


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    Initiative and Referendum

1.15    Code Enforcement


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Code adopted.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Reference applies to amendments.

1.01.040    Codification authority.

1.01.050    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.060    Severability.


1.01.010 Code adopted.

The Burien Municipal Code, as compiled from the ordinances of the city of Burien, Washington, and edited and published by Code Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, is hereby adopted as the official code of the city of Burien, Washington. [Ord. 248 § 1, 1999]


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Burien Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Burien Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the “Burien Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Burien Municipal Code” and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that code. [Ord. 248 § 2, 1999]


1.01.030 Reference applies to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to the “Burien Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Burien, Washington, that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. [Ord. 248 § 3, 1999]


1.01.040 Codification authority.

This code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances codified pursuant to RCW 35.21.500 through RCW 35.21.570, inclusive. [Ord. 248 § 4, 1999]


1.01.050 Reservation of prosecutions.

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the municipal code, nor shall the adoption of the municipal code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption, nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the city pursuant to the terms of any ordinance, upon its codification; but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. [Ord. 248 § 5, 1999]


1.01.060 Severability.

Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or its application to any person or circumstance, be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, or should any portion of this code be pre-empted by state or federal law or regulation, such decision or pre-emption shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code or its application to other persons or circumstances. [Ord. 248 § 6, 1999]


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(RESERVED)


Chapter 1.10 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.10.010    Powers granted.


1.10.010 Powers granted.

The citizens of the city of Burien, Washington, are granted the powers of initiative and referendum as provided for in RCW 35A.11.080 as now in effect or as hereafter amended. Pursuant to RCW 35A.11.100, these powers shall be exercised in the manner set forth in RCW 35.17.240 through 35.17.360 as now in effect or as hereafter amended. [Ord. 71 § 1, 1993]


Chapter 1.15 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.15.010    Purpose.

1.15.020    Definitions.

1.15.030    Conflicting code provisions.

1.15.040    Joint and several responsibility and liability.

1.15.050    Computation of time.

1.15.060    Interference with code enforcement unlawful.

1.15.070    Service of documents.

1.15.080    Violations.

1.15.090    Infractions.

1.15.100    Voluntary correction.

1.15.110    Stop work order.

1.15.120    Notice of civil violation.

1.15.130    Response to notice of civil violation.

1.15.140    Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

1.15.150    Contested hearing – Procedure.

1.15.160    Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

1.15.170    Decision of hearing examiner.

1.15.180    Failure to appear – Default order.

1.15.190    Judicial review.

1.15.200    Recovery of penalties and costs.

1.15.210    Abatement.

1.15.220    Right of entry.


1.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system of enforcing city regulations that will enable violations to be promptly resolved whenever possible, while providing both appropriate penalties and a full opportunity for alleged violators to have a hearing to contest the violations. It is the express and specific purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter. It is also the express and specific purpose and intent of this chapter that no provision or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers or employees. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city, its officers, employees or agents. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.020 Definitions.

The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise or they are more specifically defined in a subchapter or section. Terms not defined shall be given their usual meaning.

“Abate” means to act to stop an activity and/or to repair, replace, remove, or otherwise remedy a condition, when such activity or condition constitutes a violation of this code or a city regulation, by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable department director, enforcement officer, or other authorized official determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. For the purposes of this chapter, the verbs “abate” and “correct” shall be interchangeable and have the same meaning.

“Act” means doing or performing something.

“City” means the city of Burien, Washington.

“Civil penalty” or “monetary penalty,” as used in any code, ordinance or regulation of the city, shall be deemed to have the same meanings as used in this chapter.

“Code” means the Burien Municipal Code.

“Code enforcement officer” or “enforcement officer” means the city’s code enforcement officer(s); the building official; building inspectors; construction inspectors; the fire marshal or his or her designee; fire inspectors; the chief of the Burien police department or his or her designee; the director of the community development department or his or her designee; the director of the public works department or his or her designee; or any other person or persons assigned or directed by the city manager or his or her designee to enforce the regulations subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter.

“Correction notice” means a written statement issued by a code enforcement officer, notifying a person that property or work under his or her control is in violation of one or more regulations and informing such person that a notice of civil violation may be issued and/or an infraction or criminal charges filed if the violations are not abated.

“Costs” means, but is not limited to, contract expenses and city employee labor expenses incurred in abating a nuisance; a rental fee for city equipment used in abatement; costs of storage, disposal, or destruction; legal expenses and attorneys’ fees associated with civil judicial enforcement of abatement orders or in seeking abatement orders; and any other costs incurred by the city, excluding fees and expenses associated with appeals authorized by this code or by state law.

“Day” or “days” means one or more calendar days, unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a 24-hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.

“Hearing examiner” means the Burien hearing examiner and the office thereof, as established pursuant to Chapter 2.15 BMC.

“Knowledge” means being aware of a fact or circumstance or having information which would lead a reasonable person in the same situation to believe a fact or circumstance exists. A person acts knowingly or with knowledge when that person either is aware of one or more facts, circumstances, or results, which are described by an ordinance defining an offense, or has information which would lead a reasonable person in the same situation to believe that facts, circumstances, or results exist which are described by an ordinance defining an offense.

“Mortgagee” means a financial institution, including a bank, credit union or other commercial lender, which holds mortgaged property as security for repayment of a loan.

“Notice of violation” or “notice of civil violation” means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, which contains the information required under BMC 1.15.120 and which notifies a person that he or she is responsible for one or more civil violations of the Burien Municipal Code.

“Omission” means a failure to act.

“Owner” means any owner, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building or land.

“Person” means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because “person” shall include both human beings and organizational entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

“Person responsible for the violation” or “violator” means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure that is subject to the regulation; a mortgagee that has filed an action in foreclosure on the property that is subject to the regulation, based on breach or default of the mortgage agreement, until title to the property is transferred to a third party; a mortgagee of property that is subject to the regulation and has not been occupied by the owner, the owner’s tenant, or a person having the owner’s permission to occupy the premises for a period of at least 90 days; or any person who created, caused, participated in, or has allowed a violation to occur.

“Regulation” means and includes any of the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:

(a) All Burien Municipal Code provisions;

(b) All standards, regulations, and procedures adopted by the city pursuant to a city ordinance;

(c) The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the city, or any concomitant agreement entered into with the city, pursuant to code provisions; and

(d) A written order of the hearing examiner that has been served as provided in this chapter.

“Repeat violation” means, as evidenced by the prior issuance of a correction notice or a notice of violation, a subsequent violation that has occurred on the same property or that has been committed by a person responsible for the prior violation elsewhere within the city of Burien. To constitute a repeat violation, the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation. The violation of a written order of the hearing examiner that has been served as provided in this chapter shall constitute a repeat violation.

“Right-of-way” means land owned, dedicated or conveyed to the public or a unit of government, used primarily for the movement of vehicles or pedestrians and providing for access to adjacent parcels, with the secondary purpose of providing space for utility lines and appurtenances and other devices and facilities benefiting the public. “Right-of-way” includes, but is not limited to, any street, easement, sidewalk, or portion thereof under the jurisdiction of the city.

“Violation” or “civil violation” or “civil infraction” means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the city, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.030 Conflicting code provisions.

In the event a conflict exists between the enforcement provisions of this chapter and the enforcement provisions of any international or uniform code, statute, or regulation that is adopted in the Burien Municipal Code and subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter, the enforcement provisions of this chapter will prevail, unless the enforcement provisions of this chapter are preempted or specifically modified by said code, statute, or regulation. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of this code or city ordinance providing for a civil penalty, the more specific provision shall control. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.040 Joint and several responsibility and liability.

Responsibility for violations of the codes enforced under this chapter is joint and several, both as to duty to correct and to payment of monetary penalties and costs, and the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.050 Computation of time.

In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.060 Interference with code enforcement unlawful.

Any person who intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any lawful attempt to serve a notice of violation, stop work order, or emergency order, or intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with lawful attempts to correct a violation shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.070 Service of documents.

(1) Methods of Service. For purposes of this chapter, service of documents related to code enforcement, such as correction notices, notices of civil violation, stop work orders, etc. (hereinafter “document”), shall be accomplished by one of the following methods; provided, that civil infractions shall be served as provided in Chapter 7.80 RCW and criminal misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors shall be served as provided by applicable law:

(a) “Personal service” is accomplished by handing the document to the person subject to the document or leaving it at his or her last known dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein or leaving it at his or her office or place of employment with a person in charge thereof. Personal service may also be accomplished by the hearing examiner or his or her assistant handing any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing.

(b) “Service by mail” is accomplished by sending the document by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be an address provided to the city by the person to whom the document is directed. If an address has not been provided to the city, the last known address shall be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the county assessor or the taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax information website for King County; the address appearing in any database used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are occurring; or the address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the Washington State Department of Licensing database.

(c) “Service by posting” is accomplished by affixing a copy of the document in a conspicuous place on the subject property or structure, or as near to the affected property or structure as feasible, with at least one copy of such document placed at an entryway to the property or structure if an entryway exists.

(d) “Service by publication” is accomplished by publishing the document as set forth in RCW 4.28.100 and 4.28.110, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

(2) Service – When Complete. If service is accomplished by personal service, service shall be deemed complete immediately. If service is accomplished by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following which the document is placed in the mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day. If service is accomplished by posting, service shall be deemed complete upon the fourteenth day following the day upon which the document is posted. If service is accomplished by publication, service shall be deemed complete upon the final publication of the document as set forth in RCW 4.28.110.

(3) Proof of Service – Due Diligence. Proof of service shall be made by written affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service and the manner by which service was made. If service was made solely by posting or publication, the proof of service shall include a statement as to what steps were used in attempting to serve personally and by mail the person at whom service of the document is directed. If service was made by posting, a photograph of the posting may be taken and retained by the city as documentation.

(4) Additional Proof of Service Not Necessary. No additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this chapter shall be required by the hearing examiner or other entity. Any failure of the person to whom a document is directed to observe a document served by posting or publication shall not invalidate service made in compliance with this section, nor shall it invalidate the document. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.080 Violations.

(1) The violation of any regulation shall be unlawful. Violations may be enforced by issuing notices of violation and, if necessary, by filing civil infractions. In addition, any violation of this code shall constitute a misdemeanor, unless otherwise designated as a gross misdemeanor, and the city shall have discretionary authority to enforce a violation as either a civil infraction or civil violation pursuant to this chapter or as a criminal misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000 or by both such imprisonment and fine. A gross misdemeanor is punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(2) Each day during any portion of which a violation of this code occurs or continues is a separate offense.

(3) Civil enforcement of the provisions of this code or the terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued pursuant to this code shall be governed by this chapter unless other more specific provisions apply.

(4) Code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce the code using the provisions and procedures of this chapter; provided, however, that enforcement under this chapter is in addition to, and does not preclude or limit, any other forms of enforcement available to the city including, but not limited to, criminal proceedings or sanctions, nuisance and injunction actions, rights to file and enforce liens, or other civil or equitable actions to abate, discontinue, correct, or discourage unlawful acts in violation of this code.

(5) Nothing in this chapter or in other chapters of the Burien Municipal Code shall prevent code enforcement officers or any other officers of the city of Burien or other governmental unit from taking any other action, summary or otherwise, necessary to eliminate or minimize an imminent danger to the health or safety of any person or property. The city’s costs of abating any such nuisance or endangerment summarily or otherwise abated shall be recoverable under this chapter as well as in the same manner and to the same extent as costs of abating nuisances or endangerment under any other provisions of this code, in addition to or as an alternative to any other rights or remedies the city may possess. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.090 Infractions.

(1) When the city determines that it is appropriate to enforce violations of this code as civil infractions rather than civil or criminal violations as otherwise provided in this chapter, or if the city is unable to obtain payment of civil fines pursuant to a notice of civil violation, enforcement officers shall file such infractions in King County district court and shall follow the provisions of Chapter 7.80 RCW. First offenses shall be class 2 civil infractions, for which the maximum penalty and the default amount shall be $125.00, and second or subsequent violations shall be class 1 civil infractions, for which the maximum penalty and the default amount shall be $250.00, not including fees, costs, and assessments.

(2) Chapter 7.80 RCW is hereby adopted by reference to the extent that it is not inconsistent with explicit provisions of the Burien Municipal Code, including this section. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.100 Voluntary correction.

(1) General. When the city determines that a violation has occurred, a code enforcement officer may attempt to secure the voluntary correction of a violation by attempting to contact the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. This may be done orally and/or in writing. The city may also enter into a written voluntary correction agreement with any person causing, allowing, or participating in the violation, including the property owner. A voluntary correction agreement may be instead of, in lieu of, or in conjunction with a notice of violation. Voluntary correction efforts need not be made where the nature of the violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety or where it is a repeat violation.

(2) Contents of Written Voluntary Correction Agreement. A voluntary correction agreement is a contract between the city and the person responsible for the violation, in which the responsible person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. A voluntary correction agreement will generally contain the following information:

(a) The name and address of a person responsible for the violation;

(b) The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(c) A description of the violation and a reference to the code provisions that have been violated;

(d) A statement indicating what corrective actions are required and a correction deadline stating the date by which the corrective actions must be completed to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer in order for the violator to avoid the issuance of a notice of violation;

(e) An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that the city may inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement;

(f) An agreement by the person responsible for the violation and/or the owner(s) of property on which the violation has occurred or is occurring that, if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the city may enter the property, abate the violation, and recover its costs and expenses as provided in this chapter;

(g) An agreement that by entering into the voluntary correction agreement, the person responsible for the violation waives the right to a hearing before the hearing examiner under this chapter regarding the violation, any penalty, and/or required corrective action; and

(h) A statement indicating that, pursuant to BMC 1.15.120, a notice of civil violation may be issued with each violation constituting a separate offense subject to civil penalties, or, alternatively, civil infraction or criminal charges may be filed.

(3) Extension of Voluntary Correction Period or Modification of Required Actions. An extension of the deadline for voluntary correction, or a modification of any required corrective action, may be granted by the code enforcement officer if the person responsible for the violation has, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, shown due diligence or made substantial progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances have rendered correction unattainable within the original deadline.

(4) Revocation of Deadline for Compliance. The original deadline for compliance, or any extension for compliance previously granted by the code enforcement officer, may be revoked and immediate compliance required where, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, circumstances make immediate correction necessary to avoid an imminent risk of injury to persons or property.

(5) Failure to Comply with Voluntary Correction Agreement.

(a) Abatement by the City. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter, the city may abate the violation in accordance with BMC 1.15.210, if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met.

(b) Penalties and Costs. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be issued a notice of civil violation and assessed a monetary penalty in accordance with BMC 1.15.120, plus all costs and expenses of abatement. Alternatively, the city may file a civil infraction or criminal charges. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.110 Stop work order.

(1) Issuance. Whenever a code enforcement officer determines that any work, use, activity, or conduct is a violation under the Burien Municipal Code and creates an imminent threat of injury to the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public or will damage or injure, or exacerbate damage or injury already caused to, any property, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop work order directing any person causing, allowing, or participating in the offending conduct to cease such use, activity or conduct immediately.

(2) Service of Order. Service of the stop work order shall generally be accomplished as set forth in BMC 1.15.070(1)(c).

(3) The stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop work order shall take effect immediately upon service and may be appealed under the procedures set forth in this chapter. During any such appeal, the stop work order shall remain in effect.

(4) Effect of a Stop Work Order. When a stop work order has been issued, posted and/or served pursuant to this section, it is unlawful for any person to whom the order is directed or any person with actual or constructive knowledge of the order to conduct the activity or perform the work covered by the order, even if the order has been appealed, until the code enforcement officer has removed the copy of the order, if posted, and issued written authorization for the activity or work to be resumed. In addition, a monetary penalty shall accrue for each day or portion thereof that a violation of a stop work order occurs, in the same amounts as under BMC 1.15.120. In addition to such criminal or monetary penalties, the city may enforce a stop work order pursuant to any other provision of this chapter and enforce it in superior court.

(5) Removal of a Stop Work Order. When a stop work order has been posted in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, removal of such order without the authorization of the city, or the hearing examiner if the matter has been heard by the hearing examiner, is unlawful and a violation. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.120 Notice of civil violation.

(1) Issuance of Notice of Violation. When the city determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of civil violation to any person responsible for the violation.

(2) Monetary Penalty. A monetary penalty shall accrue for each day or portion thereof that each violation continues beyond the date set in a notice of civil violation or any hearing examiner’s decision. Unless a different penalty amount for a given violation is expressly authorized or required by a more specific city code provision, the maximum penalty and the default amount shall be $125.00 for the first violation and $250.00 for a second or subsequent violation of the same nature or a continuing violation past a deadline set by a notice of violation, not including fees, costs, and assessments. The city may waive the monetary penalty, if corrective action is completed by the date specified in the notice of civil violation or a voluntary correction agreement. The city shall have the discretion to impose penalties in an amount lower than those shown above.

(3) Contents of Notice. The notice of civil violation shall include the following:

(a) The name and address of a person responsible for the violation;

(b) The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(c) A description of the violation and a reference to the provision violated and a description of what must be done to correct the violation;

(d) A statement indicating that the violator must respond to the notice of civil violation within 14 days of the date of issuance, or within such other time period as specified in the notice of civil violation, by doing one of the following:

(i) Paying any fine and correcting the violation;

(ii) Entering into and complying with a voluntary correction agreement with the city;

(iii) Requesting a mitigation hearing and correcting the violation; or

(iv) Requesting a hearing to contest the violation;

(e) A statement indicating that failure to respond to the notice of violation, or failure to attend any hearing, shall result in the violation being deemed committed without requiring further action by the city, and that the monetary penalty specified in the notice shall be due to the city by the violator and further accrue as provided; and

(f) A statement indicating that payment of a monetary penalty does not relieve the person or entity named in the notice of civil violation of the duty to abate the violation, and that failure to abate may result in the issuance of additional notices of violation and/or criminal charges, with additional civil and/or criminal penalties, including the payment of costs for any abatement action taken by the city.

(4) Extension. Upon written request received prior to the correction date or time, the code enforcement officer may extend the date set for correction for good cause or in order to accommodate a violation correction agreement. The code enforcement officer may consider substantial completion of the necessary correction or unforeseeable circumstances which render completion impossible by the date established as a good cause.

(5) Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a notice of civil violation to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of civil violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of civil violation issued by the code enforcement officer and shall furnish to the code enforcement officer a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of civil violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. This provision shall not apply to the following types of transfers of real property: a gift or other transfer to a parent, spouse, domestic partner, or child of a transferor or child of any parent, spouse, or domestic partner of a transferor; a transfer between spouses or between domestic partners in connection with a marital dissolution or dissolution of a state registered domestic partnership; a transfer made by the personal representative of the estate of the decedent or by a trustee in bankruptcy; and a tax deferred exchange to an intermediary or facilitator. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.130 Response to notice of civil violation.

(1) Generally. A person who has been served with a notice of civil violation must respond to the notice within 14 days of the date the notice is served or within such other time period as specified in the notice of civil violation. A person may respond to the notice of civil violation by:

(a) Paying the amount of the monetary penalty as set forth in the notice of violation. Partial payment or payment using a check that is rejected for insufficient funds shall not be deemed payment under this subsection. Payment of the fine shall not relieve the person or entity responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

(b) Entering into a voluntary correction agreement with the city.

(c) Contesting the notice of civil violation by requesting a contested hearing in writing and sending the request to the city as described in subsection (2) of this section.

(d) Seeking to mitigate the monetary penalty by requesting a mitigation hearing to explain the circumstances surrounding the violation. The request to mitigate must be made in writing and sent to the city with a $100.00 filing fee as described in subsection (2) of this section. Requesting to mitigate the penalty shall not relieve the person responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

(2) Method of Response. The person or entity to whom a notice of civil violation has been issued may respond by mailing or hand-delivering the response to the city clerk. Mailed responses must be received no later than the fourteenth day from the date of service of the notice of violation or such other day as specified in the notice of violation. Hand-delivered responses must be brought to the city clerk no later than 4:30 p.m. on the fourteenth day after service or such other day as specified in the notice of violation; provided, that where the fourteenth or other specified day falls on a weekend or holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next regular business day. Telephone, facsimile, or email responses shall not satisfy the requirements of this section. The response deadline may be stayed for a time certain by the code enforcement officer, if the responsible person or entity is engaged in active discussions with the code enforcement officer and the code enforcement officer determines there is a reasonable probability that such discussions may result in compliance.

(3) If the person to whom the notice of civil violation is issued fails to respond as required in the notice of civil violation and this chapter, the violation(s) shall be deemed committed without requiring further action by the city or the city’s hearing examiner, and the person to whom the notice of civil violation was issued shall owe the monetary penalty indicated. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.140 Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

(1) Notice and Scheduling of Hearing. Upon the timely filing of a request for a hearing to contest a violation or to mitigate the penalty, the matter shall be scheduled to be heard at the next available appearance by the hearing examiner that is a minimum of 14 but no later than 60 calendar days after the date the request was received by the city. Notice of the hearing date and time shall be served by regular first class mail to the address of the party who requested the hearing. The date and time for any hearing may be rescheduled by the hearing examiner for good cause upon the motion of a party or the hearing examiner.

(2) Correction of Violation Prior to Hearing. The hearing may be cancelled and the party requesting the hearing need not appear if, at least two business days prior to the scheduled hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the violation has been satisfactorily corrected or abated and the monetary penalty paid in full. Where the scheduled hearing involves a repeat violation as defined in this chapter, the hearing shall not be cancelled unless the new violation has been corrected or abated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer and the monetary penalty and costs for the new violation(s) and any monetary penalty and costs owing for the previous violation(s) have been paid in full. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.150 Contested hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a contested violation hearing when such hearing is properly and timely requested. The city and the person or entity to whom the notice of civil violation was issued may participate in the hearing, and each party or its legal representative may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal, subject to the following:

(1) Where not in conflict with a more specific provision of this chapter, hearings shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2.15 BMC.

(2) The city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred.

(3) The parties are responsible for securing the appearance of any witnesses they may wish to call. Neither the city nor the hearing examiner shall have the burden of securing any witnesses on behalf of the person who is contesting the violation(s) or seeking to mitigate the penalties.

(4) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any such hearing, and the hearing examiner shall allow hearsay testimony by the parties and not require proof of chain of custody for evidence that is presented; provided, that the hearing examiner shall determine the weight to be assigned to any evidence presented.

(5) Any notes, reports, summaries, photographs, or other materials prepared by the parties shall be admitted into evidence if requested; provided, that the parties are free to argue the weight that should be assigned by the hearing examiner to any evidence submitted. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.160 Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a hearing to mitigate the penalty on a violation when such hearing is properly and timely requested; provided, that in the event a person has requested a hearing to contest a violation and prior to the start of the hearing indicates to the hearing examiner a desire to mitigate rather than contest, the examiner shall permit the person to seek mitigation of the monetary penalty. The mitigation hearing shall be conducted according to the following general procedures:

(1) The person responsible for the violation shall be given the opportunity to explain or provide evidence regarding the nature of the violation, why the violation exists, why the violation has not been abated or corrected, and any other information the hearing examiner determines is relevant.

(2) The city shall be given the opportunity, at its discretion, to provide evidence of the nature of the violation, evidence to rebut assertions made by any party, and any other information or evidence the hearing examiner deems to be relevant. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.170 Decision of hearing examiner.

(1) Contents of Order. Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the hearing examiner may issue an oral decision pending issuance of the written decision. If necessary, the hearing examiner may delay issuing the written order for up to 10 business days following the hearing. In either event, the oral decision and written order shall contain findings and conclusions based on the record, which to the extent applicable includes the following information:

(a) In mitigation hearings a statement indicating that each alleged violation has been found committed, and in contested hearings, for each alleged violation of the city code, a statement indicating whether the violation has been found committed or not committed;

(b) For violations found committed, the monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this chapter; provided, that where the person has requested to mitigate the monetary penalty, the hearing examiner may reduce the monetary penalty for each violation, but in no case shall the penalty be reduced to an amount less than $100.00 for each violation found committed;

(c) For violations found committed, any required corrective actions and compliance dates;

(d) For violations found committed, a finding that abatement of the violations by the city is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations; and

(e) A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated as required by the hearing examiner’s order.

(2) Notice of Decision. The hearing examiner may cause a copy of the decision and order to be served upon the parties at the close of the hearing. When the hearing examiner requires more time to prepare a written order, or when a party fails to appear after requesting a contested hearing, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision and order to be served on the parties by mailing a copy to each party’s last known address no later than 10 business days following the hearing. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.180 Failure to appear – Default order.

If the person who requests a hearing to contest a violation or mitigate the penalty then fails to appear at the scheduled hearing after having been given notice in the manner provided for by this chapter, the hearing examiner shall immediately issue a default order, which finds committed all the violations set forth in the notice of civil violation and which assesses a monetary penalty in the full amount indicated in the notice of violation. In addition, at the request of the city, the hearing examiner shall also impose upon the nonappearing party any costs to the city related to preparation for the hearing. The hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision to be served upon the nonappearing party by mailing a copy to the last known address of the nonappearing party within 10 business days of the hearing. Upon the motion of a party, the hearing examiner may rescind a default judgment only upon a showing of good cause to do so and only if such motion has been brought within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing at which the default judgment was ordered. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.190 Judicial review.

Judicial review of a decision by the hearing examiner relating to any ordinance regulating the improvement, development, modification, maintenance, or use of real property may be sought by any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision, pursuant to the provisions of the Land Use Petition Act, Chapter 36.70C RCW, if applicable, or other applicable authority, if any, if the petition or complaint seeking review is filed and served on all parties within 21 days of the date of the decision. For purposes of this section, “aggrieved or adversely affected” shall have the meaning set forth in RCW 36.70C.060(2). Judicial review of all other decisions may only occur subject to the procedures of Chapter 7.16 RCW. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.200 Recovery of penalties and costs.

(1) Payment of Monetary Penalties and Costs. Any monetary penalties or costs assessed pursuant to this chapter constitute a personal obligation of the person responsible for the violation. In addition, the monetary penalties or costs assessed pursuant to this chapter may be assessed against the property that is the subject of the enforcement action. The city attorney is authorized to collect the monetary penalty or costs by use of appropriate legal remedies, the seeking or granting of which shall neither stay nor terminate the accrual of additional per diem monetary penalties so long as the violation continues. The city may incorporate any outstanding penalty or cost into an assessment lien, if the city incurs costs of abating the violation. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid in full to the city within 30 days from the date of service of an uncontested notice of civil violation or any order of the hearing examiner that assesses monetary penalties.

(2) Recovery of Costs. The city shall bill its costs, including incidental expenses, of pursuing code compliance and/or of abating a violation to the person responsible for the violation and/or against the subject property. Such costs shall become due and payable 30 days after the date of the bill. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorneys’ fees incurred by the city; costs incurred in documenting the violation; the actual expenses and costs to the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; the cost of any required printing and mailing; and interest. The city manager or designee, or the hearing examiner, may in his or her discretion waive in whole or part the assessment of any costs upon a showing that abatement has occurred or is no longer necessary or that the costs would cause a significant financial hardship for the responsible party. Any challenge to the amount of the abatement costs must be made within 14 days of issuance of the bill and shall be heard by the city manager in an informal hearing. The city manager shall make a written determination as to whether or not the city’s costs were accurate and necessary for accomplishing the abatement.

(3) Use of Collection Agency. Pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the city may, at its discretion, use a collection agency for the purposes of collecting penalties and costs assessed pursuant to this chapter. The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law. No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least 30 calendar days have elapsed from the time that the city attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid. Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be made by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation; provided, that inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections.

(4) Assessment Lien. If penalties or costs assessed against a property are not paid within 30 days, the city clerk shall certify to the county treasurer the confirmed amount for assessment on the tax rolls. The county treasurer shall enter the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates as provided in RCW 84.56.020, as now or hereafter amended, for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city. The lien shall be of equal rank with the state, county and municipal taxes. The validity of any assessment made under the provisions of this chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within 15 calendar days after the assessment is placed upon the assessment roll. The city attorney may also file a lien for such costs against the real property.

(5) Continuing Duty to Abate Violations. Payment of a monetary penalty or costs pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed for continuing failure to correct or abate a violation. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.210 Abatement.

(1) Abatement by City. The city may perform the abatement required upon noncompliance with the terms of an unappealed notice of violation, a voluntary correction agreement, or a final order of the hearing examiner. The city may utilize city employees or a private contractor under city direction to accomplish the abatement. The city, its employees and agents using lawful means are expressly authorized to enter upon the property of the violator for such purposes. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from pursuing abatement of a violation pursuant to any other laws of the state of Washington or the city.

(2) Summary Abatement. Whenever any violation causes a condition the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment, the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement. No right of action shall lie against the city or its agents, officers, or employees for actions reasonably taken to prevent or cure any such immediate threats, but neither shall the city be entitled to recover any costs incurred for summary abatement, prior to the time that notice thereof is served on the person responsible for the violation as set forth in BMC 1.15.070.

(3) Obstruction with Work Prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with the city, its employees or agents, or any person who owns or holds any interest or estate in any property in the performance of any necessary act preliminary or incidental to carrying out the requirements of a notice of violation, voluntary correction agreement, or order of the hearing examiner issued pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


1.15.220 Right of entry.

(1) When it is necessary to enforce the provisions of the Burien Municipal Code, or when a code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this code, the code enforcement officer may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the code enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(2) Posted Property. Where private property is posted with a “No Trespassing” sign and has a gate or chain on private property, or where private property is enclosed by a secured gate or chain (other than by a simple latching or closure device) a city employee shall not make entry beyond areas open to the public without the express permission of the property owner/resident or a court order. No employee shall be required to enter a posted or gated piece of property if the employee feels threatened, intimidated, or otherwise in fear of his or her personal safety.

(3) Employee Identification. City employees shall carry identification cards while on duty. Any employee, when legitimately requested by the public, shall show the requesting party his/her identification card.

(4) Intimidation of Employees. Threats, intimidation, or other violations of public peace directed against an employee engaged in lawful action upon private property are unlawful and may subject that person and the owner of the property, as applicable, to legal action. [Ord. 561 § 1, 2012]


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL Revised 7/20

Chapters:

2.05    Hours of Business

2.10    City Council

2.15    Hearing Examiner

2.20    Appeals

2.25    Travel Expenses

2.26    Immigration Inquiries Prohibited

2.27    Domestic Partner Benefits

2.30    Recycled Products Procurement

2.35    Claims Against the City

2.40    Public Records

2.45    Planning Commission

2.50    Business and Economic Development Partnership

2.55    Parks and Recreation Advisory Board

2.60    Arts Commission

2.65    Human Services Commission

2.70    Indemnification of City Employees, Officials and Volunteers

2.75    Emergency Management Revised 7/20

2.80    Construction Projects – Apprenticeship Requirements

2.85    Acceptance of Donations


Chapter 2.05 HOURS OF BUSINESS

Sections:

2.05.010    Legal holidays.

2.05.020    Hours of business.


2.05.010 Legal holidays.

The following days shall be recognized as legal holidays:

	New Year’s Day	January 1 

	Martin Luther King, Jr. Day	Third Monday of January 

	Presidents’ Day	Third Monday of February 

	Memorial Day	Last Monday of May

	Independence Day	July 4 

	Labor Day	First Monday of September 

	Veterans’ Day	November 11 

	Thanksgiving Day	Fourth Thursday of November 

	Day after Thanksgiving Day	Fourth Friday of November 

	Christmas Eve	December 24

	Christmas Day	December 25 

	Floating Holiday	Provided by administrative policy 

Whenever any legal holiday set forth in this section falls upon a Sunday, the following Monday shall be a legal holiday. Whenever any legal holiday set forth in this section falls upon a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be a legal holiday, with the exception of December 24th. When December 24th falls on a Sunday, it will be observed on the following Tuesday; and when December 24th falls on a Friday, it will be observed on the preceding Thursday.

The city manager shall have the authority to administer holidays, floating holidays, and holiday overtime schedules as provided in the city personnel policies or applicable collective bargaining agreements. [Ord. 594 § 1, 2013; Ord. 507 § 1, 2009]


2.05.020 Hours of business.

City offices shall be open for the transaction of business Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except for legal holidays and such days or hours as may, from time to time, be specified by motion or resolution of the city council. [Ord. 503 § 1, 2008]


Chapter 2.10 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.10.010    Salary levels.


2.10.010 Salary levels.

The members of the Burien city council shall be entitled to receive a salary in the amount of $600.00 per month, payable on regular city paydays. The council member serving as mayor shall be entitled to an additional amount equal to 25 percent of the councilmanic salary. [Ord. 295 § 1, 2000; Ord. 55 § 1, 1993]


Chapter 2.15 HEARING EXAMINER1

Sections:

2.15.010    Creation of office.

2.15.020    Appointment and terms.

2.15.030    Qualifications.

2.15.040    Examiner pro tem.

2.15.050    Conflict of interest – Appearance of fairness.

2.15.060    Freedom from improper influence.

2.15.070    Duties of the examiner.

2.15.080    Examiner’s decision or recommendation.

2.15.090    Applications.

2.15.100    Report by department of community development.

2.15.110    Appeals.

2.15.120    Public hearing.

2.15.130    Consolidation of hearings.

2.15.140    Rules and regulations.

2.15.150    Examiner’s findings.

2.15.160    Reconsideration.

2.15.170    Appeal of examiner’s decision.

2.15.180    Council action.


2.15.010 Creation of office.

The office of the hearing examiner, hereinafter referred to as “examiner,” is created. The term examiner shall likewise include any examiner pro tem. [Ord. 61 § 1, 1993]


2.15.020 Appointment and terms.

The examiner shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve on such terms and conditions as shall be mutually agreed upon. [Ord. 61 § 2, 1993]


2.15.030 Qualifications.

The examiner shall be appointed solely with regard to his or her qualifications for the duties of the office and will have such training and experience as will qualify the examiner to conduct administrative and quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge such other functions conferred upon the examiner by the city council. The examiner shall hold no other elective or appointive office or position in the city government. [Ord. 61 § 3, 1993]


2.15.040 Examiner pro tem.

Any examiner pro tem shall be appointed by the city manager after consultation with the examiner and shall, in the event of the absence or the inability of the examiner to act, have all the duties and powers of the examiner. [Ord. 61 § 4, 1993]


2.15.050 Conflict of interest – Appearance of fairness.

(1) Participants in the land use regulatory process have the right, insofar as possible, to have the examiner free from personal interest or prehearing contacts on regulatory matters considered by him or her. It is recognized that there is a countervailing public right to free access to public officials on any matter. If such personal interest or prehearing contact impairs the examiner’s ability to act on the matter, the examiner shall recuse himself from such matter, unless all parties agree in writing to have the matter heard by said examiner.

(2) The examiner shall not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision in which the examiner has direct or indirect personal interest which might interfere with his or her decision making process. Any actual or potential conflict of interest shall be disclosed to the parties immediately upon discovery of such conflict. [Ord. 61 § 5, 1993]


2.15.060 Freedom from improper influence. 

No council member, city official or any other person shall attempt to interfere with, or improperly influence the examiner in the performance of his or her designated duties. [Ord. 61 § 6, 1993]


2.15.070 Duties of the examiner.

The examiner shall consider the matters set forth below.

(1) Applications and Appeals – Final Decision. The examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare a record thereof, and enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon those facts, which conclusions shall represent the final action on the application, unless appealed, as specified herein, for the following type of applications and appeals:

(a) Applications.

(i) Applications for residential condominium binding site plan;

(ii) Applications for shoreline substantial development permits when combined with other land use applications.

(b) Appeals.

(i) Appeals from the decision of the director regarding short subdivisions;

(ii) Appeal of administrative decision on building permits, grading permits and temporary use permit pursuant to review of the zoning code;

(iii) Appeal from decisions of the director on requests for rate adjustments to surface and storm water management rates and charges.

(2) Applications – Recommendation to Council. Until such time as the planning commission is created and its duties and procedures are adopted, the examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare a record thereof and enter findings of fact and conclusions, based upon those facts, together with a recommendation to the city council, for the following applications:

(a) Applications for preliminary plats;

(b) Applications for shoreline environment redesignation.

(3) The examiner shall act as the board of appeals and the hearing examiner for the purposes of the building and construction codes adopted in BMC Title 15.

(4) Other applications or appeals which the council may prescribe by ordinance.

(5) Hearings related to Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 520 § 1, 2009; Ord. 312 § 1, 2000; Ord. 61 § 7, 1993]


2.15.080 Examiner’s decision or recommendation.

(1) The examiner’s recommendations or decision may be to grant or deny the application, or the examiner may recommend or require of the applicant such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the examiner finds necessary to make the subject of the application consistent with the objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, zoning code, subdivision code and other codes and ordinances of the city of Burien. 

(2) In cases of recommendations, the examiner’s findings and conclusions shall be submitted to the city council, which shall have the final authority. The hearing by the examiner shall constitute the public hearing by the city council unless the city council chooses to hold one or more additional public hearings. [Ord. 61 § 8, 1993]


2.15.090 Applications.

Applications for all matters to be heard by the examiner shall be first submitted to the department of community development, which shall accept complete applications. The department shall be responsible for assigning a date of public hearing for each application which date shall be scheduled in a timely manner after the applicant has complied with all requirements and furnished all necessary data to the department. [Ord. 61 § 9, 1993]


2.15.100 Report by department of community development.

When such application has been set for public hearing, the department shall coordinate and assemble the comments and recommendations of other city departments and governmental agencies having an interest or authority in the subject application and shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved and the department’s findings and recommendations. At least seven calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing, the report shall be filed with the examiner and copies thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and shall be made available for use by any interested party for the cost or reproduction. In the event the applicant is unable to attend the scheduled hearing, the examiner may grant a continuance. [Ord. 61 § 10, 1993]


2.15.110 Appeals.

Other than matters arising under Chapter 1.15 BMC, when an appeal has been filed with the director or city clerk as prescribed by ordinance, the hearing shall be scheduled pursuant to the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 2.20 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 61 § 11, 1993]


2.15.120 Public hearing.

(1) Before rendering a decision or recommendation on any application or appeal, other than one arising under Chapter 1.15 BMC, the examiner shall hold at least one public hearing thereon.

(2) Notification of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in the ordinance governing the application. If none is specifically set forth, such notice shall be given as follows:

(a) Published and posted notice at least 10 days prior to scheduled hearing; and

(b) Mailed notice to all parties of record at least 10 days prior to scheduled hearing. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 61 § 12, 1993]


2.15.130 Consolidation of hearings.

Whenever a project requires more than one permit or approval, the examiner may order a consolidation of and conduct the required public hearings to avoid unnecessary costs or delays. Decisions of the examiner to order and conduct consolidated hearings shall be final in all cases. [Ord. 61 § 13, 1993]


2.15.140 Rules and regulations.

The examiner shall have the authority to prescribe rules and regulation for the conduct of hearings under this chapter, to administer oaths, and to preserve order. [Ord. 61 § 14, 1993]


2.15.150 Examiner’s findings.

When the examiner renders a decision or recommendation, the examiner shall make and enter written findings and conclusions which support such decision. The findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the manner in which the decision or recommendation is consistent with applicable laws, regulations and policies of the city of Burien. The decision or recommendation shall be rendered as soon as possible but in all events within 20 working days of the conclusion of the hearing. [Ord. 61 § 15, 1993]


2.15.160 Reconsideration.

Any aggrieved person who feels that the decision of the examiner is based on erroneous procedures, errors of law or fact, or the discovery of new evidence which could not be reasonably available at the prior hearing, may make a written request for reconsideration by the examiner within 10 days of the date the decision is rendered. This request shall set forth the specific errors or new information relied upon by such appellant, and the examiner may, after review of the record, take further action as he or she deems proper. There may be only one reconsideration request per application. This section does not apply to applications subject to the provisions of RCW 36.70B.060. [Ord. 312 § 2, 2000; Ord. 61 § 16, 1993]


2.15.170 Appeal of examiner’s decision.

The decision of the examiner, approving, modifying, or denying an application or an appeal shall be final and conclusive unless a written appeal is filed according to the city’s appeal procedures as set forth in Chapter 2.20 BMC, or as otherwise specifically provided. [Ord. 312 § 3, 2000; Ord. 61 § 17, 1993]


2.15.180 Council action.

Any matter requiring action by the city council shall be taken by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance by the council. When taking any such final action, the council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and conclusions therefrom which support its action. The city council may adopt all or portions of the examiner’s findings and conclusions. The city council is expressly authorized to condition its approval of any matter, including but not limited to conditions requiring the dedication of land, public improvements, and payment of impact fees authorized by Chapter 82.020 RCW or any other law or agreement. [Ord. 61 § 18, 1993]

1

Prior legislation: Ord. 38. 


Chapter 2.20 APPEALS

Sections:

2.20.010    Conflicting appeal processes superseded and repealed.

2.20.020    Appeal of director’s decision.

2.20.030    Appeal of hearing examiner decision on applications.

2.20.040    Appeal of hearing examiner decision on appeals.

2.20.050    Appeal of city council decision.

2.20.060    Notice of appeal contents.

2.20.070    Appeal hearing.

2.20.080    Waiver.

2.20.090    Enforcement stayed pending appeal – Emergencies.


2.20.010 Conflicting appeal processes superseded and repealed.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the provisions of this chapter shall control all appeals of the decisions of staff, the hearing examiner, and the city council. Inconsistent appeal provisions contained in any other ordinance, including laws adopted by reference therein, are hereby superseded and repealed. Such other appeal provisions include but are not limited to:

(1) The appeal provisions contained at sections 15 E., 595, and 601 of the Interim Zoning Code as adopted by Ordinance No. 28, codified in BMC Title 18;

(2) The appeal provisions contained at sections 53 and 72 of the Subdivision Code as adopted by Ordinance No. 29, codified in BMC Title 17;

(3) The appeal provisions for special activity permits as adopted by Ordinance 042 and amended by Ordinance No. 51, codified in Chapter 12.10 BMC;

(4) The appeal provisions for business licenses and regulations as adopted by Ordinance No. 30, codified in BMC Title 5;

(5) The appeal provisions contained in the building code, fire code, plumbing code, and other laws as adopted by Ordinance No. 14, codified in BMC Titles 8 and 15;

(6) The appeal provisions regarding trail use permits as adopted by Ordinance No. 49 codified in Chapter 12.20 BMC; and

(7) Appeals of decisions based on King County codes adopted by reference shall be done in accordance with the appeals process defined herein.

The appeals provisions set forth in BMC Title 19 shall not be superseded by the appeals provisions in this title. [Ord. 312 § 4, 2000; Ord. 60 § 1, 1993]


2.20.020 Appeal of director’s decision.

The hearing examiner is designated to hear appeals by parties of record of a decision of the director of the department of community development on those matters specified at BMC 2.15.070. Decisions of the director shall be final and conclusive unless within 10 days of the date of decision, a party of record files a notice of appeal with the city clerk. [Ord. 312 § 5, 2000; Ord. 60 § 2, 1993]


2.20.030 Appeal of hearing examiner decision on applications.

Decisions of the hearing examiner on an application shall be final and conclusive unless within 10 days from the date of issuance of the examiner’s decision, a party of record files a notice of appeal with the city clerk. [Ord. 312 § 6, 2000; Ord. 60 § 3, 1993]


2.20.040 Appeal of hearing examiner decision on appeals.

Decisions of the hearing examiner on an appeal shall be final and conclusive unless within 20 days from the date of the examiner’s decision, an aggrieved person applies to the King County superior court for a writ of review. [Ord. 60 § 4, 1993]


2.20.050 Appeal of city council decision.

Decisions of the city council shall be final and conclusive unless within 14 calendar days from the date of the council’s final action, an aggrieved person applies to the King County superior court for a writ of review. [Ord. 60 § 5, 1993]


2.20.060 Notice of appeal contents.

All appeals shall be in writing and contain the following:

(1) A heading in the words: “Before the Hearing Examiner, or City Council”, whichever is appropriate.

(2) A caption reading: “Appeal of ______” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

(3) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants;

(4) A brief statement in concise language of the specific action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

(5) A brief statement in concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

(6) The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses;

(7) The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. [Ord. 60 § 6, 1993]


2.20.070 Appeal hearing.

(1) Within 10 days of receiving the written appeal, the city clerk, shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed. Written notice of the date of the hearing shall be provided to each appellant by mailing such notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant at the address shown on the notice of appeal.

(2) At the hearing the appellant shall be entitled to appear in person and be represented by counsel, and to offer evidence pertinent and material to those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the written notice of appeal. [Ord. 60 § 7, 1993]


2.20.080 Waiver.

Failure of any person timely to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of such person’s right to any administrative hearing and adjudication of the decision, or any portion thereof. [Ord. 60 § 8, 1993]


2.20.090 Enforcement stayed pending appeal – Emergencies.

Enforcement of any decision of the director/hearing examiner shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed, unless the city manager determines that an emergency exists which poses a substantial threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. [Ord. 60 § 10, 1993]


Chapter 2.25 TRAVEL EXPENSES

Sections:

2.25.010    Reimbursement policy.


2.25.010 Reimbursement policy.

The city shall provide for the expenses of transportation, lodging, meals, or other authorized activities incurred by councilmembers, officers or employees in connection with officially assigned duties or in connection with other travel for approved public purposes, as follows:

(1) The city shall pay, in advance, directly to the sponsoring organization, agency or institution any registration fee for attendance at authorized conferences, seminars, conventions or training sessions. No other expenses shall be made in advance or without a duly certified claim form together with appropriate receipts.

(2) Use of personal automobiles by councilmembers, officers or employees in connection with officially assigned duties and other travel for approved public purposes shall be reimbursed at the then-current Internal Revenue Service business use rate upon submission of a duly certified claim form.

(3) All other expenses incurred by councilmembers, officers or employees for transportation, lodging, meals or any other authorized activities shall be reimbursed upon submission of a duly certified claim form together with appropriate receipts.

(4) All claims for reimbursement shall be certified by the councilmembers, officer or employee on the city of Burien travel authorization and expense claim form, and shall be submitted not later than 30 days after completion of the travel or authorized activity. [Ord. 98 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1 § 1, 1992]


Chapter 2.26 IMMIGRATION INQUIRIES PROHIBITED

Sections:

2.26.010    Findings.

2.26.020    Prohibition on inquiring into immigration status.

2.26.030    Prohibition on collecting information regarding religious affiliation.


2.26.010 Findings.

The city of Burien is a code city organized under Chapter 35.02 RCW and Article 11, Section 10 of the Washington State Constitution. Under its police powers, the city may exercise any power and perform any function, unless preempted by state or federal law, relating to its government and affairs, including the power to regulate for the protection and rights of its inhabitants. To this end, the city is dedicated to providing all of its residents fair and equal access to services, opportunities and protection. 

The enforcement of civil immigration laws have historically been a federal government responsibility through the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Since 2002, matters of immigration law have been handled by the Office of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a branch of the Department of Homeland Security. Requiring local law enforcement agencies, which are not specifically equipped or trained, to enforce civil immigration laws forces local governments to expend their limited resources to perform traditionally federal functions. 

A goal of this legislation is to foster trust and cooperation between city personnel and law enforcement officials and immigrant communities to heighten crime prevention and public safety. 

Since 1992, the King County sheriff’s office has embraced this goal and outlined supporting policies in its operations manual, with which this chapter is consistent. 

Another goal of this legislation is to promote the public health of city of Burien residents. 

On April 22, 2008, King County superior court affirmed the principle that our courts must remain open and accessible for all individuals and families to resolve disputes on the merits by adopting a policy that warrants for the arrest of individuals based on their immigration status shall not be executed within any of the superior court courtrooms unless directly ordered by the presiding judicial officer and shall be discouraged in the superior court courthouses, unless the public’s safety is at immediate risk. Shortly after the affirmation’s adoption, the King County executive and Immigration and Customs Enforcement agreed to honor this policy. 

This chapter is intended to be consistent with federal laws regarding communications between local jurisdictions and federal immigration authorities, including but not limited to United States Code Title 8, Section 1373. [Ord. 651 § 1, 2017]


2.26.020 Prohibition on inquiring into immigration status.

Except as provided in this section or when otherwise required by law, a city office, department, employee, agency or agent shall not condition the provision of city services on the citizenship or immigration status of any individual. 

(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any city of Burien officer or employee from participating in cross-designation or task force activities with federal law enforcement authorities. 

(2) The city of Burien personnel shall not request specific documents relating to a person’s civil immigration status for the sole purpose of determining whether the individual has violated federal civil immigration laws. The documents include but are not limited to: passports; alien registration cards; or work permits. 

(3) The city of Burien personnel may use documents relating to a person’s civil immigration status if the documents are offered by the person upon a general, nonspecific request. 

(4) The city of Burien personnel shall not initiate any inquiry or enforcement action based solely on a person’s: 

(a) Civil immigration status; 

(b) Race;

(c) Inability to speak English; or

(d) Inability to understand city personnel or its officers. 

(5) Except when otherwise required by law, where the city accepts presentation of a state-issued driver’s license or identification card as adequate evidence of identity, presentation of a photo identity document issued by the person’s nation of origin, such as a driver’s license, passport or matricula consular, which is a consulate-issued document, shall be accepted and shall not subject the person to a higher level of scrutiny or different treatment than if the person had provided a Washington State driver’s license or identification card. However, a request for translation of such a document to English shall not be deemed a violation of any provision of this chapter and any subsequent ordinance. This provision does not apply to documentation required to complete a federal I-9 employment eligibility verification form. 

(6) This section does not create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees or agents. 

(7) Unless permitted by this chapter or otherwise required by state or federal law or international treaty, all applications, questionnaires and interview forms used in relation to the provision of city benefits, opportunities or services shall be promptly reviewed by each agency, and any question requiring disclosure of information related to citizenship or immigration status shall be, in the agency’s best judgment, either deleted in its entirety or revised such that the disclosure is no longer required. [Ord. 651 § 1, 2017]


2.26.030 Prohibition on collecting information regarding religious affiliation.

(1) No Burien official, including any agent or contracted agent, may collect information or establish or otherwise utilize a registry, database, or similar for the purpose of classifying any person on the basis of religious affiliation, or conduct any study related to the collection of such information or the establishment or utilization of such a registry, database, or similar. 

(2) Rule of Construction. Nothing in this section may be construed as prohibiting the collection of information that is voluntarily provided, including relating to the decennial census. [Ord. 651 § 1, 2017]


Chapter 2.27 DOMESTIC PARTNER BENEFITS

Sections:

2.27.010    Reimbursement.

2.27.020    Eligibility.


2.27.010 Reimbursement.

When the AWC Employee Benefit Trust extends dependent eligibility to employees’ domestic partners and their children, the city will provide benefit coverage to domestic partners and dependent children on the same basis as provided to spouses and dependent children. [Ord. 384 § 1, 2003; Ord. 348 § 1, 2001]


2.27.020 Eligibility.

Eligibility for domestic partnership status will be established by the presentation of either a certificate of state registered domestic partnership issued by the Washington Secretary of State pursuant to Chapter 26.60 RCW or an affidavit of domestic partnership meeting the definition of domestic partner as defined in the city of Burien personnel policies. The affidavit is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “A” and is on file in the office of the city clerk. [Ord. 537 § 1, 2010; Ord. 348 § 2, 2001]


Chapter 2.30 RECYCLED PRODUCTS PROCUREMENT

Sections:

2.30.010    Purpose.

2.30.020    Definitions.

2.30.030    Designated recyclable products.

2.30.040    Policies.

2.30.050    Paper and paper products.

2.30.060    Responsibilities of the department.

2.30.070    Responsibilities of other Burien departments.

2.30.080    Exemptions.


2.30.010 Purpose.

This policy shall be known as the “Burien recycled product procurement policy.” Its purpose is to promote the development of markets for recycled products and recyclable products by establishing preferential purchase programs applicable to Burien departments and contractors, thereby diverting materials from the solid waste stream. [Ord. 37 § 1, 1993]


2.30.020 Definitions.

The following terms shall have the assigned definitions for all purposes under this policy: 

(1) “Compost products” means mulch, soil amendments, ground cover, or other landscaping material derived from the biological or mechanical conversion of cellulose-containing waste materials.

(2) “Department” means the city of Burien department of community development, or such other department as may be designated by the city manager.

(3) “Designated recycled product” means a product designated in this policy, or designated by the department, pursuant to this policy, that meets or surpasses Burien minimum recycled content standards.

(4) “Minimum recycled content standards” means standards that specify the minimum level of recycled material and/or post-consumer recycled material necessary for designated products to qualify as recycled products.

(5) “Recycled material” means waste material and by-products that have been recovered or diverted from solid waste and that can be utilized in place of raw or virgin material in manufacturing a product and consist of materials derived from post-consumer waste, manufacturing waste, industrial scrap, agricultural wastes, and other items, all of which can be used in the manufacture of new or recycled products.

(6) “Post-consumer recycled material” means a material or product that has served its intended use and has been discarded for disposal or recovery by a final consumer.

(7) “Practicable” means sufficient in performance and available at a reasonable price.

(8) “Price preference” means an extra percentage that Burien is willing to pay for a recycled product.

(9) “Recyclable product” means a product which, after its intended end use, can demonstrably be diverted from Burien’s solid waste stream for use as raw material in the manufacture of another product. [Ord. 37 § 2, 1993]


2.30.030 Designated recyclable products.

(1) Paper and paper products; 

(2) Compost products; 

(3) Cement and asphalt concrete containing glass cullet, recycled fiber or plastic, tire rubber, or fly ash; 

(4) Re-crushed cement concrete aggregate and asphalt; 

(5) Lubricating oil and hydraulic oil with refined oil content; 

(6) Antifreeze; 

(7) Outdoor-wood product substitutes made from recycled plastic; 

(8) Remanufactured tires and products made from recycled tire rubber; 

(9) Building insulation products;

(10) Paint;

(11) Remanufactured laser printer toner cartridges;

(12) Other products as designated by the department. [Ord. 37 § 3, 1993]


2.30.040 Policies.

(1) All Burien departments shall use recycled products and recyclable products whenever practicable.

(2) The Burien department shall be responsible for coordinating the implementation of this policy.

(3) The Burien department may establish a price preference for any designated recycled product when the performance of that product is sufficient and a price preference will significantly increase procurement of that product. This price preference shall at no time be greater than ten percent.

(4) Burien departments may, at their option, require procurement of designated recycled products or recyclable products above the levels required by this policy or at prices above the price preference levels established under this policy.

(5) Burien shall require its contractors and consultants to use recycled products and recyclable products in fulfilling contractual obligations whenever practicable.

(6) Burien shall promote the use of recycled products and recyclable products by publicizing its procurement program. [Ord. 37 § 4, 1993]


2.30.050 Paper and paper products.

(1) Burien shall offer a 10 percent price preference for recycled paper purchased for use by city departments, except where recycled paper is specifically required by this policy or by user departments.

(2) Burien’s recycled paper procurement goal for each user department, expressed as a percentage of the total value of paper purchased, shall be: not less than 30 percent by 1994; not less than 40 percent by 1995; not less than 50 percent by 1996, and not less than 60 percent by 1997.

(3) All imprinted letterhead paper, envelopes and business cards used by Burien departments shall be recycled paper and shall bear an imprint identifying the recycled content of the paper.

(4) Burien departments shall ensure that all contracts for printing require the use of recycled paper and the inclusion of the chasing-arrow symbol identifying the recycled content of the paper whenever practicable.

(5) Burien departments shall ensure that the title page of each internal report printed or copied on recycled paper bears an imprint identifying the recycled content of the paper.

(6) Requests for bids and proposals issued by Burien shall courage contractors and consultants to: 

(a) Use recycled paper for proposals and for any printed or photocopied material created pursuant to a contract with Burien whenever practicable.

(b) Use both sides of paper sheets for reports submitted to Burien whenever practicable.

(7) To reduce the volume of paper purchased, departments shall use both sides of paper sheets whenever practicable. [Ord. 37 § 5, 1993]


2.30.060 Responsibilities of the department.

The department shall:

(1) Designate recycled products that shall be purchased by departments wherever practicable. These designated recycled products shall include, but not be limited to, the products listed in BMC 2.30.030.

(2) Determine which designated recycled products shall qualify for a price preference and at what level price preferences shall be set.

(3) Adopt the minimum recycled content standards issued by the King County purchasing agency unless the (lead) department finds that different standards would significantly increase recycled product availability, recycled content, or competition.

(4) Inform departments of their responsibilities under this policy, communicate to departments the list of designated recycled products, and provide departments with information about recycled product procurement opportunities. [Ord. 37 § 6, 1993]


2.30.070 Responsibilities of other Burien departments.

Each Burien department shall: 

(1) Purchase recycled products and recyclable products whenever practicable;

(2) Evaluate each designated recycled product to determine the extent to which the product may be practicably used by the department and its contractors; 

(3) Meet periodically with the department to report the progress of policy implementation by the department, including the results of product evaluations conducted by the department, types of recycled products purchased by department and its contractors, and the status of departmental efforts to maximize recycled product procurement; and

(4) Ensure that contracts issued by the department require recycled material content wherever practicable and that contractors provide certification of this content and reports of amounts used. [Ord. 37 § 7, 1993]


2.30.080 Exemptions.

(1) Nothing contained in this policy shall preclude user departments from requiring recycled material content as a bid specification.

(2) Nothing in this policy shall be construed as requiring a department or contractor to procure products that do not perform adequately for their intended use or are not available at a reasonable price in a reasonable period of time. [Ord. 37 § 8, 1993]


Chapter 2.35 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Sections:

2.35.010    Auditing officer.

2.35.020    Agent for receiving claims.


2.35.010 Auditing officer.

Pursuant to RCW 42.24.080, the director of the department of administrative services, or such other person as may be appointed by the city manager, shall serve as the auditing officer responsible for ensuring that all claims presented to the city are audited prior to payment. [Res. 51 § 1, 1994]


2.35.020 Agent for receiving claims.

The city clerk is hereby appointed to be the city agent responsible to receive claims for damages made under Chapter 4.96 RCW. The city clerk shall be available to receive claims for damages during normal City Hall business hours at Burien City Hall, 415 S.W. 150th Street, Burien, Washington 98166-1973. [Ord. 334 § 1, 2001]


Chapter 2.40 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

2.40.080    Relationship to Public Records Act.

2.40.090    Definitions.

2.40.100    Provision of public access.

2.40.110    Exemptions.

2.40.115    Administrative rules.


2.40.080 Relationship to Public Records Act.

This chapter constitutes the city’s rules and regulations to carry out and implement the Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Chapter 42.56 RCW, as now or hereafter amended, shall apply to disclosure of all city public records. In the event of a conflict between any section, provision, phrase, or term of Chapter 42.56 RCW and any section, provision, phrase, or term of this chapter, such section, provision, phrase, or term of Chapter 42.56 RCW shall control to the extent of the conflict. [Ord. 517 § 1, 2009]


2.40.090 Definitions.

The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:

“Public record” means any writing, maps or drawings containing information relating to the conduct of government or the performance of any governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used or retained by the city regardless of physical form or characteristics.

“Public records officer” means the city clerk or designee.

“Writing” means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing, and every other means of recording any form of communication or representation, including but not limited to letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combination thereof, and all papers, maps, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, motion pictures, film and video recordings, magnetic or punched cards, discs, drums, diskettes, sound recordings, and other documents including existing data compilations from which information may be obtained or translated. [Ord. 517 § 2, 2009]


2.40.100 Provision of public access.

(1) Requests for access to public records shall be addressed to and accepted by the public records officer, during city hours of business, by phone, fax, mail, electronic mail or in person. Upon the public records officer receiving a request to inspect a copy of public record, the public records officer shall grant the request unless the public records officer determines that the record requested is or may be exempt from disclosure in whole or in part or that uncertainty exists as to whether the record is exempt from disclosure in whole or in part, in which case the public records officer shall ask that a written request (or written request form) for public records be submitted by the requester.

(2) Any completed written request for public record shall immediately, upon receipt by a city employee, be delivered by or on behalf of the city employee to the public records officer.

(3) Upon the public records officer receiving a completed request for a public record (or written request form), the public records officer shall determine whether the public record requested is exempt by law from inspection and copying in whole or in part. The public records officer shall consult with the city attorney in making such determination. 

(4) Within five business days of receiving a public record request, the city must respond by:

(a) Either providing the record; 

(b) Acknowledging that the city has received the request and providing a reasonable estimate of the time the city will require to respond to the request; or 

(c) Denying the public record request.

(5) If the public records officer determines that the document is exempt in part but can be made available after deletion of exempt portions, the request shall be granted; provided, that such exempt portions shall first be deleted.

(6) In acknowledging receipt of a public record request that is unclear, the city may ask the requester to clarify what information the requester is seeking. If the requester fails to clarify the request, the agency need not respond to it.

(7) If the public records officer determines to deny the request, in whole or in part, a written statement of the specific reasons for the denial shall be provided the requester. [Ord. 517 § 3, 2009; Ord. 137 § 1, 1995]


2.40.110  Exemptions.

(1) The following public records, or applicable portions thereof, are exempt from public disclosure pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 42.56 RCW:

(a) Personal information in files maintained for employees, appointees, or elected officials, to the extent that disclosure would violate their right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.56.050.

(b) Information required of any taxpayer in connection with the assessment or collection of any tax if the disclosure of the information to other persons would be prohibited to such persons by RCW 82.32.330 or violate the taxpayer’s right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.56.050, or result in unfair competitive disadvantage to the taxpayer.

(c) Specific intelligence information and specific investigative records compiled by investigative, law enforcement, and penology agencies, the nondisclosure of which is essential to effective law enforcement or for the protection of any person’s right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.56.050.

(d) Credit card numbers, debit card numbers, electronic check numbers, card expiration dates or bank or other financial account numbers except when disclosure is expressly required by or governed by other law.

(e) Information revealing the identity of persons who are witnesses to or victims of crime or who file complaints with investigative, law enforcement, or penology agencies, other than the public disclosure commission, if disclosure would endanger any person’s life, physical safety, or property; provided, that if, at the time a complaint is filed, the complainant, victim or witness indicates a desire for disclosure or nondisclosure, such desire shall govern.

(f) Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to administer a license, employment, or academic examination.

(g) Except as provided by Chapter 8.26 RCW, the contents of real estate appraisals made for or by any agency including the city relative to the acquisition or sale of property, until the project or prospective sale is abandoned or until such time as all of the property has been acquired or the property to which the sale appraisal relates is sold, but in no event shall disclosure be denied for more than three years after the appraisal.

(h) Valuable formulae, designs, drawings, and research data obtained by the city within five years of the request for disclosure when disclosure would produce private gain and public loss.

(i) Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, and intra-agency memorandums in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended, except that a specific record shall not be exempt when publicly cited by the city in connection with any city action.

(j) Records which are relevant to a controversy to which the city is a party but which records would not be available to another party under the rules of pretrial discovery for causes pending in the superior courts.

(k) Records, maps, or other information identifying the location of archaeological sites in order to avoid the looting or depredation of such sites.

(l) Financial and commercial information and records supplied by businesses during application for loans or program services provided by Chapters 43.160, 43.163, 43.168 and 43.330 RCW.

(m) All applications for public employment, including the names of applicants, resumes, and other related materials submitted with respect to an applicant.

(n) The residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of employees or volunteers of the city which are held by the city in personnel records, employment or volunteer rosters, or mailing lists of employees or volunteers.

(o) The residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of the customers of a city utility contained in the records or lists held by the city utility of which they are customers.

(p) Client records maintained by the city under any domestic violence program as defined in RCW 70.123.020 or 70.123.075 or rape crisis center as defined in RCW 70.125.030.

(q) Information that identifies a person who, while a city employee:

(i) Seeks advice, under an informal process established by the city, in order to ascertain his or her rights in connection with a possible unfair practice under Chapter 49.60 RCW against the person; and

(ii) Requests that his or her identity or any identifying information not be disclosed.

(r) License applications under RCW 9.41.070.

(s) Information revealing the identity of child victims of sexual assault who are under age 18. Identifying information means the child victim’s name, address, location, photograph, and in cases in which the child victim is a relative or stepchild of the alleged perpetrator, identification of the relationship between the child and the alleged perpetrator.

(t) A law enforcement authority may not request inspection or copying of records of any person which belong to a city electrical utility, unless the authority provides the city electrical utility with a written statement in which the authority states that it suspects that the particular person to whom the records pertain has committed a crime and the authority has a reasonable belief that the records could determine or help determine whether the suspicion might be true.

(u) Names, residential addresses, residential telephone numbers, and other individually identifiable records held by an agency in relation to a vanpool, carpool, or other ride-sharing program; however, these records may be disclosed to other persons who apply for ride-matching services and who need that information in order to identify potential riders or drivers with whom to share rides.

(v) Financial information, including but not limited to account numbers and values, and other identification numbers supplied by or on behalf of a person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or other entity related to an application for a liquor license, gambling license, or lottery retail license.

(w) Attorney-client privileged communications under RCW 5.60.060.

(x) Abstracts of driving records under RCW 46.52.130(2).

(y) Any other record which is exempt from disclosure under any state law.

(2) The exemptions from public disclosure set forth in this section shall be inapplicable to the extent that information, the disclosure of which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, can be deleted from the specific records sought. No exemption shall be construed to permit the nondisclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person or persons.

(3) Inspection or copying of any specific records exempt under this section may be permitted if the King County superior court finds, after a hearing with notice thereof to every person interested and to the city, that the exemption of such records is clearly unnecessary to protect any individual’s right of privacy or any vital governmental function.

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect a positive duty of the city to disclose or a positive duty to withhold information which duty to disclose or withhold is contained in any other law. [Ord. 517 § 4, 2009]


2.40.115  Administrative rules.

The city manager may issue rules for the implementation of this chapter. [Ord. 137 § 3, 1995]


Chapter 2.45 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.45.010    Created.

2.45.020    Membership.

2.45.030    Meetings.

2.45.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.45.050    City staff support.


2.45.010 Created. 

There is hereby created a planning commission to provide advice and recommendation to the city council on Burien’s future growth through review, analysis, and recommendations regarding the city’s comprehensive plan and related land use documents. [Ord. 388 § 1, 2003; Ord. 187 § 1, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1, 1995]


2.45.020 Membership.

(1) Number of Members. The planning commission shall consist of seven voting members.

(2) Appointment. All members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. The four positions filled in 2003 (Positions 1, 2, 3, and 4) shall be appointed for terms expiring March 31, 2006, or until their successors are duly appointed and confirmed. The three incumbent positions (Positions 5, 6, and 7) shall expire March 31, 2004, or until their successors are duly appointed and confirmed. Subsequent appointments for full terms shall begin as of April 1st and shall be for four-year terms, or until their successors are duly appointed and confirmed. There shall be a term limit of two consecutive full terms.  After a two-year absence, members may be reappointed. Members must reside within the city. The planning commission shall at all times include between five and seven voting members. All planning commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. The city council shall attempt, but shall not be obligated, to appoint planning commission members so that all geographic areas of the city are represented. Employees of the city of Burien are not eligible.

(3) Removal. Planning commission members may be removed by a majority vote of the entire city council for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office or other just cause. Members may be removed if they have unexcused absences totaling 25 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings for the calendar year or three consecutive unexcused absences. The city manager shall notify the city council of any such absences. The decision of the city council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom.

(4) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 566 § 1, 2012; Ord. 388 § 2, 2003; Ord. 187 § 2, 1996; Ord. 113 § 2, 1995]


2.45.030 Meetings.

(1) The planning commission shall hold such regular and special meetings as may be necessary to complete its responsibilities. The planning commission shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. A majority of the planning commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of members present shall be necessary to carry any motion. Staff will prepare meeting agendas with advice from the chair.

(2) The planning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business. [Ord. 566 § 1, 2012; Ord. 388 § 3, 2003; Ord. 187 § 3, 1996; Ord. 113 § 3, 1995]


2.45.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The planning commission shall be an advisory body to the city council responsible for providing advice and recommendation for Burien’s future growth. Duties of the planning commission shall include:

(1) Review and recommendations relating to the city of Burien’s comprehensive land use plan;

(2) Review and recommendations relating to changes to the official zoning map and the zoning code;

(3) Such other and future duties as assigned by the city council. [Ord. 388 § 4, 2003; Ord. 187 § 4, 1996; Ord. 113 § 4, 1995]


2.45.050 City staff support.

Administrative staff support shall be provided by the community development director or any other designee of the city manager. Said staff support shall be responsible for the agenda packets, written record of the proceedings of the planning commission, and such other support as necessary to enable the planning commission to conduct business and carry out its duties and responsibilities. [Ord. 566 § 1, 2012]


Chapter 2.50  BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP

Sections:

2.50.010    Created.

2.50.020    Membership.

2.50.030    Meetings.

2.50.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.50.050    City staff support.


2.50.010 Created. 

There is hereby created a citizen board, to be called the Burien business and economic development partnership, consisting of 14 appointed members, and one nonvoting ex officio member who shall be the city manager, to provide advice to the city council on Burien’s economic development through review of, and recommendations for improvement to, economic development components of the city’s comprehensive plan, and to make recommendations to the city council on other economic development programs and priorities. [Ord. 258 § 1, 1999; Ord. 114 § 1, 1995]


2.50.020 Membership.

(1) Number, Terms and Qualifications of Members. The partnership shall consist of 11 appointed members and three nonvoting ex officio members. Appointed members shall serve four-year terms running from April 1st through March 31st, or until a member’s successor is duly appointed and confirmed. The appointments shall be staggered with every odd-numbered year, half of the members due for reappointment or replacement.

The voting membership shall be selected with a goal of having predominantly business representation. To the extent available, representation should include applicants from the following areas serving Burien:

(a) Business owners, managers and employees;

(b) Commercial property owners;

(c) Chambers of commerce and merchants’ associations;

(d) Burien city residents;

(e) Employment and job training services;

(f) Education;

(g) Others with interest in Burien.

In addition, a representative from Discover Burien, the Seattle Southside Chamber, and the King County Labor Council shall be nonvoting ex officio members.

(2) Appointment. Members of the partnership shall be appointed by the city council in a manner consistent with the council’s appointment procedures. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Employees of the city of Burien are not eligible.

(3) There shall be a term limit of two consecutive full terms. After a two-year absence, members may be reappointed.

(4) Removal. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the entire city council. The decision of the city council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom. Members may be removed if they have absences totaling 25 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings for the calendar year or three consecutive unexcused absences. Members may also be removed if they are found by the majority of the whole council, or at the recommendation of the BEDP, to have violated the BEDP code of conduct.

(5) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointments as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 687 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 566 § 2, 2012; Ord. 258 § 2, 1999; Ord. 114 § 2, 1995]


2.50.030 Meetings.

(1) The partnership shall hold such regular and special meetings as may be necessary to complete its responsibilities. The partnership shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. A majority of the partnership members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion. Staff will prepare meeting agendas with advice from the chair.

(2) The partnership shall adopt bylaws and such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business, subject to approval by the city council. [Ord. 566 § 2, 2012; Ord. 258 § 3, 1999; Ord. 114 § 3, 1995]


2.50.040 Duties and responsibilities. 

The partnership shall be an advisory body to the city council responsible for providing advice on Burien’s economic growth and development. Duties of the partnership shall include:

(1) Make recommendations annually for changes to the Burien comprehensive plan that promote and enhance economic development;

(2) Make recommendations on economic development programs and priorities;

(3) Provide periodic reports to the city council; submit an annual work program to the city council for approval; provide a year-end annual report of the progress made in implementing the work program and on the status of economic development planning in the city; and

(4) Such other duties as assigned by the city council. [Ord. 258 § 4, 1999; Ord. 114 § 4, 1995]


2.50.050 City staff support.

Administrative staff support shall be provided by the economic development manager or any other designee of the city manager. Said staff support shall be responsible for the agenda packets, written record of the proceedings of the partnership, and such other support as necessary to enable the partnership to conduct business and carry out its duties and responsibilities. [Ord. 566 § 2, 2012]


Chapter 2.55 PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:

2.55.010    Definitions.

2.55.020    Creation – Eligibility.

2.55.030    Compensation.

2.55.040    Terms of board members – Vacancies.

2.55.050    Officers – Meetings – Quorum – Records.

2.55.060    Powers and duties.

2.55.070    City staff support.


2.55.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the listed terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Board” means the city of Burien parks and recreation board; and

(2) “Parks” means areas of land, with or without water, owned by the city and used for public recreational purposes, including landscaped tracts, downtown parks, picnic grounds, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers, camps, foot, bicycle and bridle paths, wildlife sanctuaries, museums, zoological and botanical gardens, facilities for bathing, boating, and fishing, as well as other recreational facilities and open space used for the benefit of the public. [Ord. 325 § 1, 2001; Ord. 228 § 1, 1998]


2.55.020 Creation – Eligibility.

(1) There is hereby created an advisory parks and recreation board, consisting of seven voting members, each appointed by a majority vote of the city council, from among the residents of the city. Appointments shall be made from citizens of recognized fitness for the position, based on a demonstrated interest in parks and recreation, dedication to representing the interests of the public, and to some degree, based on professional training/expertise in related fields. Employees of the city of Burien are not eligible to be appointed to the board.

(2) The council may also appoint alternate (nonvoting) members. The board may from time to time create short-term ad hoc committees that include nonmembers who are deemed important in performing the board’s duties. Tenure shall vary with the need as determined by the board’s voting members. Nonmembers and alternate members shall not have voting rights. [Ord. 566 § 3, 2012; Ord. 325 § 2, 2001; Ord. 228 § 2, 1998]


2.55.030 Compensation.

No board member shall receive any compensation for his or her services. [Ord. 325 § 3, 2001; Ord. 228 § 3, 1998]


2.55.040 Terms of board members – Vacancies.

(1) Except as noted in subsection (2) of this section, board members shall be appointed to four-year terms running from April 1st through March 31st, or until a member’s successor is duly appointed and confirmed; provided, that the term of the member’s successor will be shortened by the length of the hold-over and will be considered a full term. Members of the board may be excused by majority vote of the city council. Vacancies shall be filled for the remaining unexpired portion of the term being filled. Members may be removed if they have unexcused absences totaling 25 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings for the calendar year or three consecutive unexcused absences.

(2) During the initial organization of the board, three of the members shall be appointed to two-year terms to stagger initial membership expiration.

(3) There shall be a term limit of two consecutive full terms. A member who has served two full terms may reapply to serve on the board after a period of two years has elapsed. [Ord. 566 § 3, 2012; Ord. 468 § 1, 2007; Ord. 325 § 4, 2001; Ord. 228 § 4, 1998]


2.55.050 Officers – Meetings – Quorum – Records.

(1) Members of the board shall meet and organize by electing from the members of the board a chair and vice-chair and such other officers as may be necessary. The chair and vice-chair shall be elected for a one-year term. All board members present are eligible to vote. In the event the chair is unable to complete his or her term, the vice-chair will assume the position of the chair until the expiration of the one-year term, and a new vice-chair shall be elected.

(2) The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board and in his or her absence, the vice-chair shall preside. Staff will prepare meeting agendas with advice from the chair.

(3) A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

(4) A meeting of the board shall be held at least once a month. [Ord. 566 § 3, 2012; Ord. 325 § 5, 2001; Ord. 228 § 5, 1998]


2.55.060 Powers and duties.

The board shall:

(1) Develop bylaws to govern the internal affairs of the parks and recreation advisory board. All bylaws must be approved by the Burien city council;

(2) Advise and make recommendations to the city council and the city manager regarding the acquisition, promotion, improvement, maintenance, and use of city parks, and advise and make recommendations in regards to recreational programs and events. All recommendations presented to the council must contain project funding source options and/or financial reports detailing the projected expenditure for the project;

(3) Make recommendations regarding available grants for the purpose of supporting city parks; 

(4) Coordinate with the parks and recreation department to assure that the board’s recommendations are feasible and practical;

(5) Submit to the city council during June of each year a report of accomplishments for the previous year and work-plan recommendations for the development and operation of the parks and recreation programs and facilities, for the information of and as a recommendation to the city council in preparing the annual parks and recreation budget; 

(6) Carry out other parks and recreation related tasks assigned by the city council or by ordinance; and

(7) Advise and make recommendations to the city council and the city manager regarding issues relating to regulations and care for public trees and other vegetation in a manner that ensures its viability for future generations. [Ord. 406 § 1, 2004; Ord. 325 § 6, 2001; Ord. 228 § 6, 1998]


2.55.070 City staff support.

Administrative staff support shall be provided by the parks and recreation manager or any other designee of the city manager. Said staff support shall be responsible for the agenda packets, written record of the proceedings of the parks and recreation board, and such other support as necessary to enable the parks and recreation board to conduct business and carry out its duties and responsibilities. [Ord. 325 § 7, 2001; Ord. 228 § 7, 1998]


Chapter 2.60 ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.60.010    Definitions.

2.60.020    Creation – Eligibility.

2.60.030    Compensation.

2.60.040    Terms of commission members – Vacancies.

2.60.050    Officers – Meetings – Quorum – Records.

2.60.060    Powers and duties.

2.60.070    City staff support. 


2.60.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the listed terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Commission” means the city of Burien arts commission; and

(2) “Arts” means specific artistic projects and cultural activities within the city that both the city and the arts commission members wish to promote, enhance or develop. [Ord. 324 § 1, 2001; Ord. 229 § 1, 1998]


2.60.020 Creation – Eligibility.

(1) There is hereby created an advisory arts commission, consisting of nine voting members, each appointed by a majority vote of the city council, from among the residents of the city. Appointments shall emphasize citizens involved in nonprofit arts organizations. Employees of the city of Burien are not eligible to be appointed to the commission.

(2) The council may also appoint alternate (nonvoting) members. The commission may from time to time create short-term ad hoc committees that include nonmembers who are deemed important in performing the commission’s duties. Tenure shall vary with the need as determined by the commission’s voting members. Nonmembers and alternate members shall not have voting rights. [Ord. 566 § 4, 2012; Ord. 494 § 1, 2008; Ord. 324 § 2, 2001; Ord. 229 § 2, 1998]


2.60.030 Compensation.

No commission member shall receive any compensation for his or her services. [Ord. 324 § 3, 2001; Ord. 229 § 3, 1998]


2.60.040 Terms of commission members – Vacancies.

(1) Except as noted in subsection (2) of this section, commission members shall be appointed to four-year terms running from April 1st through March 31st, or until a member’s successor is duly appointed and confirmed; provided, that the term of the member’s successor will be shortened by the length of the hold-over and will be considered a full term. Members of the commission may be excused by majority vote of the city council. Vacancies shall be filled for the remaining unexpired portion of the term being filled. Members may be removed if they have unexcused absences totaling 25 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings for the calendar year or three consecutive unexcused absences.

(2) During the initial organization of the commission, three of the members shall be appointed to two-year terms to stagger initial membership expiration.

(3) There shall be a term limit of two consecutive full terms. A member who has served two full terms may reapply to serve on the board after a period of two years has elapsed. [Ord. 566 § 4, 2012; Ord. 469 § 1, 2007; Ord. 324 § 4, 2001; Ord. 229 § 4, 1998]


2.60.050 Officers – Meetings – Quorum – Records

(1) Members of the commission shall meet and organize by electing from the members of the commission a chair, vice-chair, recording secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary. The chair and vice-chair shall be elected for a one-year term. All commission members present are eligible to vote. In the event the chair is unable to complete his or her term, the vice-chair will assume the position of the chair until the expiration of the one-year term, and a new vice-chair shall be elected.

(2) The chair shall preside at all meetings of the commission and in his or her absence, the vice-chair shall preside. The recording secretary shall keep and publish a summary of the minutes and provide those minutes to the city clerk. Staff will prepare meeting agendas with advice from the chair.

(3) A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

(4) A meeting of the commission shall be held at least once a month. [Ord. 566 § 4, 2012; Ord. 324 § 5, 2001; Ord. 229 § 5, 1998]


2.60.060 Powers and duties.

The commission shall:

(1) Develop bylaws to govern the internal affairs of the arts commission. All bylaws must be approved by the Burien city council;

(2) Develop cooperation and coordination with schools and local, regional and national arts organizations;

(3) Initiate, sponsor and conduct programs calculated to further public awareness of and interest in fine and performing arts and/or the cultural activities in the city of Burien. The commission may develop these programs alone or in cooperation with any other private, civic or public body of the city, county, state or federal government;

(4) Explore ways to obtain private, local, state and federal funds to promote art projects in the city; 

(5) Advise the city council and staff on the receipt of and/or purchase of works of art to be placed on municipal property;

(6) Advise and assist the city council and staff in connection with such other artistic and cultural activities as may be referred to it by the city council or by ordinance;

(7) All advice and recommendations presented to the council must contain project funding source options and/or financial reports detailing the projected expenditure for the project; and

(8) Submit to the city council during June of each year a report of accomplishments for the previous year and work-plan recommendations for the promotion or development of artistic and cultural activities for the upcoming year. [Ord. 324 § 6, 2001; Ord. 229 § 6, 1998]


2.60.070 City staff support. 

Administrative staff support shall be provided by the parks and recreation manager or any other designee of the city manager. Said staff support shall be responsible for the agenda packets, written record of the proceedings of the arts commission, and such other support as necessary to enable the arts commission to conduct business and carry out its duties and responsibilities. [Ord. 566 § 4, 2012]


Chapter 2.65 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION 

Sections:

2.65.010    Human services commission created. 

2.65.020    Membership. 

2.65.030    Meetings. 

2.65.040    Duties and responsibilities. 

2.65.050    City staff support. 


2.65.010 Human services commission created. 

There is hereby created a human services commission consisting of seven members to provide guidance and direction to the city council on human services issues in the city and human services funding allocations. [Ord. 669 § 1, 2017]


2.65.020 Membership.  

(1) Number. The human services commission shall consist of seven appointed members.

(2) Appointment and Terms. 

(a) The seven members of the human services commission shall be appointed by the city council. Initially, three positions shall expire March 31, 2019, and four positions shall expire March 31, 2020. Thereafter, appointed members shall serve three-year terms running from April 1st of the year of appointment through March 31st of the third year thereafter. Each member’s appointment continues until a member’s successor is duly appointed and confirmed. There shall be a term limit of two consecutive full terms. An appointment to serve an unexpired term of two years or less shall not count towards the two consecutive term limit. After a two-year absence, members may be reappointed. 

(b) Commission members shall be appointed based on their knowledge of and experience in the provision of human services, preferably with knowledge of issues in Burien. At least five of the appointed members shall be residents of the city of Burien. Board members and employees of human services agencies receiving city human services funding, and employees of the city of Burien are not eligible.

(c) No human services commission member shall receive any compensation for his or her services.

(3) Removal. Appointed human services commission members may be removed with consent of a majority of the city council for conflicts of interest as defined pursuant to RCW 42.23.030; unexcused absences totaling 25 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings for the calendar year or three consecutive unexcused absences; or for any reason deemed sufficient by a majority of the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom. 

(4) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner as described in subsection (2) of this section. [Ord. 669 § 2, 2017]


2.65.030 Meetings. 

The human services commission shall hold regular and special meetings as may be necessary to complete its duties and responsibilities. The human services commission shall elect from among its members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice-chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. The chair and vice-chair shall be elected for a one-year term. A majority of the human services commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of members present shall be necessary to carry any motion. [Ord. 669 § 3, 2017]


2.65.040 Duties and responsibilities. 

The human services commission shall be an advisory body to the city council responsible for providing advice and recommendations related to human services issues. Duties and responsibilities of the human services commission include:

(1) Identify and assess the human services needs in the city.

(2) Recommend priorities and approaches to address human services needs within the city.

(3) Review human services funding requests submitted to the city and make funding allocation recommendations.

(4) Review performance of human services agencies/programs that are funded by the city.

(5) Other duties as may be assigned by the city council. [Ord. 669 § 4, 2017]


2.65.050 City staff support. 

Administrative staff support shall be provided by a designee of the city manager. Said staff support shall be responsible for the agenda packets, written record of the proceedings of the human services commission, financial analysis, and such other support as necessary to enable the human services commission to carry out its duties and responsibilities. [Ord. 669 § 5, 2017]


Chapter 2.70 INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES, OFFICIALS AND VOLUNTEERS

Sections:

2.70.010    Indemnification of employees, officials, and volunteers.

2.70.020    Defense provision – Failure to cooperate.

2.70.030    No duty to indemnify – Conditions.

2.70.040    Duty to indemnify – Common law.


2.70.010 Indemnification of employees, officials, and volunteers.

The city shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend a city employee, elected official or volunteer for any liability that may arise from acts or omissions committed by the employee, volunteer or elected official where said acts or omissions were made in good faith during the course of and within the scope of city employment or volunteer activity for the city, or while performing duties as an elected official. [Ord. 356 § 1, 2002]


2.70.020 Defense provision – Failure to cooperate.

If the city determines that it will provide a defense for the affected city employee/elected official/volunteer, then the affected employee/ elected official/volunteer will fully cooperate with the city in preparing a defense and trying the case should it go to trial. If the city employee/elected official/volunteer fails to cooperate, then the city may refuse to provide further defense and indemnity. [Ord. 356 § 2, 2002]


2.70.030 No duty to indemnify – Conditions. 

The city shall have no duty to indemnify, hold harmless or defend a city employee/ elected official/volunteer affected with regards to the following:

(1) Nonmonetary orders that are entered against the employee/elected official/volunteer;

(2) Consequences of the lawsuit that occur prior to the time the employee/elected official/volunteer notifies the city attorney about the claim;

(3) Any criminal complaint;

(4) Any intentional tort or for any conduct that is willful or wanton; provided, however, if the city employee/elected official/volunteer denies that he/she has committed intentional or willful or wanton conduct, then the city shall provide the defense but shall have no duty to indemnify the employee/elected official/volunteer if any judgment is entered against him/her for intentional or willful and wanton wrongful conduct; provided further, if the trier of fact finds that the employee/elected official/volunteer has committed a willful, wanton or intentional wrongful act, then he/she shall be required to reimburse the city for defense costs, including attorney fees, incurred in defending the employee/elected official/volunteer in said lawsuit. The city shall require the employee to sign an agreement indicating he/she will reimburse the city for defense costs, including attorney fees, should the trier of fact determine the employee committed a willful, wanton or intentional wrongful act. This document shall be signed before the city is obligated to provide a defense; and

(5) Provided, however, the city attorney shall defend an elective city official in a judicial hearing to determine the sufficiency of a recall charge as provided in RCW 29.82.023 if the official requests such defense. Said defense by the city attorney shall include the cost of appealing the decision rendered by the superior court concerning the sufficiency of the recall charge if the city attorney determines there is legal merit for an appeal and the official requests such an appeal. [Ord. 356 § 3, 2002]


2.70.040 Duty to indemnify – Common law.

The city’s duty to indemnify, hold harmless and defend is recognized as a common law duty. [Ord. 356 § 4, 2002]


Chapter 2.75 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT Revised 7/20

Sections:

2.75.010    Definitions.

2.75.020    Purpose.

2.75.030    Emergency management policy.

2.75.040    Emergency operations plan.

2.75.050    Emergency management.

2.75.060    Disaster and emergency powers of the mayor.

2.75.070    Disaster and emergency powers of the city manager. Revised 7/20

2.75.080    Disaster and emergency powers of the director of emergency management. Revised 7/20

2.75.090    Private liability.

2.75.100    Penalty.


2.75.010 Definitions.

(1) “Emergency management” shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress.

(2) “Emergency management organization” shall mean the Washington Military Department, Emergency Management Division, or its successor or any emergency management organization created in accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW.

(3) “Emergency” or “disaster” as used in this chapter shall mean an event or set of circumstances which:

(a)  Demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property or to provide relief to any stricken area within the city overtaken by such occurrences; or

(b)  Reaches such a dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the city manager proclaiming the existence of a disaster or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and state statute.

(4) “Director of emergency management” shall mean the city manager or his/her designee who shall be responsible for the administration and operation of the emergency management program for the city of Burien.

(5) “Disaster coordinator” shall mean the person(s) appointed by the director of emergency management to perform duties in support of the director of emergency management as assigned. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.020 Purpose.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for persons and property within the city of Burien in the event of an emergency or disaster, and to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and services of the city in coordination with private and other affected public agencies and private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.030 Emergency management policy.

It is the policy of the city of Burien to make effective preparation and use of manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. Disasters and emergencies, by their very nature, may disrupt or destroy existing systems and the capability of the city to respond to protect life, public health and public property. Therefore, citizens are advised to be prepared to be on their own for at least 72 hours should an emergency or disaster occur. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.040 Emergency operations plan.

The emergency operations plan, prepared at the direction of the city manager and approved by executive order of the city manager, is the official emergency operations plan of the city of Burien. The director of emergency management shall file a copy of said plan in the office of the city clerk, and distribute copies of said plan to appropriate city departments, King County office of emergency management, neighboring cities, and the Washington Military Department, Emergency Management Division. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.050 Emergency management.

(1) There is hereby created, in accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW, an emergency management organization. The purpose of the local organization is to perform local emergency management functions. The organization shall represent only the city of Burien and operate only within the city.

(2) The city’s director of emergency management shall be the administrative head and have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management program for the city, and direct responsibility for the emergency operations of departments in the city. The director of emergency management shall be responsible for assuring that emergency preparedness, mitigation, response and recovery activities are carried out within the city, through the emergency operations plan.

(3) The director of emergency management shall develop and maintain the emergency operations plan and program and shall have such other duties as may be added by amendment to this chapter.

(4) An emergency planning team appointed by the director of emergency management shall provide staff support in the development, implementation and maintenance of the emergency operations plan and to staff the emergency operations center (or its successor), provide policy recommendations to the city council during emergency and recovery periods and perform any other necessary functions during an emergency or disaster. The team shall consist of such key personnel as are designated by the city manager, and such personnel from outside professional and volunteer organizations having key roles in emergency preparedness, planning and response activities as determined by the director of emergency management. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.060 Disaster and emergency powers of the mayor.

The mayor shall be responsible for:

(1) Providing visible leadership to the community;

(2) Providing policy direction through the city manager and the director of emergency management. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.070 Disaster and emergency powers of the city manager. Revised 7/20

In the event of an emergency or disaster or upon the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor of the state, the city manager is hereby empowered:

(1) To issue an executive order proclaiming an emergency, which order shall be in effect until such time that the city manager determines that the extraordinary measures detailed therein are no longer required for the protection of the public peace, safety, and welfare;

(2) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

(3) To request, through established channels, the county executive to proclaim a local emergency when, in the opinion of the city manager, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;

(4) To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and to bind the city for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

(5) To control and direct the efforts of the emergency management organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

(6) To require emergency services of the city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the service and equipment of as many citizens of this city as may be deemed necessary in the execution of the city manager’s duties; and such persons to be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency workers;

(7) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

(8) To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the manager by this chapter, by any other statute, agreement or lawful authority, as necessary;

(9) To take any other action necessary to protect and ensure the safety and wellbeing of Burien residents, businesses and property as deemed appropriate by the city council or the city manager; provided, that the city manager provides notice of the action to the city council at the earliest reasonable opportunity. [Ord. 740 §§ 1, 2, 2020; Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.080 Disaster and emergency powers of the director of emergency management. Revised 7/20

The director of emergency management is hereby empowered:

(1) To request the city manager to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation, if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest practicable time.

(2) To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the departments and services of the city in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

(3) To recommend for adoption by the city council emergency management plans, ordinances, interlocal and mutual aid agreements.

(4) To represent the emergency management organization of the city in dealing with issues pertaining to emergency management.

(5) To maintain the emergency management plan of the city and manage the day-to-day responsibilities of the emergency management program activities.

(6) To take any other action necessary to protect and ensure the safety and wellbeing of Burien residents, businesses and property, and, if the director is a city manager designee, with notice to the city manager at the earliest reasonable opportunity. [Ord. 740 § 3, 2020; Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.090 Private liability.

No individual firm, association, corporation or other party owning, maintaining, controlling any building or premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits said city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such building or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice emergency or disaster, or their successors in interest, or the agents or employees of any of them, shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon said building or premises as a result of any act or mission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof, except a willful act of misconduct, when such a person has entered or gone into or upon said building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during an emergency or disaster or an attack by enemies of the United States or during a disaster drill, exercise or test ordered by a lawful authority. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


2.75.100 Penalty.

Any person who shall:

(1) Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such member by virtue of this chapter; or

(2) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; or

(3) Falsely (a) represent himself or herself to be an official of an emergency management organization; (b) wear, without authority of an emergency management organization, uniforms or a distinctive part thereof, or any badge, identification or insignia of an emergency management organization, or any facsimile of the aforementioned uniform, badge, identification or insignia; or (c) wear or carry upon his person or display upon a vehicle, without the authority of an emergency management organization, any object, device or lettering designed to create the impression such person is in any manner acting in an official capacity connected with such emergency management organization; shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding $5,000, or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding one year, or both, at the discretion of the court. [Ord. 473 § 1, 2007]


Chapter 2.80 CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS – APPRENTICE REQUIREMENTS1

Sections:

2.80.010    Definitions.

2.80.020    Use of apprentices required for public works.

2.80.030    Administration.

2.80.040    EAP utilization plan.

2.80.050    Exceptions and waivers.

2.80.060    Monitoring.

2.80.070    Reporting.

2.80.080    Failure to meet utilization goal.


2.80.010 Definitions.

Where used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the meaning and construction set forth herein:

(1) “Apprentice” means an apprentice enrolled in a state-approved apprenticeship training program.

(2) “Contractor” means a person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or joint venture entering into a contract with the city to construct a public work.

(3) “Labor hours” refers to the total number of hours worked by workers receiving an hourly wage who are directly employed on the site of the public work and who are subject to state or federal prevailing wage requirements. “Labor hours” shall also include hours worked by workers employed by subcontractors on the site of the public work, and shall include additional hours worked as a result of a contract or project adjustment or pursuant to an agreed-upon change order.

(4) “Employee apprenticeship program (EAP)” refers to the requirements of this chapter and any administrative regulations applicable thereto.

(5) “EAP coordinator” refers to the person designated by the city manager to administer and coordinate the employee apprenticeship program.

(6) “EAP utilization plan” refers to the plan for utilization of apprenticeship labor in a public work project that meets the requirements of BMC 2.80.040.

(7) “Estimated cost” shall mean the anticipated cost of a public work, as determined by the city, based upon the expected costs of materials, supplies, equipment, and labor, but excluding taxes and contingency funds.

(8) “Notice to proceed” refers to the written authorization to the contractor under the public work contract to commence work.

(9) “Public work” refers to all city funded construction projects that constitute a public work pursuant to RCW 39.04.010 as now or hereafter amended and estimated to cost $1,000,000 or more.

(10) “State-approved apprenticeship program” means an apprenticeship program approved or recognized by the Washington State Apprenticeship and Training Council.

(11) “Subcontractor” means a person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or joint venture that has contracted with the contractor to perform all or part of the work to construct a public work by a contractor. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.020 Use of apprentices required for public works.

Apprentices shall be utilized on the construction of all public works in accordance with this chapter. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.030 Administration.

(1) Apprenticeship Program Goal. All contractors and subcontractors constructing or involved with the construction of public works, and all service providers involved with the construction of a public work, shall ensure that the lesser of at least 15 percent of the total labor hours actually worked on the public work project, or 15 percent of the estimated labor hours, are performed by apprentices.

(2) Contract Requirements. Contracts for such construction projects shall include provisions detailing the apprentice labor requirements.

(3) Submission of EAP Utilization Plan. All contractors shall submit an EAP utilization plan and shall meet with the EAP coordinator to review said EAP utilization plan prior to being issued a notice to proceed. Failure to submit an EAP utilization plan may be grounds for the city to withhold remittance of a progress payment until such plan is received from the responsible contractor. A meeting with the EAP coordinator prior to issuance of a notice to proceed shall be excused only when the EAP coordinator is unavailable to meet prior to the scheduled date for issuance of the notice to proceed and the contractor and the EAP coordinator have otherwise scheduled a meeting for the coordinator to review the contractor’s plan. The contractor shall be responsible for meeting the EAP utilization goal requirements of the contract, including all amendments and change orders thereto, and shall be responsible for overall compliance for all hours worked by subcontractors. To the extent possible, the contractor shall recruit apprentices from multiple trades or crafts. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.040 EAP utilization plan.

The EAP utilization plan shall meet the following requirements:

(1) Shall be submitted on forms prepared or approved by the EAP coordinator;

(2) Shall specify the planned labor hours for each trade or craft;

(3) Shall provide for quarterly reports, as well as a final report, indicating the total labor hours and the apprenticeship hours utilized by the contractor and all subcontractors on the project; and

(4) Shall include a description of how the contractor will satisfy the EAP utilization goal on the particular public work project and include a summary of outreach and recruitment procedures to hire apprentices to work on the project. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.050 Exceptions and waivers.

During the term of a construction contract subject to this chapter, the city manager may reduce or waive the apprentice labor hour goals upon his or her determination that:

(1) The contractor has demonstrated that it has utilized its best efforts to meet the established percentage requirement but remains unable to fulfill the goal;

(2) The contractor has demonstrated that insufficient apprentices are available to meet the EAP utilization goals;

(3) The reasonable and necessary requirements of the contract render apprentice utilization infeasible at the required levels;

(4) There exists a disproportionately high ratio of material costs to labor hours, which does not make feasible the required minimum level of apprentice participation;

(5) To the extent that apprentice labor hour goals are in conflict with funding agreements in place, including federal aid projects, in connection with the public work; or

(6) For reasons deemed appropriate by the city manager and not inconsistent with the purpose and goals of this chapter. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.060 Monitoring.

The city manager shall implement a system for monitoring the actual use of apprentices in construction projects subject to this chapter. Such monitoring shall include identifying individual apprentices by name and Washington State apprenticeship registration number; reviewing documents provided by the contractor showing total apprentice labor hours; determining the apprentice hours worked by minorities and women, and as available, persons with disabilities and economically disadvantaged youth; and assessing whether the contractor has complied with the apprenticeship requirement established in its contract. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.070 Reporting.

The city manager shall report to the city council annually upon the use of apprentices for public work projects. The report shall include, to the extent it is available:

(1) The percentage of labor hours actually worked by apprentices on each project and the total number of labor hours on each project;

(2) The number of apprentices by contractor broken down by trade and craft category;

(3) The number and percentage of minorities, women, persons with disabilities and disadvantaged youth utilized as apprentices on each project;

(4) The number of new apprentices indentured during the reporting year as a result of the city’s apprenticeship requirements; and

(5) The percentage of apprentices in training on city projects who have graduated to journey level during the reporting year. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]


2.80.080 Failure to meet utilization goal.

(1) Hours Assessment. Contracts for the construction of public work projects shall provide that contractors failing to meet the EAP utilization goals shall be assessed an amount for each hour that is not achieved. The amount per hour shall be based on the extent the contractor or service provider met its goal. The amount per hour that shall be assessed shall be as follows:

	Percent of goal met	Assessment per unmet hour

	100%	$ 0.00

	90% to 99%	$ 2.00

	75% to 89%	$ 3.50

	50% to 74%	$ 5.00

	1% to 49%	$ 7.50

	0%	$10.00

When determining the percent of goal that is met, all rounding shall be down to the nearest whole percent. No assessment shall be waived by the city unless it is determined by the city manager to be in the best interests of the city, which determination shall be made after consultation with the EAP coordinator.

(2) Deposit of Assessments. All assessments imposed pursuant to this section shall be deposited into a separate account and utilized to support the city’s pre-apprenticeship and training program. The policies and regulations adopted by the city manager and director of utilities pursuant to this chapter shall address issues pertaining to a contractor’s existing workforce. Contributions need not be made for labor hours that have been adjusted in accordance with BMC 2.80.050. [Ord. 474 § 1, 2007]1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 475 adds the provisions of this chapter as Chapter 2.75. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 2.85 ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS

Sections:

2.85.010    Acceptance of donations.


2.85.010 Acceptance of donations.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.100, the city council authorizes the city manager to accept donations or bequests of money or property on the city’s behalf in accordance with the terms of the donation or bequest, if such terms are within the powers granted the city by law. If no terms or conditions are attached to the donation or bequest, the city may expend or use it for any municipal purpose. If the donation or bequest is not in the city’s interest, the city manager may reject it or negotiate different terms. The city manager shall designate the appropriate city fund or department to which such money or property shall be allocated. [Ord. 577 § 1, 2013]


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE Revised 1/20

Chapters:

3.04    Biennial Budget

3.05    Fee Schedule

3.06    Administrative Provisions for Collection of City of Burien Taxes Revised 1/20

3.10    Sales and Use Taxes

3.11    Business and Occupation Tax Revised 1/20

3.12    Utility Tax

3.13    Commercial Parking Tax Revised 1/20

3.15    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.20    Real Estate Excise Taxes

3.25    Gambling Tax

3.27    Admissions Tax

3.30    Funds

3.31    Art in Public Places Fund

3.35    Bond Registration

3.40    Referendum Procedure for Tax Levies

3.42    Repealed

3.45    Working Capital Funds for Grant-Related Activities


Chapter 3.04 BIENNIAL BUDGET

Sections:

3.04.010    Biennial budget established.

3.04.020    Mid-biennial review and modification.


3.04.010 Biennial budget established.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.34.040, the city council hereby establishes a two-year biennial budget, for the city of Burien, beginning with the two-year biennium which begins January 1, 2009. The 2009 – 2010 biennial budget and all subsequent budgets shall be prepared, considered and adopted under the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 35A.34 RCW which is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. [Ord. 485 § 1, 2008]


3.04.020 Mid-biennial review and modification.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.34.130, the city council hereby provides for a mid-biennial review and modification of the biennial budget. No sooner than eight months after the start of the first year of the fiscal biennium, nor later than the first regularly scheduled city council meeting in November of the first year of each biennial budget, the city manager shall prepare proposed budget modifications to be effective as of January 1st of the following year. Such proposed modifications shall be sent to city council members and shall be a public record and available to the public. A public hearing shall be advertised at least once and shall be held at a city council meeting no later than the second Tuesday in December and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing or thereafter, council may consider a proposed ordinance to carry out such modifications, which such ordinance shall be subject to other provisions of Chapter 35A.34 RCW. Copies of the proposed mid-biennial modification shall be made available to the public through the city clerk. The clerk shall transmit a complete copy of the budget modification as adopted to the State Auditor. [Ord. 485 § 1, 2008]


Chapter 3.05 FEE SCHEDULE

Sections:

3.05.010    Permit fees.

3.05.020    Repealed.

3.05.030    Parks and recreation – Setting and establishing user fees.


3.05.010 Permit fees.

Permit fees, deposit requirements and other community development and land use related fees will be established by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 515 § 1, 2009; Ord. 320 § 1, 2000; Ord. 181 § 1, 1996; Ord. 149 § 1, 1995; Ord. 57 § 1, 1993]


3.05.020 Schedule.

Repealed by Ord. 320. [Ord. 181, 1996; Ord. 149, 1995; Ord. 57 Attachment D, 1993]


3.05.030 Parks and recreation – Setting and establishing user fees.

(1) The city manager shall review annually the current rates, fees and charges for facilities and programs, and amend them, if necessary, to assure that the city of Burien is providing such services at a reasonable fair market value and consistent with fee policies and goals as recommended by the parks department advisory board.

(2) The city manager is authorized to establish or amend these rates, fees and charges for the following described services:

(a) Senior adult programs, classes and services;

(b) Family program activities, classes and services;

(c) Youth program activities, classes and services;

(d) Facility rentals (e.g., meeting rooms, picnic shelters, etc.); and

(e) Field rentals.

(3) The parks director shall review at least annually the current rates, fees and charges and recommend to the city manager any necessary adjustments. The city manager is authorized to establish or amend these rates, fees and charges.

(4) The director shall set user fees in accordance with this section.

(5) The director shall set user fees for all parks and recreation facilities and programs for which specific users can be readily identified and charged, unless the director determines that the administrative costs to collect the fees are likely to exceed revenues.

(6) In setting user fees, the director shall consider the following, among other factors:

(a) The cost of providing services and the demand for services;

(b) The administrative costs of collecting the fees;

(c) The user’s ability to pay; and

(d) Maximizing nontax revenue for the support of parks and recreation facilities.

(7) User fees for youth shall generally be set lower than comparable fees for adults.

(8) Consistent with applicable law, the director may waive, in whole or in part, user fees or provide or facilitate scholarships for individuals meeting federally established low-income criteria, to help ensure that no one is denied access to parks and recreation facilities or activities based solely on an inability to pay. The director shall adopt rules that establish the circumstances for which these waivers or scholarships are available and the process for granting the waivers or scholarships. In addition, the director may waive user fees as part of a concession, advertising or sponsorship agreement under which the city receives consideration equal to or greater than the total amount of the fees to be waived. The director shall document all waivers of user fees.

(9) The director shall set user fees in a way that clearly and simply states the amounts and the facilities or programs to which the fees apply. The director may set ranges for particular user fees and select fees within those ranges.

(10) The parks director shall maintain a record of the rates, fees and charges assessed and shall provide a copy to the city clerk for audit and accounting purposes and shall publish the most recent listings of the rates, fees and charges in regular publications of the department.

(11) All funds collected from the rates, fees and charges shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. [Ord. 475 § 3, 2007; Ord. 336 § 1, 2001; Ord. 243 § 1, 1998]


Chapter 3.06 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR COLLECTION OF CITY OF BURIEN TAXES Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.06.010    Purpose.

3.06.015    Application of chapter stated.

3.06.020    Definitions.

3.06.021    Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW.

3.06.025    Registration/license requirements.

3.06.030    Registration/license certificates.

3.06.040    When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns. Revised 1/20

3.06.050    Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks.

3.06.060    Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment.

3.06.070    Accounting methods.

3.06.080    Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.

3.06.090    Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest.

3.06.095    Time in which assessment may be made.

3.06.100    Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations.

3.06.110    Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties.

3.06.120    Cancellation of penalties.

3.06.130    Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor.

3.06.140    Administrative appeal.

3.06.150    Judicial review of administrative appeal decision.

3.06.160    Director to make rules.

3.06.170    Ancillary allocation authority of director.

3.06.180    Mailing of notices.

3.06.190    Tax declared additional.

3.06.200    Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing.

3.06.210    Tax constitutes debt.

3.06.220    Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties.

3.06.230    Suspension or revocation of business license.

3.06.240    Closing agreement provisions.

3.06.250    Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.

3.06.260    Severability.


3.06.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform administrative provisions for taxes directly administered by the city. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.015 Application of chapter stated.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the taxes imposed under Chapters 3.11 and 3.12 BMC and under other titles, chapters, and sections in such manner and to such extent as indicated in each such title, chapter or section. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Chapters 3.11 and 3.12 BMC shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

“Reporting period” means:

(a) A one-month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or

(b) A three-month period beginning the first day of January, April, July or October of each year (quarterly); or

(c) A 12-month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual).

“Return” means any document a person is required by the city to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city and that has a statutorily defined due date.

“Successor” means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.

“Tax year” or “taxable year” means the calendar year. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.021 Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW.

Where provisions of Chapter 82.32 RCW are incorporated in BMC 3.06.090, “department” as used in the RCW shall refer to the “director” as defined in the RCW and “warrant” as used in the RCW shall mean “citation or criminal complaint.” [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.025 Registration/license requirements.

Business license requirements are set forth in Chapter 5.05 BMC. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.030 Registration/license certificates.

Business license requirements are set forth in Chapter 5.05 BMC. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.040 When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns. Revised 1/20

(1) Other than any annual license fee or registration fee assessed under this chapter, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. At the director’s discretion, businesses may be assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period depending on the tax amount owing or type of tax. Until December 31, 2020, tax payments required by Chapter 3.11 BMC are due on or before the last day of the next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the return. Effective January 1, 2021, tax payments required by Chapter 3.11 BMC are due on or before the time as provided in RCW 82.32.045(1), (2), and (3). Tax payments required by Chapter 3.12 BMC remain at the director’s discretion; businesses may be assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period.

(2) Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a return on forms as prescribed by the director. The return shall be signed by the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer. The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in the return is complete and true.

(3) Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not any tax is owed.

(4) For purposes of the tax imposed by Chapter 3.11 BMC, any person whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business subject to tax after all allowable deductions is equal to or less than $20,000 for those taxpayers filing annual returns, or $5,000 in the current quarter, shall file a return, declare no tax due on their return, and submit the return to the director. The gross receipts and deduction amounts shall be entered on the tax return even though no tax may be due.

(5) A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity.

(6) Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or city or federal legal holiday, in which case the last day of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or city or federal legal holiday.

(7) If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make a return as and when required in this chapter, the director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the director’s estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the city by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. [Ord. 727 § 1, 2019; Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.050 Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks.

(1) Taxes shall be paid to the director in United States currency by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, cash, or by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic payment is authorized by the director. If payment so received is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer by whom such payment is tendered shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the full amount due.

(2) A return or remittance that is transmitted to the city by United States mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation mark stamped by the post office upon the envelope containing it. The director may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A return or remittance which is transmitted to the city electronically shall be deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the director.

(3) If a written request is received prior to the due date, the director, for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and file returns.

(4) The director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received or refunded. The director shall apply payments first against all penalties and interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the taxpayer.

(5) For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this chapter.

(6) Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a nonsufficient funds (NSF) charge of $20.00 is received by the director. Any license issued upon payment with a NSF check will be considered void, and shall be returned to the director. No license shall be reissued until payment (including the $20.00 NSF fee) is received.

(7) The director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or fees, when and as due under this chapter. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.060 Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment.

Every person liable for any fee or tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of five years after filing a tax return, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which the person may be liable; which records shall include copies of all federal income tax and state tax returns and reports made by the person. All books, records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise, and other data, including federal income tax and state tax returns and reports, shall be open for examination at any time by the director or its duly authorized agent. Every person’s business premises shall be open for inspection or examination by the director or a duly authorized agent.

(1) If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the city, it shall be sufficient if such person (a) produces within the city such books and records as may be required by the director, or (b) bears the cost of examination by the director’s agent at the place where such books and records are kept; provided, that the person electing to bear such cost shall pay in advance to the director the estimated amount thereof including round-trip fare, lodging, meals and incidental expenses, subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.

(2) Any person who fails or refuses a department request to provide or make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business premises, shall be forever barred from questioning, in any court action, the correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the city for any period for which such records have not been provided, made available or kept and preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business premises has been denied. The director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the city by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.070 Accounting methods.

(1) A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer’s books of account are kept on a cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual method.

(2) The taxes imposed and the returns required hereunder shall be upon a calendar year basis. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.080 Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.

The director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any public work contract for the city, require such person to pay in full all license fees or taxes due under this title from such person on account of such contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the director a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the person in connection with said public work. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.090 Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest.

(1) If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained by the director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due has been paid, the director shall assess the additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The director shall notify the person by mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, or within such time as the director may provide in writing.

(2)(a) Interest imposed under this chapter shall be computed from the last day of the month following the end of the reporting period and will continue to accrue until payment is made. In case of an audit the interest shall be computed from the first day of the month following each calendar year or portion thereof included in the audit period.

(b) For the purposes of this section, the rate of interest to be charged to the taxpayer shall be an average of the federal short-term rate as defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 1274(d) plus two percentage points. The rate shall be computed by taking an arithmetical average to the nearest percentage point of the federal short-term rate, compounded annually. That average shall be calculated using the rates from four months: January, April, and July of the calendar year immediately preceding the new year, and October of the previous preceding year. The rate shall be adjusted on the first day of January of each year for use in computing interest for that calendar year.

(c) For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the director shall compute interest in accordance with RCW 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(d) If subsection (2)(b) of this section is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.095 Time in which assessment may be made.

The director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes, penalties, or interest due more than four years after the close of the calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the director may issue an assessment:

(1) Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period commencing 10 years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the person was contacted in writing by the director;

(2) Against a person who has committed fraud or who misrepresented a material fact; or

(3) Against a person who has executed a written waiver of such limitations. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.100 Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations.

(1) If upon receipt of an application for a refund or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns, the director determines that the amount of tax, penalty, or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no refund or credit shall be made for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than four years prior to the beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or examination of records is completed.

(2) The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying for or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to, the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the director discovers that a refund or credit is due.

(3) Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the director and by the issuance of a city check or warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the city may provide.

(4) Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner as provided in subsection (3) of this section upon the filing with the director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.

(5)(a) Interest on overpayments of taxes shall be the average federal short-term interest rate as outlined for assessments under BMC 3.06.090(2)(b) plus two percentage points.

(b) For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(c) If BMC 3.06.090(2)(b) is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.110 Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties.

(1) If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer is not received by the director by the due date, the director shall add a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(2) If the director determines that any tax has been substantially underpaid as defined in RCW 82.32.090(2), there shall be added a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(2), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(3) If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the director for the collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest or penalties, there shall be added thereto a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(4) If the director finds that a person has engaged in any business or performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person has not obtained from the director a license as required by Chapter 5.05 BMC, the director shall impose a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be amended. No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection (4) if the person who has engaged in business without a license obtains a license prior to being notified by the director of the need to be licensed.

(5) If the director determines that all or any part of a deficiency resulted from the taxpayer’s failure to follow specific written tax reporting instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(6) If the director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable, the director shall assess a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(7) The penalties imposed under subsections (1) through (5) of this section can each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.

(8) The director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due.

(9) For the purposes of this section, “return” means any document a person is required by the city of Burien to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city, and that has a statutorily defined due date.

(10) If incorporation into the city of Burien’s code of future changes to RCW 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.090 existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective shall apply. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.120 Cancellation of penalties.

(1) The director may cancel any penalties imposed under BMC 3.06.110(1) if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay the tax was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. Willful neglect is presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was, nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, unable to file or pay by the due date. The director has no authority to cancel any other penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(2) A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the director within 30 days after the date the department mails the notice that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause determination. In all cases the burden of proving the facts rests upon the taxpayer.

(3) The director may cancel the penalties in BMC 3.06.110(1) one time if a person:

(a) Is not currently licensed and filing returns;

(b) Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax; and

(c) Obtained business licenses and filed past due tax returns within 30 days after being notified by the department.

(4) The director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.130 Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor.

(1) Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within 10 days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due.

(2) Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the city from the taxpayer until such time as: (a) the taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the city showing payment in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due; or (b) more than six months have passed since the successor notified the director of the acquisition and the director has not issued and notified the successor of an assessment.

(3) Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due such successor from the taxpayer.

(4) Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the director of the acquisition, and the department does not within six months of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be liable for the tax. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.140 Administrative appeal.

Any person, except one who has failed to comply with BMC 3.06.060, aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the director to be required under the provisions of this chapter, may appeal from such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days from the date written notice of such amount was mailed to the taxpayer. Payment of the amount assessed can be demanded before any appeal process, before any appeal to a court, or after the appeal process is completed. The appeal process shall be conducted in accord with Chapter 2.20 BMC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall indicate the correct amount of the tax or fee owing. The appellant may seek judicial review of the decision to the King County superior court. The city shall have the same right of review from a decision as does a taxpayer. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.150 Judicial review of administrative appeal decision.

Any person, except one who has failed to comply with BMC 3.06.060, having paid any tax as required and feeling aggrieved by the amount of the tax assessed, and after first exhausting the right of administrative appeal set forth in this chapter, may seek judicial review in the King County superior court within 21 days of the entry of the decision of the hearing examiner. The taxpayer shall set forth the amount of the tax imposed upon the taxpayer that the taxpayer concedes to be the correct amount of tax and the reason why the tax imposed should be reduced or abated. The appealing party shall serve a copy of the application for writ upon the opposing party within the time herein specified and shall file the original thereof, with proof of service with the clerk of the superior court of Washington for King County. The trial in the superior court on appeal shall be de novo without the necessity of any pleadings other than the notice of appeal. The burden shall rest upon the taxpayer to prove that the tax paid by the taxpayer is incorrect, either in whole or in part, and to establish the correct amount of the tax. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.160 Director to make rules.

The director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.170 Ancillary allocation authority of director.

The director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington cities which impose an eligible gross receipts tax:

(1) To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor employed by the city of Burien, another city, or a contract auditor; provided, that such contract auditor’s pay is not in any way based upon the amount of tax assessed.

(2) To allocate or apportion in a manner that fairly reflects the gross receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities the gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts tax to more than one Washington city.

(3) To apply the city’s tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or place of business within the city and has paid tax on all gross income to another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided, that the other city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived from contracts with the city. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.180 Mailing of notices.

Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer or licensee shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer or licensee as shown by the records of the director. Failure of the taxpayer or licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer or licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the director in writing about a change in the taxpayer’s address. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.190 Tax declared additional.

The license fee and tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city of Burien except as herein otherwise expressly provided. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.200 Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing.

(1) For purposes of this section:

(a) “Disclose” means to make known to any person in any manner whatever a return or tax information.

(b) “Tax information” means:

(i) A taxpayer’s identity;

(ii) The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer’s income, payments, receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax liability deficiencies, overassessments, or tax payments, whether taken from the taxpayer’s books and records or any other source;

(iii) Whether the taxpayer’s return was, is being, or will be examined or subject to other investigation or processing; or

(iv) Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the city with respect to the determination or the existence, or possible existence, of liability, or the amount thereof, of a person under BMC Title 3 for a tax, penalty, interest, fine, forfeiture, or other imposition, or offense. However, data, material, or documents that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable taxpayer do not constitute tax information under this section. Nothing in this chapter requires any person possessing data, material, or documents made confidential and privileged by this section to delete information from such data, material or documents so as to permit its disclosure.

(c) “City agency” means every city office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other city agency.

(d) “Taxpayer identity” means the taxpayer’s name, address, telephone number, registration number, or any combination thereof, or any other information disclosing the identity of the taxpayer.

(2) Returns and tax information are confidential and privileged, and except as authorized by this section, neither the director nor any other person may disclose any return or tax information.

(3) This section does not prohibit the director from:

(a) Disclosing such return or tax information in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or an administrative proceeding:

(i) In respect of any tax imposed under BMC Title 3, if the taxpayer or its officer or other person liable under this title is a party in the proceeding; or

(ii) In which the taxpayer about whom such return or tax information is sought and another state agency are adverse parties in the proceeding;

(b) Disclosing, subject to such requirements and conditions as the director prescribes by rules adopted pursuant to BMC 3.06.160, such return or tax information regarding a taxpayer to such taxpayer or to such person or persons as that taxpayer may designate in a request for, or consent to, such disclosure, or to any other person, at the taxpayer’s request, to the extent necessary to comply with a request for information or assistance made by the taxpayer to such other person. However, tax information not received from the taxpayer must not be so disclosed if the director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or litigation by any federal, state, or local government agency in connection with the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is contrary to any agreement entered into by the department that provides for the reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any court;

(c) Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns or reports or items thereof;

(d) Disclosing such return or tax information, for official purposes only, to the city manager or city attorney, or to any city agency, or to any member of the city council or their authorized designees dealing with matters of taxation, revenue, trade, commerce, the control of industry or the professions;

(e) Permitting the city’s records to be audited and examined by the proper state officer, his or her agents and employees;

(f) Disclosing any such return or tax information to a peace officer as defined in RCW 9A.04.110 or county prosecuting attorney, for official purposes. The disclosure may be made only in response to a search warrant, subpoena, or other court order, unless the disclosure is for the purpose of criminal tax enforcement. A peace officer or county prosecuting attorney who receives the return or tax information may disclose that return or tax information only for use in the investigation and a related court proceeding, or in the court proceeding for which the return or tax information originally was sought or where otherwise allowed to be disclosed under this section;

(g) Disclosing any such return or tax information to the proper officer of the internal revenue service of the United States, the Canadian government or provincial governments of Canada, or to the proper officer of the tax department of any state or city or town or county, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the United States, Canada or its provincial governments, or of such other state or city or town or county, as the case may be, grants substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the city;

(h) Disclosing any such return or tax information to the United States Department of Justice, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Department of Defense, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Customs and Border Protection Agencies of the United States Department of Homeland Security, the United States Coast Guard, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of Treasury, and the United States Department of Transportation, or any authorized representative of these federal agencies or their successors, for official purposes;

(i) Publishing or otherwise disclosing the text of a written determination designated by the director as a precedent pursuant to RCW 82.32.410;

(j) Disclosing, in a manner that is not associated with other tax information, the taxpayer name, entity type, business address, mailing address, revenue tax registration numbers and the active/closed status of such registrations, state or local business license registration identification and the active/closed status and effective dates of such licenses, reseller permit numbers and the expiration date and status of such permits, North American industry classification system or standard industrial classification code of a taxpayer, and the dates of opening and closing of business. Except that this subsection may not be construed as giving authority to the city or any recipient to give, sell, or provide access to any list of taxpayers for any commercial purpose;

(k) Disclosing such return or tax information that is also maintained by another Washington State or local governmental agency as a public record available for inspection and copying under the provisions of Chapter 42.56 RCW or is a document maintained by a court of record and is not otherwise prohibited from disclosure;

(l) Disclosing such return or tax information to the United States Department of Agriculture, or successor department or agency, for the limited purpose of investigating food stamp fraud by retailers;

(m) Disclosing to a financial institution, escrow company, or title company, in connection with specific real property that is the subject of a real estate transaction, current amounts due the city for a filed tax warrant, judgment, or lien against the real property;

(n) Disclosing to a person against whom the department has asserted liability as a successor under BMC 3.06.130 return or tax information pertaining to the specific business of the taxpayer to which the person has succeeded;

(o) Disclosing real estate excise tax affidavit forms filed under Chapter 3.20 BMC in the possession of the city, including real estate excise tax affidavit forms for transactions exempt or otherwise not subject to tax;

(p) Disclosing such return or tax information to the court or hearing examiner in respect to the city’s application for a subpoena, if there is probable cause to believe that the records in possession of a third party will aid the director in connection with his/her official duties under this title or a civil or criminal investigation.

(4) (a) The director may disclose return or taxpayer information to a person under investigation or during any court or administrative proceeding against a person under investigation as provided in this subsection (4). The disclosure must be in connection with the director’s official duties under this title, or a civil or criminal investigation. The disclosure may occur only when the person under investigation and the person in possession of data, materials, or documents are parties to the return or tax information to be disclosed. The director may disclose return or tax information such as invoices, contracts, bills, statements, resale or exemption certificates, or checks. However, the director may not disclose general ledgers, sales or cash receipt journals, check registers, accounts receivable/payable ledgers, general journals, financial statements, expert’s workpapers, income tax returns, state tax returns, tax return workpapers, or other similar data, materials, or documents.

(b) Before disclosure of any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4), the director must, through written correspondence, inform the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The correspondence must clearly identify the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The director may not disclose any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4) until the time period allowed in subsection (4)(c) of this section has expired or until the court has ruled on any challenge brought under subsection (4)(c) of this section.

(c) The person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed by the director has 20 days from the receipt of the written request required under subsection (4)(b) of this section to petition the superior court of King County for injunctive relief. The court must limit or deny the request of the director, if the court determines that:

(i) The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure are cumulative or duplicative, or are obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;

(ii) The production of the data, materials, or documents sought would be unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the director, the amount in controversy, limitations on the petitioner’s resources, and the importance of the issues at stake; or

(iii) The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure contain trade secret information that, if disclosed, could harm the petitioner.

(d) The director must reimburse reasonable expenses for the production of data, materials, or documents incurred by the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed.

(e) Requesting information under subsection (4)(b) of this section that may indicate that a taxpayer is under investigation does not constitute a disclosure of tax return or tax information under this section.

(5) Service of a subpoena issued by the court or under Chapter 2.15 BMC does not constitute a disclosure of return or tax information under this section. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary in this section, a person served with a subpoena issued by the court or under Chapter 2.15 BMC may disclose the existence or content of the subpoena to that person’s legal counsel.

(6) Any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information in the course of his or her employment with the city and any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information as provided under subsection (3)(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (k) of this section, who discloses any such return or tax information to another person not entitled to knowledge of such return or tax information under the provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person guilty of such violation is an officer or employee of the city, such person must forfeit such office or employment and is incapable of holding any public office or employment in the city for a period of two years thereafter. [Ord. 576 § 2, 2012; Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.210 Tax constitutes debt.

Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city of Burien and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.220 Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person liable for fees under this chapter (or other chapters as listed):

(a) To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the director;

(b) To make any false statement on any license application or tax return;

(c) To aid or abet any person in any attempt to evade payment of a license fee or tax;

(d) To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena issued in accordance with state law;

(e) To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

(2) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor.

(3) Any person, or officer of a corporation, convicted of continuing to engage in business after the revocation of a license shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.230 Suspension or revocation of business license.

The director, or designee, shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke any license in accordance with BMC 5.05.140. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.240 Closing agreement provisions.

The director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by the director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:

(1) The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the agreement modified, by the director or the taxpayer; and

(2) In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.250 Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.

The director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a taxpayer, if the director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to be collected from the taxpayer. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


3.06.260 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 482 § 4, 2007]


Chapter 3.10 SALES AND USE TAXES

Sections:

Article I. Sales and Use Tax

3.10.010    Imposition.

3.10.020    Rate.

3.10.030    Administration and collection.

3.10.040    Consent to inspection of records.

3.10.050    City and state to contract.

3.10.060    Penalties.

3.10.070    Effective date for tax collections.

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax

3.10.080    Imposition.

3.10.090    Rate.

3.10.100    Administration and collection.

3.10.110    Consent to inspection of records.

3.10.120    City and state to contract.

3.10.130    Penalties.

3.10.140    Effective date for tax collections.

Article III. Credit against State’s Share of Tax – Sales Use Tax for Affordable Housing

3.10.150    Credit against state’s share of tax – Sales use tax for affordable housing – Imposition.

3.10.160    Credit against state’s share of tax – Sales use tax for affordable housing – Rate.

3.10.170    Administration and collection.

Article I. Sales and Use Tax


3.10.010 Imposition.

Pursuant to authorization of RCW 82.14.030(1), there is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons who are taxable by the state pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 5 § 1, 1993]


3.10.020 Rate.

The rate of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.010 shall be five-tenths of one percent of the selling price, in the case of the sales tax, or value of the article used, in the case of the use tax. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, during such period as King County imposes a sales or use tax, the rate of tax imposed by the city shall be four hundred and twenty-five one-thousandths of one percent. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 5 § 2, 1993]


3.10.030 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.010 shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 5 § 3, 1993]


3.10.040 Consent to inspection of records.

The city consents to the inspection by the State Department of Revenue of such city records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330(3)(h). [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 5 § 4, 1993]


3.10.050 City and state to contract.

The city manager and the city clerk are authorized, on behalf of the city, to enter into a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration of the taxes imposed in this article, pursuant to RCW 82.14.050. A copy of the contract shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and is, by this reference, incorporated in this article. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 5 § 5, 1993]


3.10.060 Penalties.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of BMC 3.10.010 and 3.10.020, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of BMC 3.10.010 and 3.10.020. Any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 5 § 6, 1993]


3.10.070 Effective date for tax collections.

Pursuant to state law, the effective date for tax collections payable or otherwise owing to the city of Burien is March 1, 1993. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 18 § 1, 1993; Ord. 5 § 8, 1993]

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax


3.10.080 Imposition.

Pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), there is imposed an additional sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event as defined in RCW 82.14.020 occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons or entities who are taxable by the state pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 6 § 1, 1993]


3.10.090 Rate.

The rate of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.080 shall be five-tenths of one percent of the selling price, in the case of the sales tax, or value of the articles used, in the case of a use tax. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, during such period as King County imposes an additional sales or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), the allocation of the additional sales and use taxes between the county and city shall be governed by RCW 82.14.030(2). [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 6 § 2, 1993]


3.10.100 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.080 shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 6 § 3, 1993]


3.10.110 Consent to inspection of records.

The city consents to the inspection by the State Department of Revenue of such city records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 6 § 4, 1993]


3.10.120 City and state to contract.

The city manager and the city clerk are authorized, on behalf of the city, to enter into a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration of the taxes imposed in this article, pursuant to RCW 82.14.050. A copy of the contract shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and is, by this reference, incorporated in this article. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 6 § 5, 1993]


3.10.130 Penalties.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of BMC 3.10.080 and 3.10.090 or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of BMC 3.10.080 and 3.10.090. Any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 6 § 6, 1993]


3.10.140 Effective date for tax collections.

Pursuant to state law, the effective date for tax collections payable or otherwise owing to the city of Burien shall be March 1, 1993. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 18 § 2, 1993; Ord. 6 § 8, 1993]

Article III. Credit against State’s Share of Tax – Sales Use Tax for Affordable Housing


3.10.150 Credit against state’s share of tax – Sales use tax for affordable housing – Imposition.

There is hereby imposed an additional sales or use tax, as the case may be, as authorized by Laws of 2019, Chapter 338, § 1, upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, but will be credited against the state’s share of the tax. Moneys collected under this article must be used solely, as required by Laws of 2019, Chapter 338, § 1, and as hereinafter amended, for the purpose of acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services under RCW 71.24.385, or funding the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.10.160 Credit against state’s share of tax – Sales use tax for affordable housing – Rate.

The rate of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.150 shall be seventy-three thousandths of one percent of the selling price the article used, as the case may be. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.10.170 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by BMC 3.10.150 shall be in accordance with the provisions of Laws of 2019, Chapter 338, § 1. [Ord. 714 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


Chapter 3.11 BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.11.010    Purpose. Revised 1/20

3.11.020    Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

3.11.028    Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

3.11.030    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.11.050    Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied. Revised 1/20

3.11.070    Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes. Revised 1/20

3.11.075    Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing activities and prior to January 1, 2008, transactions involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax. Revised 1/20

3.11.076    Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles. Revised 1/20

3.11.077    Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

3.11.078    Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

3.11.090    Exemptions. Revised 1/20

3.11.100    Deductions. Revised 1/20

3.11.120    Tax part of overhead. Revised 1/20

3.11.130    Severability clause. Revised 1/20


3.11.010 Purpose. Revised 1/20

The purpose of the business and occupation tax is to provide revenue for city services and capital facilities. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.020 Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the city code. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.028 Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.06 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.030 Definitions. Revised 1/20

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.

“Business” includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.

“Business and occupation tax” or “gross receipts tax” means a tax imposed on or measured by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the business.

“Commercial or industrial use” means the following uses of products, including byproducts, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:

(a) Any use as a consumer; and

(b) The manufacturing of articles, substances or commodities.

“Delivery” means the transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the seller and the buyer or the buyer’s representative. Delivery to an employee of a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer’s representative first takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over the property. “Dominion and control” means the buyer has the ability to put the property to the buyer’s own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer’s representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property, and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to itself. A buyer’s representative is a person, other than an employee of the buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a buyer’s representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and other provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (RCW Title 62A) do not determine when or where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.

“Digital automated service,” “digital code,” and “digital goods” have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192.

“Digital products” means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(b).

“Director” means the finance and administrative services director of the city or any officer, agent or employee of the city designated to act on the director’s behalf.

“Eligible gross receipts tax” means a tax which:

(a) Is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within BMC 3.11.050; and

(b) Is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts, and is not an income tax or value added tax; and

(c) Is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price; and

(d) Is not a sales or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment for the use and enjoyment of property, property right or a privilege; and

(e) Is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the state of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other nonlocal jurisdiction above the county level.

Engaging in Business.

(a) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(b) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute “engaging in business” in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the city without having to register and obtain a business license or pay city business and occupation taxes. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection (a) of this definition. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city, shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(c) Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

(i) Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the city.

(ii) Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place of business, or other establishment in the city.

(iii) Soliciting sales.

(iv) Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(v) Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(vi) Installing, constructing, or supervising installation, or construction of, real or tangible personal property.

(vii) Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

(viii) Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(ix) Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(x) Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(xi) Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

(xii) Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

(xiii) Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(xiv) Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(xv) In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(xvi) Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(d) If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license and pay tax:

(i) Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(ii) Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(iii) Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

(iv) Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.

(v) Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(vi) Conducting advertising through the mail.

(vii) Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.

(e) A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the city. Such activities do not include those in subsection (d) of this definition.

The city expressly intends that “engaging in business” include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the tax under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus-generating contact or subsequent contacts.

“Extracting” is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under the extracting classification.

“Extractor” means every person who from the person’s own land or from the land of another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes or produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral or other natural resource product; or fells, cuts or takes timber, Christmas trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or takes fish, shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products. “Extractor” does not include persons performing under contract the necessary labor or mechanical services for others; or persons meeting the definition of farmer.

“Extractor for hire” means a person who performs under contract necessary labor or mechanical services for an extractor.

“Gross income of the business” means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of the business engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discount, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

“Gross proceeds of sales” means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services or for other services rendered, without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

“In this city” or “within this city” includes all federal areas lying within the corporate city limits of the city.

“Manufacturing” means the activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under the manufacturing classification.

Manufacturer, To Manufacture.

(a) “Manufacturer” means every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from the person’s own materials or ingredients any products. When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than 20 percent of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be deemed to be a processor for hire, and not a manufacturer. (A business not located in this city that is the owner of materials or ingredients processed for it in this city by a processor for hire shall be deemed to be engaged in business as a manufacturer in this city.)

(b) “To manufacture” means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:

(i) The production of special made or custom made articles;

(ii) The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations, substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or dental technician;

(iii) Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and

(iv) The producing of articles for sale or for commercial or industrial use from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials, articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables.

“To manufacture” shall not include the production of digital goods or the production of computer software if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to the purchaser.

“Person” means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the state of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

“Retail service” shall include the sale of or charge made for personal, business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest, rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated, received by persons engaging in the following business activities:

(a) Amusement and recreation services including but not limited to golf, pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and tows, basketball, racquet ball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers. “Amusement and recreation services” also include the provision of related facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term “amusement and recreation services” does not include instructional lessons to learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or archery lessons.

(b) Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services;

(c) Credit bureau services;

(d) Automobile parking and storage garage services;

(e) Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding (i) horticultural services provided to farmers and (ii) pruning, trimming, repairing, removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an electric utility;

(f) Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting events;

(g) The following personal services: physical fitness services, tanning salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, Turkish bath services, escort services, and dating services; and

(h) The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.

“Retailing” means the activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported under the retailing classification.

Sale, Casual or Isolated Sale.

(a) “Sale” means any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of, property for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a “sale at retail,” “retail sale,” or “retail service.” It includes renting or leasing, conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether consumed upon the premises or not.

(b) “Casual or isolated sale” means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis.

Sale at Retail, Retail Sale.

(a) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 and who:

(i) Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or

(ii) Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs, or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal property without intervening use by such person; or

(iii) Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale; or

(iv) Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or

(v) Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as part of competitive telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any activity classified as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property is resold or utilized as provided in subsection (a)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of this definition following such use.

(vi) Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person’s obligations under an extended warranty as defined in subsection (g) of this definition, if such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such person.

(b) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” also means every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any business activity which is taxable under BMC 3.11.050(1)(g).

(c) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall include the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following:

(i) The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges made for the use of coin-operated laundry facilities when such facilities are situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry service to nonprofit health care facilities, and excluding services rendered in respect to live animals, birds and insects;

(ii) The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming or agriculture;

(iii) The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession, or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any other means to the original owner;

(iv) The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing or moving of existing buildings or structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services; and for purposes of this section the term “janitorial services” shall mean those cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing, floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes and upholstery. The term “janitorial services” does not include painting, papering, repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal or sandblasting;

(v) The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services, but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under Chapter 82.16 RCW;

(vi) The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one month or more to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to enjoy the same;

(vii) The installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers;

(viii) The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor and services to persons taxable under subsection (c)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), and (vii) of this definition when such sales or charges are for property, labor and services which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the performance of any activity defined as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property, labor and services may be resold after such use or consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify subsection (a) of this definition and nothing contained in subsection (a) of this definition shall be construed to modify this subsection.

(d) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers.

(e) Sale at Retail or Retail Sale.

(i) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of prewritten software other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470, regardless of the method of delivery to the end user. For purposes of this subsection, the sale of prewritten computer software includes the sale of or charge made for a key or an enabling or activation code, where the key or code is required to activate prewritten computer software and put the software into use. There is no separate sale of the key or code from the prewritten computer software, regardless of how the sale may be characterized by the vendor or by the purchaser. The term “sale at retail” or “retail sale” does not include the sale of or charge made for:

(A) Custom software; or

(B) The customization of prewritten software.

(ii)(A) The term also includes the charge made to consumers for the right to access and use prewritten computer software, where possession of the software is maintained by the seller or a third party, regardless of whether the charge for the service is on a per use, per user, per license, subscription, or some other basis.

(B)1. The service described in subsection (ii)(A) of this definition includes the right to access and use prewritten software to perform data processing.

2. For purposes of this subsection, “data processing” means the systematic performance of operations on data to extract the required information in an appropriate form or to convert the data to usable information. Data processing includes check processing, image processing, form processing, survey processing, payroll processing, claim processing, and similar activities.

(f) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, the state of Washington, or by the United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind (public road construction).

(g) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a consumer. For purposes of this subsection, “extended warranty” means an agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the occurrence of specified events. The term “extended warranty” does not include an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of extended warranty in this subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property covered by the agreement.

(h) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority created pursuant to Chapter 35.82 RCW, including the installing, or attaching, of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation (government contracting).

(i) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other byproducts of weapons production and nuclear research and development. (This should be reported under the service and other classification.)

(j) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered for environmental remedial action. (This should be reported under the service and other classification.)

(k) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods, digital codes, and digital automated services:

(i) Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of permanent use;

(ii) Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use that is less than permanent;

(iii) Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale; and

(iv) Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale. A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services under this subsection (k) includes any services provided by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for such services. For purposes of this subsection, “permanent” means perpetual or for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition subsequent.

(l) “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers.

“Sale at wholesale” or “wholesale sale” means any sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, prewritten computer software, or services described in subsection (e)(ii)(A) of the definition of “sale at retail or retail sale,” which is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property and retail services, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale or retail service when rendered to or for consumers. Sale at wholesale also includes the sale of telephone business to another telecommunications company as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated by RCW 35.21.715.

Service. No definition.

“Taxpayer” means any “person,” as herein defined, required to have a business license under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax or fee is imposed by this chapter.

“Value proceeding or accruing” means the consideration, whether money, credits, rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer.

Value of Products.

(a) The value of products, including by-products, extracted or manufactured, shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or byproducts by the seller.

(b) Where such products, including byproducts, are extracted or manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products, including byproducts, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the city, or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or article extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values.

(c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this definition, the value of a product manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the development of a new or improved product shall correspond to (i) the retail selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or (ii) the value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the new or improved product is not offered for sale.

“Wholesaling” means engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is reported under the wholesaling classification. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.050 Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied. Revised 1/20

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, there is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within the city, whether the person’s office or place of business be within or without the city. The tax shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including byproducts, as the case may be, as follows:

(a) Upon every person engaging within the city in business as an extractor; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts, extracted within the city for sale or for commercial or industrial use, multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including byproducts, so extracted, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city.

(b) Upon every person engaging within the city in business as a manufacturer; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts, manufactured within the city, multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including byproducts, so manufactured, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city.

(c) Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales at wholesale; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001).

(d) Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales at retail; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business, without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001).

(e) Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of (i) printing, (ii) both printing and publishing newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, music, and other printed items, (iii) publishing newspapers, magazines and periodicals, (iv) extracting for hire, and (v) processing for hire; as to such persons, the amount of tax on such business shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001).

(f) Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales of retail services; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of sales multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001).

(g) Upon every other person engaging within the city in any business activity other than or in addition to those enumerated in the above subsections; as to such persons, the amount of tax on account of such activities shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.001). This subsection includes, among others, and without limiting the scope hereof (whether or not title to material used in the performance of such business passes to another by accession, merger or other than by outright sale), persons engaged in the business of developing or producing custom software or of customizing canned software, producing royalties or commissions, and persons engaged in the business of rendering any type of service which does not constitute a sale at retail, a sale at wholesale or a retail service.

(2) The gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value of products, including byproducts, as the case may be, from all activities conducted within the city during any calendar year is equal to or less than $20,000 or is equal to or less than $5,000 during any quarter if on a quarterly reporting basis. Furthermore, the gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value of products, including byproducts, as the case may be, from all activities conducted inside or outside the city during any calendar year is equal to or less than $200,000 or is equal to or less than $50,000 during any quarter if on a quarterly reporting basis. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.070 Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes. Revised 1/20

(1) Persons who engage in business activities that are within the purview of two or more subsections of BMC 3.11.050 shall be taxable under each applicable subsection.

(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if imposition of the city’s tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the city’s tax, and still apply the city tax to as much of the taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the city’s taxing authority.

(3) To take the credit authorized by this section, a taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which the credit is applied.

(4) Credit for Persons That Sell in the City Products That They Extract or Manufacture. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid (a) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold in the city, and (b) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the ingredients used in the products, sold in the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.

(5) Credit for Persons That Manufacture Products in the City Using Ingredients They Extract. Persons taxable under the manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts tax paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the products manufactured in the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing of those products.

(6) Credit for Persons That Sell within the City Products that They Print, or Publish and Print. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the printing and publishing, of the products sold within the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.075 Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing activities and prior to January 1, 2008, transactions involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax. Revised 1/20

(1) Amounts Subject to an Eligible Gross Receipts Tax in Another City That Also Maintains Nexus over the Same Activity. For taxes due prior to January 1, 2008, a taxpayer that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax on the same activity in more than one jurisdiction may be entitled to a deduction as follows:

(a) A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax, with respect to a sale of goods or services, to a jurisdiction in which the goods are delivered or the services are provided may deduct an amount equal to the gross receipts used to measure that tax from the measure of the tax owed to the city.

(b) Notwithstanding the above, a person that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax in more than one jurisdiction on the gross income derived from intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents or goodwill shall assign those gross receipts to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located).

(c) A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax on the privilege of accepting or executing a contract with another city may deduct an amount equal to the contract price used to measure the tax due to the other city from the measure of the tax owed to the city.

(2) Person Manufacturing Products within and Without. A person manufacturing products within the city using products manufactured by the same person outside the city may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax the value of products manufactured outside the city and included in the measure of an eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction with respect to manufacturing such products. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.076 Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles. Revised 1/20

Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located). [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.077 Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

Effective January 1, 2008, gross income, other than persons subject to the provisions of Chapter 82.14A RCW, shall be allocated and apportioned as follows:

(1) Gross income derived from all activities other than those taxed as service or royalties under BMC 3.11.050(1)(g) shall be allocated to the location where the activity takes place.

(2) In the case of sales of tangible personal property, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs.

(3) In the case of sales of digital products, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs. The delivery of digital products will be deemed to occur at:

(a) The seller’s place of business if the purchaser receives the digital product at the seller’s place of business;

(b) If not received at the seller’s place of business, the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee, designated as such by the purchaser, receives the digital product, including the location indicated by instructions for delivery to the purchaser or donee, known to the seller;

(c) If the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee receives the digital product is not known, the purchaser’s address maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business when use of this address does not constitute bad faith;

(d) If no address for the purchaser is maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business, the purchaser’s address obtained during the consummation of the sale, including the address of a purchaser’s payment instrument, if no other address is available, when use of this address does not constitute bad faith; and

(e) If no address for the purchaser is obtained during the consummation of the sale, the address where the digital good or digital code is first made available for transmission by the seller or the address from which the digital automated service or service described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) or (6)(b) was provided, disregarding for these purposes any location that merely provided the digital transfer of the product sold.

(4) If none of the methods in subsection (3) of this section for determining where the delivery of digital products occurs are available after a good faith effort by the taxpayer to apply the methods provided in subsections (3)(a) through (e) of this section, then the city and the taxpayer may mutually agree to employ any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products. The taxpayer will be responsible for petitioning the city to use an alternative method under this subsection. The city may employ an alternative method for allocating the income from the sale of digital products if the methods provided in subsections (3)(a) through (e) of this section are not available and the taxpayer and the city are unable to mutually agree on an alternative method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products.

(5) For purposes of subsections (3)(a) through (e) of this section, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Digital automated services,” “digital codes,” and “digital goods” have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192;

(b) “Digital products” means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(c); and

(c) “Receive” has the same meaning as in RCW 82.32.730.

(6) Gross income derived from activities taxed as services and other activities taxed under BMC 3.11.050(1)(g) shall be apportioned to the city by multiplying apportionable income by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor plus the service income factor and the denominator of which is two.

(a) The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid in the city during the tax period by the taxpayer for compensation and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in the city if:

(i) The individual is primarily assigned within the city;

(ii) The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period and the employee performs 50 percent or more of his or her service for the tax period in the city; or

(iii) The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period, the individual does not perform 50 percent or more of his or her service in any city and the employee resides in the city.

(b) The service income factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer everywhere during the tax period. Service income is in the city if the customer location is in the city.

(c) Gross income of the business from engaging in an apportionable activity must be excluded from the denominator of the service income factor if, in respect to such activity, at least some of the activity is performed in the city, and the gross income is attributable under subsection (6)(b) of this section to a city or unincorporated area of a county within the United States or to a foreign country in which the taxpayer is not taxable. For purposes of this subsection, “not taxable” means that the taxpayer is not subject to a business activities tax by that city or county within the United States or by that foreign country, except that a taxpayer is taxable in a city or county within the United States or in a foreign country in which it would be deemed to have a substantial nexus with the city or county within the United States or with the foreign country under the standards in RCW 35.102.050 regardless of whether that city or county within the United States or that foreign country imposes such a tax.

(d) If the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection (6) do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the city, the taxpayer may petition for or the tax administrator may require, in respect to all or any part of the taxpayer’s business activity, if reasonable:

(i) Separate accounting;

(ii) The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;

(iii) The inclusion of one or more additional factors that will fairly represent the taxpayer’s business activity in the city; or

(iv) The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

(e) The party petitioning for, or the tax administrator requiring, the use of any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income pursuant to subsection (6)(d) of this section must prove by a preponderance of the evidence:

(i) That the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection (6) do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the city; and

(ii) That the alternative to such provisions is reasonable.

The same burden of proof shall apply whether the taxpayer is petitioning for, or the tax administrator is requiring, the use of an alternative, reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

(f) If the tax administrator requires any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income, the tax administrator cannot impose any civil or criminal penalty with reference to the tax due that is attributable to the taxpayer’s reasonable reliance solely on the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection (6).

(g) A taxpayer that has received written permission from the tax administrator to use a reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income shall not have that permission revoked with respect to transactions and activities that have already occurred unless there has been a material change in, or a material misrepresentation of, the facts provided by the taxpayer upon which the tax administrator reasonably relied in approving a reasonable alternative method.

(7) The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.

(a) “Apportionable income” means the gross income of the business taxable under the service classifications of a city’s gross receipts tax, including income received from activities outside the city if the income would be taxable under the service classification if received from activities within the city, less any exemptions or deductions available.

(b) “Business activities tax” means a tax measured by the amount of, or economic results of, business activity conducted in a city or county within the United States or within a foreign country. The term includes taxes measured in whole or in part on net income or gross income or receipts. “Business activities tax” does not include a sales tax, use tax, or a similar transaction tax, imposed on the sale or acquisition of goods or services, whether or not denominated a gross receipts tax or a tax imposed on the privilege of doing business.

(c) “Compensation” means wages, salaries, commissions, and any other form of remuneration paid to individuals for personal services that are or would be included in the individual’s gross income under the federal Internal Revenue Code.

(d) “Customer” means a person or entity to whom the taxpayer makes a sale or renders services or from whom the taxpayer otherwise receives gross income of the business.

(e) “Customer location” means the following:

(i) For a customer not engaged in business, if the service requires the customer to be physically present, where the service is performed.

(ii) For a customer not engaged in business, if the service does not require the customer to be physically present:

(A) The customer’s residence; or

(B) If the customer’s residence is not known, the customer’s billing/mailing address.

(iii) For a customer engaged in business:

(A) Where the services are ordered from;

(B) At the customer’s billing/mailing address if the location from which the services are ordered is not known; or

(C) At the customer’s commercial domicile if none of the above are known.

(f) “Individual” means any individual who, under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship, has the status of an employee of that taxpayer.

(g) “Primarily assigned” means the business location of the taxpayer where the individual performs his or her duties.

(h) “Service-taxable income” or “service income” means gross income of the business subject to tax under either the service or royalty classification.

(i) “Tax period” means the calendar year during which tax liability is accrued. If taxes are reported by a taxpayer on a basis more frequent than once per year, taxpayers shall calculate the factors for the previous calendar year for reporting in the current calendar year and correct the reporting for the previous year when the factors are calculated for that year, but not later than the end of the first quarter of the following year.

(8) Assignment or apportionment of revenue under this section shall be made in accordance with and in full compliance with the provisions of the interstate commerce clause of the United States Constitution where applicable. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.078 Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

Notwithstanding RCW 35.102.130, effective January 1, 2008, gross income from the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals or magazines shall be allocated to the principal place in this state from which the taxpayer’s business is directed or managed. As used in this section, the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals or magazines have the same meanings as attributed to those terms in RCW 82.04.280(1) by the Department of Revenue. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.090 Exemptions. Revised 1/20

(1) Public Utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically imposed under the provisions of Chapter 3.12 BMC.

(2) Investments – Dividends from Subsidiary Corporations. This chapter shall not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its subsidiary corporations.

(3) Insurance Business. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by any person who is an insurer or their appointed insurance producer upon which a tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to RCW 48.14.020; and provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety, or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting contractor.

(4) Employees.

(a) This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the person’s employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of “employee” shall include those persons that are defined in the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended.

(b) A booth renter is an independent contractor for purposes of this chapter.

(5) Amounts Derived from Sale of Real Estate. This chapter shall not apply to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest or similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent for a continuous period of 30 days or longer.

(6) Mortgage Brokers’ Third-party Provider Services Trust Accounts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage brokers for the payment of third-party costs if the accounts are operated in a manner consistent with RCW 19.146.050 and any rules adopted by the director of financial institutions.

(7) Amounts Derived from Manufacturing, Selling or Distributing Motor Vehicle Fuel. This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or distributing of motor vehicle fuel, as the term “motor vehicle fuel” is defined in RCW 82.38.020 and exempt under RCW 82.38.280; provided, that any fuel not subjected to the state fuel excise tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable under this chapter.

(8) Amounts Derived from Liquor, and the Sale or Distribution of Liquor. This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010 and exempt in RCW 66.08.120.

(9) Casual and Isolated Sales. This chapter shall not apply to the gross proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.

(10) Accommodation Sales. This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of selling such property where (a) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article and (b) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within 14 days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the seller.

(11) Taxes Collected as Trust Funds. This chapter shall not apply to amounts collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third party obligations to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.100 Deductions. Revised 1/20

In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the following items:

(1) Receipts from Tangible Personal Property Delivered Outside the State. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer’s representative at a location outside the state of Washington.

(2) Cash Discount Taken by Purchaser. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of this tax, have been computed according to the “value of product” provisions.

(3) Credit Losses of Accrual Basis Taxpayers. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis.

(4) Constitutional Prohibitions. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the state of Washington or the Constitution of the United States.

(5) Receipts from the Sale of Tangible Personal Property and Retail Services Delivered Outside the City but within Washington. Effective January 1, 2008, amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from the sale of tangible personal property delivered to the buyer or the buyer’s representative outside the city but within the state of Washington may be deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or wholesaling classification.

(6) Professional Employer Services. In computing the tax, a professional employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross income of the business derived from performing professional employer services that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits, workers’ compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement.

(7) Interest on Investments or Loans Secured by Mortgages or Deeds of Trust. In computing tax, to the extent permitted by Chapter 82.14A RCW, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on nontransient residential properties. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.120 Tax part of overhead. Revised 1/20

It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the purchaser or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of doing business of such person. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


3.11.130 Severability clause. Revised 1/20

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 726 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]




Chapter 3.12 UTILITY TAX

Sections:

3.12.010    Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

3.12.020    Levied.

3.12.030    Definitions.

3.12.040    Occupations subject to tax – Amount.

3.12.050    Tax year.

3.12.060    Exceptions and deductions.

3.12.070    Monthly installments.

3.12.080    Taxpayer’s records.

3.12.090    Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full.

3.12.100    Penalty for delinquent payment.

3.12.110    Overpayment of tax.

3.12.120    Noncompliance – Penalty.

3.12.130    Appeal.

3.12.140    City manager to make rules.

3.12.150    Tax relief.

3.12.160    Referendum procedure.

3.12.170    Exclusive procedure.

3.12.180    Utility tax relief program established.

3.12.190    Utility tax relief for solid waste, electricity and gas services.

3.12.200    Utility tax deduction for Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy for this program.

3.12.210    Utility tax relief for telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services. 

3.12.220    Utility tax relief filing procedures.


3.12.010 Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

All revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the general fund, and shall be used for the funding of city services or capital facilities as the council shall direct through its annual budget process. [Ord. 343 § 1, 2001]


3.12.020 Levied.

The tax provided for in this chapter shall be known as the “utility tax,” and is levied upon the privilege of conducting an electric energy, natural or manufactured gas, telephone, or cable television business within the city of Burien effective February 3, 2002, and upon the privilege of conducting a solid waste collection business within the city of Burien effective December 1, 2002. [Ord. 368 § 1, 2002; Ord. 343 § 2, 2001]


3.12.030 Definitions.

(1) Use of Words and Phrases. As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this section shall have the indicated meanings.

(2) “Cable television services” means the transmission of video programming and associated nonvideo signals to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with video programming.

(3) “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Burien, Washington, or his or her designee.

(4) “Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the performance of the particular business involved, including gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, and receipts (including all sums earned or charged, whether received or not) by reason of investment in the business engaged in (excluding rentals, receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of real property or any interest therein, and proceeds from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidences of indebtedness, or stocks and the like), all without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, interest or discount paid, delivery costs or any expenses whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses. 

(5) “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity of any type engaged in a business subject to taxation under this chapter.

(6) “Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data, pager or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. The term includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Telephone business” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service or cable television service, or other providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations.

“Cellular telephone service” means any two-way voice and data telephone or similar communications system based in whole or in substantial part on wireless radio communications, including cellular mobile service, and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services including specialized mobile radio, personal communications services, and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology that accomplishes a purpose substantially similar to cellular mobile service. Cellular telephone service is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter.

“Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, directory advertising and lease of telephone street directories, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which may be provided by persons not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80, and for which a separate charge is made. Transmission of communication through cellular telephones is classified as “telephone business” rather than “competitive telephone service.”

“Pager service” means service provided by means of an electronic device which has the ability to send or receive voice or digital messages transmitted through the local telephone network, via satellite or any other form of voice or data transmission. “Pager service” is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter. 

(7) “Solid waste” means garbage, trash, rubbish, or other materials discarded as worthless or not economically viable for further use. The term does not include hazardous or toxic waste, and does not include yard waste or material collected primarily for recycling or salvage. [Ord. 368 § 2, 2002; Ord. 343 § 3, 2001]


3.12.040 Occupations subject to tax – Amount.

There is levied upon, and shall be collected from a person because of certain business activities engaged in or carried on in the city of Burien, taxes in the amount to be determined by the application of rates given against gross income as follows:

(1) Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting electric energy, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the period for which the tax is due;

(2) Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting gas, whether natural or manufactured, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the period for which the tax is due;

(3) Upon a person engaged in or carrying on any telephone business, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income, including income from intrastate long distance toll service, from such business in the city during the period for which the tax is due; 

(4) Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing or transmitting cable television service, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the period for which the tax is due;

(5) Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of collecting solid waste, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the period for which the tax is due, less income derived from collection and sales of materials not defined herein as solid waste. [Ord. 570 § 1, 2012; Ord. 368 § 3, 2002; Ord. 343 § 4, 2001]


3.12.050 Tax year.

The tax year for purposes of this utility tax shall commence February 3, 2002, and end December 31, 2002, and thereafter shall commence January 1st and end December 31st. [Ord. 343 § 5, 2001]


3.12.060 Exceptions and deductions. 

There is excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed:

(1) So much of the total gross income as is derived from business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or laws of the United States and the constitution or laws of the state of Washington.

(2) Income derived from that portion of network telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065, which represents charges to another telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services, or charges for network telephone service that is purchased for the purpose of resale.

(3) Adjustments made to a billing or customer account in order to reverse a billing or charge that was not properly a debt of the customer.

(4) Cash discounts allowed and actually granted to customers of the taxpayer during the tax year. 

(5) Uncollectible debts written off the taxpayer’s books during the tax year. If subsequently collected, the income shall be reported for the period in which collected. [Ord. 343 § 6, 2001]


3.12.070 Monthly installments.

The tax imposed by BMC 3.12.040 shall be due and payable in monthly installments, and remittance therefor shall be made on or before the last day of the month following the end of the monthly period in which the tax is accrued, unless the estimated gross income subject to the tax is less than $2,500 per three-month quarter, in which case the taxpayer may elect to pay quarterly for the preceding three-month period, on or before the thirty-first day of January, the thirtieth day of April, the thirty-first day of July, and the thirty-first day of October, at the office of the city clerk, Burien City Hall, or his or her designee. Furthermore, if the estimated gross income subject to the tax is less than $1,500 annually, the taxpayer may elect to pay annually for the preceding 12-month period, on or before the thirty-first day of January. On or before said due date, the taxpayer shall file with the city manager a written return upon such form and setting forth such information as the city manager shall reasonably require relating to the accurate computation and collection of this tax, together with the payment of the amount. [Ord. 518 § 1, 2009; Ord. 343 § 7, 2001]


3.12.080 Taxpayer’s records.

Each taxpayer shall keep records reflecting the amount of the taxpayer’s gross income on sales and services within the city, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times for the inspection of the city manager or his designee to verify information provided on any utility tax return, or to determine whether such return is required to be filed. [Ord. 343 § 8, 2001]


3.12.090 Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full.

If a taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make his return as and when required in this chapter, the city manager is authorized to determine the amount of the tax payable under provisions of BMC 3.12.040, and to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be the tax and be immediately due and payable, together with penalty and interest. Delinquent taxes, including any penalties, are subject to an interest charge of 12 percent per year on the unpaid balance from the date any such taxes became due as provided in BMC 3.12.070. [Ord. 343 § 9, 2001]


3.12.100 Penalty for delinquent payment.

If a person subject to this tax fails to pay any tax required by this chapter within 15 days after the due date thereof, there shall be added to such tax a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such tax, and any tax due under this chapter that is unpaid and all penalties thereon shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies. [Ord. 343 § 10, 2001]


3.12.110 Overpayment of tax.

Money paid to the city through error, or otherwise not in payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, or in excess of such tax, shall, upon discovery, be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder; provided however, that overpayments extending beyond one year prior to notification of the city shall not be refunded. If such taxpayer has ceased doing business in the city, any such overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. [Ord. 343 § 11, 2001]


3.12.120 Noncompliance – Penalty.

(1) No person subject to this chapter shall fail or refuse to file tax returns or to pay tax when due, nor shall any person make a false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such tax return, or otherwise violate or refuse to comply with this chapter or with any rule promulgated pursuant to BMC 3.12.140.

(2) In addition to the interest and delinquent filing penalties set forth above, a willful violation of or failure to comply with this chapter is a civil infraction, subject to a fine of up to $250.00 for each day that a violation continues. [Ord. 343 § 12, 2001]


3.12.130 Appeal.

A taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the tax, penalties, interest, or civil infraction fine determined to be due by the city manager or his designee, under the provisions of this chapter, may appeal such determination to the city of Burien, director of finance and administrative services or his or her designee. [Ord. 343 § 13, 2001]


3.12.140 City manager to make rules.

The city manager shall have the power to adopt and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with the law for the purposes of carrying out the provisions thereof. [Ord. 343 § 14, 2001]


3.12.150 Tax relief.

The city manager will develop and propose to the council a utility tax relief program to protect those least able to pay at the maximum level possible under the law. [Ord. 343 § 15, 2001]


3.12.160 Referendum procedure.

The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter are subject to the referendum procedure as follows:

(1) A referendum petition seeking to repeal the ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall be designated the person to receive petitions of all types, within seven days of the passage by the city council of the ordinance or publication thereof, whichever is later.

(2) Within 10 days, the city clerk shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and cause to be written a ballot title for the measure.

(3) The ballot title shall be posed as a question, so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within this 10-day period.

(4) After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the city and to file the signed petitions with the city clerk.

(5) Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The city clerk shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient valid signatures are properly submitted, the city clerk shall cause the referendum measure to be submitted to the city voters at the next election within the city or at a special election as provided pursuant to RCW 35.17.260(2). [Ord. 343 § 16, 2001]


3.12.170 Exclusive procedure.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.706, the referendum procedure set forth in BMC 3.12.160 shall be the exclusive referendum procedure for the utility tax imposed herein, and shall supersede the procedures, to the extent applicable, under Chapters 35.17 and 35A.11 RCW and all other statutory provisions for initiative or referendum which might otherwise apply. [Ord. 343 § 17, 2001]


3.12.180 Utility tax relief program established.

A utility tax relief program is established for low income Burien households in accordance with the eligibility criteria and guidelines described in the following sections of this chapter. [Ord. 350 § 1, 2002]


3.12.190 Utility tax relief for solid waste, electricity and gas services.

(1) For solid waste services provided by Recology CleanScapes and electricity and gas services provided by Puget Sound Energy, eligible low income Burien households may apply annually to have their residential solid waste bill(s) adjusted by Recology CleanScapes and their residential electric and gas bill(s) adjusted by Puget Sound Energy so they do not have to pay the utility tax passed on to customers by Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy for those services. The City of Burien will provide Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy with a list, at least annually, of eligible Burien households who should have their solid waste and electric and gas bills adjusted to remove the utility tax. Adjustments are not retroactive.

(2) To qualify for utility tax relief from solid waste services provided by Recology CleanScapes and electric and gas services provided by Puget Sound Energy, a household must:

(a) Be a household residing in Burien.

(b) Have a current residential account with Recology CleanScapes for solid waste services and/or current residential account with Puget Sound Energy for electric and/or gas services.

(c) Have an income during the calendar year, or part thereof, from all sources whatsoever, not exceeding 50 percent of the median income level for such calendar year for the Seattle-Bellevue-Everett Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) per household as published by the federal Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. If the annual update of the PMSA is not available, the median income level shall be determined by adjusting the prior year median income level by cost of living changes. As used in this subsection income means “disposable income,” as that term is defined in RCW 84.36.383, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time. [Ord. 603 § 1, 2014; Ord. 350 § 2, 2002]


3.12.200 Utility tax deduction for Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy for this program.

Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy may deduct the revenue received from the eligible Burien households enrolled in the utility tax relief program described in BMC 3.12.190 from the total gross receipts reported to the city when computing taxable receipts. [Ord. 603 § 2, 2014; Ord. 350 § 3, 2002]


3.12.210 Utility tax relief for telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services. 

For telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services, eligible low income Burien households may apply annually to receive a “reimbursement” from the city for utility taxes paid for telephone (not including cellular) and cable television services as described below:

(1) For all billings paid by the household during a calendar year for service charges to any entity or organization which paid the utility tax of the city on telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services, the city is authorized to pay to such household a “reimbursement” up to a maximum amount determined in accordance with subsection (2) of this section; provided, that the total amount of all reimbursements paid pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed the total dollar amount established through the budget process.

(2) Utility tax relief is available for telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services as follows:

(a) Telephone (not including cellular telephone): a maximum rate will be determined annually based on the utility tax paid on a single residential telephone line.

(b) Cable television: a maximum rate will be determined annually based on the utility tax paid for basic cable service only.

The amount of relief shall be prorated on a monthly basis for each month that the household was residing in city, and for which the household qualified for the relief as set forth in subsection (3) of this section, and was paying the tax.

(3) To qualify for utility tax relief from telephone (not including cellular telephone) and cable television services, a household must:

(a) Have been a household residing within the city at all times during any period for which a reimbursement is requested, and have paid the city utility tax charges from the income or resources of the household;

(b) Have an income during the calendar year, or part thereof, for which a “reimbursement” is requested from all sources whatsoever, not exceeding 50 percent of the median income level for such calendar year for the Seattle-Bellevue-Everett Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) per household as published by the federal Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. If the annual update of the PMSA is not available, the median income level shall be determined by adjusting the prior year median income level by cost of living changes. As used in this subsection, income means “disposable income” as that term is defined in RCW 84.36.383, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time. [Ord. 350 § 4, 2002]


3.12.220 Utility tax relief filing procedures.

(1) To qualify for the billing adjustment provided by Recology CleanScapes or Puget Sound Energy as set forth in BMC 3.12.190, a household must apply annually on the application form approved by the city. Requests for Recology CleanScapes solid waste and Puget Sound Energy electricity and gas billing adjustments may be made at any time, however, are only valid through December 31st of each year and must be renewed annually. Adjustments are not retroactive. If a household changes Burien residences, they must reapply for the billing adjustment by Recology CleanScapes and Puget Sound Energy. The utility tax will be reinstated at the old address. 

(2) To qualify for a “reimbursement” for some of utility taxes paid for telephone (not including cellular) and cable television as set forth in BMC 3.12.210, a household must apply annually on the application form approved by the city. Such application must be received no later than the date established by the city manager for the calendar year for which a “reimbursement” is requested. Households must reapply annually for the utility tax relief program.

(3) The city manager shall adopt rules and procedures for the filing of reimbursement claims, and for the administration of the utility tax relief program. [Ord. 603 § 3, 2014; Ord. 350 § 5, 2002]


Chapter 3.13 COMMERCIAL PARKING TAX Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.13.010    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.13.020    Imposed. Revised 1/20

3.13.030    Tax in addition to other license fees or taxes. Revised 1/20

3.13.040    Use of tax proceeds. Revised 1/20

3.13.050    Taxes collected by business operators. Revised 1/20

3.13.060    Exempt vehicles. Revised 1/20

3.13.070    Violation – Penalty. Revised 1/20

3.13.080    Appeal procedure. Revised 1/20

3.13.090    Referendum procedure. Revised 1/20


3.13.010 Definitions. Revised 1/20

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Commercial parking business” means the ownership, lease, operation, or management of a commercial parking lot in which fees are charged, and includes parking service operations of municipal corporations of the state of Washington and other governmental entities, where a fee is charged for parking services or for use of parking spaces.

(2) “Commercial parking lot” means any covered or uncovered area with parking stalls or spaces used by a commercial parking business for the purpose of parking motor vehicles or allowing motor vehicles to be parked.

(3) “Commercial parking transaction” means any transaction or arrangement whereby a vehicle is parked and a fee is charged for parking or allowing the vehicle to be parked. It shall constitute a parking transaction each time a fee is charged for parking or allowing a vehicle to be parked, irrespective of the length of time the vehicle is parked, including “short-stay metered parking,” as defined herein; provided, that “local employee parking,” as defined herein, shall not constitute a commercial parking transaction. A commercial parking transaction shall include instances where a fee is charged for the parking of a vehicle and that fee is included as a specific item in the fee or charge. A commercial parking transaction shall also include instances where a vehicle is parked or allowed to be parked for a certain period of time, and a fee is charged in connection with other services. A commercial parking transaction shall also include instances where a guest of a hotel, motel or other lodging establishment is allowed to park or leave his/her vehicle at the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment after the guest has concluded his/her business at the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment and/or has checked out of the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment, so that the guest’s vehicle is parked at the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment during days when the guest is not staying at the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment, regardless of whether a parking fee is included as a specific item listed or identified on the bill or charge for services by the hotel, motel or other lodging establishment. A commercial parking transaction shall also include instances where a vehicle is parked or allowed to be parked and where a fee would be charged for the parking unless validated by a business because a customer makes a purchase or otherwise transacts business for which a fee is paid. Each vehicle that is parked shall constitute a separate commercial parking transaction for which the tax shall be collected, even if the fees charged and/or arrangements made for vehicle parking include more than one vehicle.

(4) “Local employee parking” refers to parking spaces provided or reserved for use by an employee who works within the city, where the employee parks his/her vehicle in connection with his/her employment, without regard to whether arrangements or payment for the parking is made by the employee or by his/her employer.

(5) “Short-stay metered parking” refers to the parking of vehicles in spaces where payment for parking is made through parking meters and where the duration of the metered parking does not exceed three consecutive hours. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 1, 2001]


3.13.020 Imposed. Revised 1/20

(1) Pursuant to RCW 82.80.030, there is levied a commercial parking tax to be imposed on the privilege of parking in commercial parking facilities within the city. The tax shall be imposed at the rate of $3.00 per commercial parking transaction, including “short-term metered parking,” irrespective of the length of time that a vehicle is parked in connection with each transaction.

(2) Beginning January 1, 2020, and each year thereafter, the tax imposed in subsection (1) of this section shall be adjusted based on the June to June Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers, CPI-U. The adjustment shall be calculated to the nearest cent. Notification of CPI-U based adjustments will be sent out to affected businesses by November 30, 2019, for the 2020 adjustment, and in subsequent years, by November 1st of the year preceding the adjustment. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 571 § 1, 2012; Ord. 344 § 2, 2001]


3.13.030 Tax in addition to other license fees or taxes. Revised 1/20

The tax levied hereunder shall be in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law, statute or ordinance whether imposed or levied by the city, state or other governmental entity or political subdivision. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 3, 2001]


3.13.040 Use of tax proceeds. Revised 1/20

All revenues, assessments and other charges generated and collected as commercial parking taxes shall be placed into the street fund, and shall be used by the city for transportation purposes, in accordance with RCW 82.80.070, and for administering the tax, including activities of the city in keeping and tracking records, financial reports and other documents, reviewing filings and compiling reports by commercial parking businesses, and other activities involved in collection and enforcement of the tax. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 4, 2001]


3.13.050 Taxes collected by business operators. Revised 1/20

Taxes imposed herein shall be collected by the operators of the commercial parking businesses. The operators of the commercial parking businesses shall remit to the city the commercial parking taxes collected on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the taxes were collected. The city shall be authorized to review and inspect financial records involving activities of businesses which are taxable by this tax at least quarterly. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 5, 2001]


3.13.060 Exempt vehicles. Revised 1/20

The tax shall not be levied on exempt vehicles. Exempt vehicles shall include vehicles with handicap decals, government vehicles which are exempt from tax and tax exempt car-pool vehicles. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 6, 2001]


3.13.070 Violation – Penalty. Revised 1/20

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in a commercial parking business to fail or refuse to collect and remit the taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect. Any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 7, 2001]


3.13.080 Appeal procedure. Revised 1/20

Any person aggrieved by the amount of tax determined to be due the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the city manager, or designee, from such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city manager, or designee, shall, as soon as practical, fix a time and place for the hearing for such appeal. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 8, 2001]


3.13.090 Referendum procedure. Revised 1/20

The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter are subject to the referendum procedure as follows:

(1) A referendum petition seeking to repeal the ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall be designated the person to receive petitions of all types, within seven days of the passage by the city council of the ordinance or publication thereof, whichever is later.

(2) Within 10 days, the city clerk shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and cause to be written a ballot title for the measure.

(3) The ballot title shall be posed as a question, so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or fee being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or fee not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within this 10-day period.

(4) After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the city and to file the signed petitions with the city clerk.

(5) Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The city clerk shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient valid signatures are properly submitted, the city clerk shall cause the referendum measure to be submitted to the city voters at a general or special election held on one of the dates provided in RCW 29.13.010, as determined by the city council, which election shall not take place later than 120 days after the signed petition has been filed with the city clerk. [Ord. 722 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 344 § 9, 2001]


Chapter 3.15 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.15.010    Imposition.

3.15.020    Rate.

3.15.030    Exemptions.

3.15.040    Administration and collection.

3.15.050    City and state to contract.


3.15.010 Imposition.

Pursuant to authorization of RCW 82.29A.040, there is imposed a leasehold excise tax on the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city, through a “leasehold interest” as defined in RCW 82.29A.020. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons holding such leasehold interests within the city from whom a leasehold excise tax is collected by the State Department of Revenue, pursuant to Chapter 82.29A RCW. [Ord. 8 § 1, 1993]


3.15.020 Rate.

The rate of the tax imposed by BMC 3.15.010 shall be four percent of the taxable rent, as defined by RCW 82.29A.020(2), less any allowable credits pursuant to RCW 82.29A.120. [Ord. 8 § 2, 1993]


3.15.030 Exemptions.

Leasehold interests exempted from leasehold excise taxes by RCW 82.29A.130 and 82.29A.135 shall also be exempt from the tax imposed by BMC 3.15.010. [Ord. 8 § 3, 1993]


3.15.040 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by BMC 3.15.010 shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.29A.080. [Ord. 8 § 4, 1993]


3.15.050 City and state to contract.

The mayor and the city clerk are authorized on behalf of the city to enter into a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration of the taxes imposed in this chapter, pursuant to RCW 82.29A.080. A copy of the contract shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and is, by this reference, incorporated in this chapter. [Ord. 8 § 5, 1993]


Chapter 3.20 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAXES

Sections:

Article I. Real Estate Excise Tax

3.20.010    Imposition.

3.20.020    Rate.

3.20.030    Taxable events.

3.20.040    Consistency with state tax.

3.20.050    Use of tax proceeds.

3.20.060    Seller’s obligation.

3.20.070    Lien provisions.

3.20.080    Payment and collection.

3.20.090    Date payable.

3.20.100    Excessive and improper payments.

3.20.110    Contract for collection and enforcement.

Article II. Additional Real Estate Excise Tax

3.20.120    Imposition.

3.20.130    Rate.

3.20.140    Taxable events.

3.20.150    Consistency with state tax.

3.20.160    Use of tax proceeds.

3.20.170    Seller’s obligation.

3.20.180    Lien provisions.

3.20.190    Payment and collection.

3.20.200    Date payable.

3.20.210    Excessive and improper payments.

3.20.220    Contract for collection and enforcement.

Article I. Real Estate Excise Tax


3.20.010 Imposition.

Pursuant to authorization of RCW 82.46.010, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 9 § 1, 1993]


3.20.020 Rate.

The rate of tax imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price on each sale of real property. [Ord. 9 § 2, 1993]


3.20.030 Taxable events.

Taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall be collected from persons or entities who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC, upon the occurrence of any taxable event, as defined therein, within the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 9 § 3, 1993]


3.20.040 Consistency with state tax.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW, and Chapter 458-61 WAC. The provisions of those chapters shall apply as though fully set forth in this article. [Ord. 9 § 4, 1993]


3.20.050 Use of tax proceeds.

All proceeds received by the city from the taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall be placed in a municipal capital improvement fund. These capital improvement funds shall be used by the city for local improvements, including, but not by way of limitation, those listed in RCW 35.43.040. [Ord. 9 § 5, 1993]


3.20.060 Seller’s obligation.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010 are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through an action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed by the foreclosure of mortgages, without necessity for an election of remedies. [Ord. 9 § 6, 1993]


3.20.070 Lien provisions.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010, and any interest or penalties thereon, are a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. [Ord. 9 § 7, 1993]


3.20.080 Payment and collection.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of King County. The treasurer of King County shall act as agent for the city. The treasurer of King County shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance, prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit, in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the treasurer of King County for payment of the tax imposed by BMC 3.20.010 shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in BMC 3.20.070 and may be recorded in the same manner prescribed for recording satisfaction of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County department of records and elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the same affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the face of the instrument by the treasurer of King County. [Ord. 9 §8, 1993]


3.20.090 Date payable.

The tax imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 9 § 9, 1993]


3.20.100 Excessive and improper payments.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the King County treasurer for a refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due, or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the King County treasurer to the taxpayer; provided that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. [Ord. 9 § 10, 1993]


3.20.110 Contract for collection and enforcement.

The city manager is authorized and directed to enter into a contract with King County for administration, collection and enforcement of the real estate excise tax. [Ord. 9 § 11, 1993]

Article II. Additional Real Estate Excise Tax


3.20.120 Imposition.

Pursuant to authorization of RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 31 § 1, 1993]


3.20.130 Rate.

The rate of tax imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price on each sale of real property. [Ord. 31 § 2, 1993]


3.20.140 Taxable events.

Taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall be collected from persons or entities who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC, upon the occurrence of any taxable event, as defined therein, within the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 31 § 3, 1993]


3.20.150 Consistency with state tax.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW, and Chapter 458-61 WAC. The provisions of those chapters shall apply as though fully set forth in this article. [Ord. 31 § 4, 1993]


3.20.160 Use of tax proceeds.

All proceeds received by the city from the taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall be placed in a municipal capital projects improvement fund, pursuant to RCW 82.46.035 (3) and (4). [Ord. 31 § 5, 1993]


3.20.170 Seller’s obligation.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120 are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through an action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed by the foreclosure of mortgages, without necessity for an election of remedies. [Ord. 31 § 6, 1993]


3.20.180 Lien provisions.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120, and any interest or penalties thereon, are a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages, pursuant to RCW 82.46.040. [Ord. 31 § 7, 1993]


3.20.190 Payment and collection.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of King County. The treasurer of King County shall act as agent for the city. The treasurer of King County shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance, prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit, in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the treasurer of King County for payment of the tax imposed by BMC 3.20.120 shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in BMC 3.20.180 and may be recorded in the same manner prescribed for recording satisfaction of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County department of records and elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the same affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the face of the instrument by the treasurer of King County. [Ord. 31 § 8, 1993]


3.20.200 Date payable.

The tax imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 31 § 9, 1993]


3.20.210 Excessive and improper payments.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the King County treasurer for a refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due, or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the King County treasurer to the taxpayer; provided that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. [Ord. 31 § 10, 1993]


3.20.220 Contract for collection and enforcement.

The city manager is authorized and directed to enter into a contract with King County for administration, collection and enforcement of the real estate excise tax. [Ord. 31 § 11, 1993]


Chapter 3.25 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.25.010    Imposition.

3.25.020    Exemptions.

3.25.030    Activity report – Payment.

3.25.040    Delinquencies.

3.25.050    Additional rules.


3.25.010 Imposition.

There is hereby imposed a tax, at the rates set forth below, upon the following gambling activities, when authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, and when conducted in the city:

(1) Five percent of the gross receipts from punchboards and pull-tabs, as those terms are defined by RCW 9.46.0273 and the Rules and Regulations of the Gambling Commission;

(2) Five percent of the gross revenue, less the amount paid for or as prizes, received from bingo and raffles, as those terms are defined by RCW 9.46.0205 and 9.46.0277;

(3) Two percent of the gross revenue, less the amount paid for or as prizes, from amusement games, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0201; and

(4) Eleven percent of the gross revenue from social card games, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0281 and the Rules and Regulations of the Gambling Commission. [Ord. 703 § 1, 2018; Ord. 585 § 1, 2013; Ord. 285 § 1, 2000; Ord. 249 § 1, 1999; Ord. 206 § 1, 1997; Ord. 7 § 1, 1993]


3.25.020 Exemptions.

Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations, as defined by RCW 9.46.0209, conducting bingo, raffles or amusement games within the city shall be exempt from payment of the taxes imposed by BMC 3.25.010 on those activities, providing that such bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization shall employ no paid operating or management personnel and shall have gross income from bingo, raffles or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding $5,000 per year, less the amount paid for or as prizes. [Ord. 7 § 2, 1993]


3.25.030 Activity report – Payment.

(1) Activity Report. Every holder of a license issued by the Washington State Gambling Commission who conducts any taxable gambling activities within the city shall provide to the city a true copy of each activity report required by the Gambling Commission no later than the date of filing required by the State Gambling Commission.

(2) Tax to Be Paid Quarterly. The tax levied under BMC 3.25.010 shall be paid quarterly for the preceding three-month period, or a portion thereof, on or before the thirty-first day of January, the thirtieth day of April, the thirty-first day of July, and the thirty-first day of October, at the office of the city clerk, Burien City Hall, or his or her designee; provided, however, that those persons conducting activities subject to taxation under this chapter less frequently than once every two months shall pay the tax for each taxable activity at the office of the city clerk, Burien City Hall, or his or her designee, within 30 days following the date upon which the activity was conducted. [Ord. 486 § 1, 2008]


3.25.040 Delinquencies.

(1) All taxes on gambling activities shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the due date(s) as specified in BMC 3.25.030. Penalties shall accrue on all such delinquencies as follows:

(a) Ten percent of the delinquent amount ($5.00 minimum) if paid in full within 17 days after the applicable due date;

(b) Fifteen percent of the delinquent amount ($10.00 minimum) if paid in full between the eighteenth and fortieth days, inclusive, of the applicable due date; and

(c) All delinquent taxes and applicable penalties shall accrue interest at the rate of 12 percent, compounded daily, beginning on the forty-first day after any applicable due date.

(2) Delinquent taxes, penalties, and accrued interest shall constitute a public debt owing to the city which shall be subject to collection or other enforcement by all means available, at law and in equity, including but not limited to injunctive relief against the offending party.

(3) The city council shall have the authority to adjust or waive the penalties and/or interest imposed under this section. [Ord. 585 § 2, 2013; Ord. 47 § 1, 1993; Ord. 7 § 4, 1993]


3.25.050 Additional rules.

The city manager or director of finance shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, for carrying out and enforcing payment, collection and remittance of the taxes levied in this chapter. Such rules and regulations may include the form of tax return required to be filed with the city at the time of payment of the tax on gambling activities, and procedures for auditing of the taxpayer’s records. A copy of the rules and regulations so adopted shall be on file and available for public examination in the clerk’s office. [Ord. 585 § 3, 2013; Ord. 7 § 5, 1993]


Chapter 3.27 ADMISSIONS TAX

Sections:

3.27.010    Definitions.

3.27.020    Admissions tax levied.

3.27.030    Exemptions.

3.27.040    Collection – Remittance to city manager.

3.27.050    Violations.


3.27.010 Definitions.

(1) “Admission charge” shall include:

(a) Any charge made for admission including season tickets or subscriptions;

(b) A cover charge, or a charge made for use of seats and tables reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations;

(c) A charge made for food and refreshment in any place where free entertainment, recreation or amusement is provided;

(d) A charge made for rental or use of equipment or facilities for purposes of recreation or amusement; if the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge;

(e) Automobile parking charges if the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in the automobile.

(2) “Facilities” means the combined areas of a building classified under Section 303 of the International Building Code in which admissions-related activities are performed.

(3) “Nonprofit organization” means an organization that is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3), (4), and (6) of the Internal Revenue Code. [Ord. 689 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 345 § 1, 2001]


3.27.020 Admissions tax levied.

Effective January 1, 2002, there is hereby levied a five percent tax on the ticket price or other charge for admission to any place in the city of Burien; provided, that no such tax is imposed on admission to any activity of any elementary or secondary school or any public facility of a public facility district under Chapter 35.57 or 36.100 RCW for which a tax is imposed under RCW 35.57.100 or 36.100.210. This includes a tax on persons who are admitted free of charge or at reduced rates to any place for which other persons pay a charge or a regular higher charge for the same privileges or accommodations. [Ord. 689 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 345 § 2, 2001]


3.27.030 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Admission charges that occur during special events produced by government, elementary or secondary schools, or nonprofit organizations.

(2) Admissions charges:

(a) For activities taking place in facilities with a maximum certified occupancy of less than 100 persons; or

(b) To participants of athletic or sporting activities including but not limited to: bowling, golf, gymnastics, and swimming. This exemption does not apply to spectators at athletic or sporting events who pay an admission charge. [Ord. 689 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 345 § 3, 2001]


3.27.040 Collection – Remittance to city manager.

(1) The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected from the person paying the admission charge, or being admitted free of charge or at a reduced rate, at the time the admission charge is paid, and such taxes shall be remitted by any person collecting the tax to the city manager in quarterly remittances on or before the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the tax is due.

(2) Any person receiving any payment for admissions shall make a return upon such forms and setting forth such information as the city manager may reasonably require, showing the amount of the tax upon admissions for which the person is liable for the preceding quarterly period, and shall sign and transmit the same to the city manager, with a remittance for the amount; provided, that the city manager may at his discretion require verified annual returns from any person receiving admission payments setting forth such additional information as the city manager may deem necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable.

(3) If the return provided for herein is not made and transmitted and the tax is not collected and remitted to the city by the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarter in which the tax was due, the city manager shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the tax due, which penalty shall be added to the amount of the tax due, and remitted in the same manner.

(4) Every person liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve for a period of three years all unused tickets, ticket manifests, books and all other records from which can be determined the amount of admission tax which such person was liable to remit under the provisions of this chapter, and all such tickets, books and records shall be open for examination and audit at all reasonable times by the city manager or his duly authorized agent.

(5) The city manager shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied; and a copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the city clerk’s office. [Ord. 689 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 345 § 4, 2001]


3.27.050 Violations.

(1) Violation a Misdemeanor. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and is a misdemeanor.

(2) Collection of Tax by Civil Action. Any tax due under the provisions of this chapter and all penalties thereon may be collected by civil action, which remedies shall be in addition to any and all other existing remedies. In the event of any civil action regarding unpaid taxes, the prevailing party shall be entitled to additionally recover its attorneys’ fees and costs, expressly including expert witness fees for accountants or others used in the proceeding.

(3) Violators Designated. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or aids or abets the same, and every person or entity who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such violation is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter and may be proceeded against as such. [Ord. 689 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 345 § 5, 2001]


Chapter 3.30 FUNDS

Sections:

Article I. Establishment and Use

3.30.010    Petty cash fund.

3.30.020    Change fund.

3.30.030    Deferred compensation fund.

Article II. Credit Card Policy

3.30.100    City authorized credit cards.

3.30.110    Distribution.

3.30.120    Application.

3.30.130    Approved uses for credit card purchases.

3.30.140    Purchasing restrictions.

3.30.150    Reporting credit card charges.

3.30.160    Unauthorized use of credit cards.

Article I. Establishment and Use


3.30.010 Petty cash fund.

There is established a fund to be known as the petty cash fund in a sum not to exceed $1,000. The fund shall be established by issuance of a warrant or check drawn upon the current expense and general funds and cash in the fund shall be maintained by the director of finance and administrative services or his/her successor or designee. Minor sums may be withdrawn from the fund for payment or reimbursement upon proper receipts and in accordance with state law and regulations set forth by the Office of the State Auditor. The fund shall be replenished upon approval of vouchers by the city council in accordance with usual policy and procedures. [Ord. 353 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 183 §§ 1, 2, 1996; Ord. 35 § 1, 1993]


3.30.020 Change fund.

(1) Total Fund. The authorized balance of the change fund is now increased to $600.00.

(2) Disbursements. Disbursements from this fund shall be only for the purpose of making change for permit activity ($100.00), for making change for business license and pet license activity ($100.00), and for making change for parks activity fee collections ($400.00), or so much thereof as is considered necessary by the city manager. These funds shall remain under the direction and control of the city of Burien. [Ord. 693 §§ 1, 2, 2018; Ord. 283 §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. 86 §§ 1, 2, 1994; Ord. 48 §§ 1, 2, 1993]


3.30.030 Deferred compensation fund.

(1) Agency fund No. 633 shall be designated as the “deferred compensation fund” and shall be used to display the annual balances of any deferred compensation plans the city may utilize.

(2) The director of administrative services is authorized to implement any accounting procedures necessary to meet the requirements of GASB and the Washington State Auditor’s Office. [Ord. 72 §§ 1, 2, 1993]

Article II. Credit Card Policy


3.30.100 City authorized credit cards.

City of Burien credit card usage is intended to provide an efficient method for the purchase of goods and services when the use of the city’s purchasing system is not possible or practical. The city manager or designee shall implement the system set forth in this article for the distribution, authorization and control, credit limits, and payment of bills related to the use of credit cards by city officials and employees. For the purpose of this chapter, “credit card” shall mean a bank issued credit or purchasing card. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 1, 2000]


3.30.110 Distribution.

Credit cards may be issued to those city officials and employees who, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, have job responsibilities which would benefit or otherwise be facilitated by the use of a credit card. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 2, 2000]


3.30.120 Application. 

The city manager or designee shall have explicit authority to enter into credit card programs with lending entities on behalf of the city; provided, however, that prior to changing lending entities the city manager shall report to the city council regarding the reasons for and ramifications of the change. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 3, 2000]


3.30.130 Approved uses for credit card purchases.

Credit cards may be used for the following purchases:

(1) Subscriptions, dues or memberships, fuel, supplies, minor equipment, and online services at the time of purchase. Fuel purchase is limited to city-owned vehicles when on travel status.

(2) Registrations, travel, and/or other training related expenses.

(3) Invoices received for goods and services provided to the city for authorized purchases.

(4) Expenses related to recreational programs which may include food, admission, parking, and other fees related to excursions or trips for program participants.

(5) Other items specifically authorized by the city manager or designee. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 4, 2000]


3.30.140 Purchasing restrictions.

Credit cards may not be used for cash advances of any kind, for personal use, or for any expense not otherwise allowed under law and city policies. Each assigned card will be established with a per transaction limit, a monthly spending limit, and limits on the types of allowed purchases. These limits will be based upon the current city manager’s delegated purchasing and signature authority to staff. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 5, 2000]


3.30.150 Reporting credit card charges.

Within five working days of receiving a statement from the credit card company, the official or employee responsible for the purchase (the “cardholder”) will submit the statement, all receipts and supporting documents and a properly coded and executed claims request to the finance division for payment. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 6, 2000]


3.30.160 Unauthorized use of credit cards.

Any charge against the credit card not allowed following a post audit shall be paid by the cardholder by check, U.S. currency or salary deduction. Finance charges resulting from a cardholder’s failure to submit all necessary receipts and supporting documents within the time allowed will be considered disallowed charges and will be charged to the cardholder. If for any reason disallowed charges are not repaid before the charge card billing is due and payable, the city shall have a prior lien against and a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the cardholder up to an amount of the disallowed charges and interest at the same rate as charged by the issuing credit card company. The city shall have unlimited authority to revoke use of any charge card issued for failure to repay a disallowed charge or failure to adhere to the city’s credit card policies and procedures. The responsible cardholder shall also be subject to disciplinary action. [Ord. 695 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 1, 2014; Ord. 311 § 7, 2000]


Chapter 3.31 ART IN PUBLIC PLACES FUND

Sections:

3.31.010    Established. 

3.31.020    Definitions. 

3.31.030    Deposits into the arts in public places fund. 

3.31.040    Uses of funds. 

3.31.050    Responsibilities of arts commission. 


3.31.010 Established. 

There is hereby established in the city treasury a special fund to be known and designated as the “art in public places fund” for the purpose of providing funds for acquiring and maintaining public art. [Ord. 684 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 § 1, 1998]


3.31.020 Definitions. 

As used in connection with the art in public places fund, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:

(1) “Acquisition of real property” means the purchase of parcels of land or existing buildings and structures, including associated costs such as appraisals or negotiations.

(2) “Art in public places” means any expression by an artist of visual works of art available to the public in an open city-owned facility in areas designated as public areas, or non-city-owned property if the work of art is installed or financed, either in whole or in part, by the city.

(3) “Arts commission” means the Burien arts commission.

(4) “Equipment” means equipment or furnishings that are portable.

(5) “Per capita” shall mean “for each person.”

(6) “Per capita funding methodology” shall mean the sum of $0.50 multiplied by the total number of people residing in the city of Burien according to the annual population as calculated by the Washington State Office of Financial Management for the previous year in which the annual deposit to the fund is made. [Ord. 684 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 § 2, 1998]


3.31.030 Deposits into the arts in public places fund.

Deposits into the arts in public places fund shall be appropriated annually based on a $0.50 per capita contribution from the general fund. [Ord. 684 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 § 3, 1998]


3.31.040 Uses of funds. 

All appropriations shall be pooled into the art in public places fund. These funds shall be used for:

(1) Selection, acquisition and installation or display of original works of visual art which may be an integral part of a project, or be placed in another public facility.

(2) Repairs and maintenance of public art.

(3) Other project-specific expenses of selection and acquisition; provided, that no part of the funds shall be used to pay administrative staffing expenses of the program.

Any unexpended funds which remain in the fund at the end of any budget year shall not be transferred to the general fund or otherwise lapse, but the unexpended funds shall be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purposes set forth in this section, unless otherwise directed by city council. [Ord. 684 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 § 6, 1998. Formerly 3.31.060]


3.31.050 Responsibilities of arts commission. 

Annually the arts commission shall make recommendations to the city council that will reflect short- and long-range planning for art works and sites regarding the appropriation of project funds. The recommendations will relate to, but not be limited by, the following:

(1) Art projects will be responsive to the developing public art needs of the community;

(2) Art projects will reflect the scope, scale and character of the site; and

(3) Art projects will be part of new parks and building developments. The arts commission shall carry out all necessary tasks and procedures consistent with established arts policies for the selection, placement and conservation of art works. [Ord. 684 § 1, 2018; Ord. 238 § 7, 1998. Formerly 3.31.070]


Chapter 3.35 BOND REGISTRATION

Sections:

3.35.010    Findings.

3.35.020    Definitions.

3.35.030    Registration – System adopted.

3.35.040    Registration – Required.

3.35.050    Registration – Method.

3.35.060    Denominations.

3.35.070    Registrar – Appointment.

3.35.080    Registrar – Duties.

3.35.090    When registrar not fiscal agencies.

3.35.100    Statement of transfer restrictions.


3.35.010 Findings.

The city council finds that it is in the city’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the city’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. [Ord. 15 § 2, 1993]


3.35.020 Definitions.

The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

(1) “Bond” or “bonds” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be from time to time amended.

(2) “City” means the city of Burien, Washington.

(3) “Fiscal agencies” means the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the state of Washington serving as such at any given time.

(4) “Obligation” or “obligations” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.

(5) “Registrar” means the person, persons or entity designated by the city to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter or under an ordinance of the city authorizing the issuance of such bonds or obligations. [Ord. 15 § 1, 1993]


3.35.030 Registration – System adopted.

The city adopts the system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations set out in this chapter. [Ord. 15 § 3, 1993]


3.35.040 Registration – Required.

All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, on which the interest is intended to be excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 15 § 3(a), 1993]


3.35.050 Registration – Method.

(1) The registration of all city bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:

(a) A book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the registrar, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or

(b) Recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the reissuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owner.

(2) No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar. [Ord. 15 § 3(b), 1993]


3.35.060 Denominations.

Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on reissuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued. [Ord. 15 § 3(c), 1993]


3.35.070 Registrar – Appointment.

Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the city treasurer shall be the registrar for all registered interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or less after issuance and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other city bonds and obligations without a fixed maturity date or maturing more than one year after issuance. [Ord. 15 § 3(d), 1993]


3.35.080 Registrar – Duties.

(1) The registrar shall serve as the city’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.

(2) The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the city treasurer and the registrar, except that (a) when the fiscal agencies serve as registrar, the city adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, obligations and compensation of the registrar, and (b) when the city treasurer serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required. [Ord. 15 § 3(e), 1993]


3.35.090 When registrar not fiscal agencies.

In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agencies and the bonds or obligations are assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:

(1) Making payments of principal and interest;

(2) Printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;

(3) Specifying record and payment dates;

(4) Determining denominations;

(5) Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations;

(6) Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction;

(7) Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and

(8) Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the city may deem to be necessary or appropriate. [Ord. 15 § 3(e), 1993]


3.35.100 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the city subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. [Ord. 15 § 4, 1993]


Chapter 3.40 REFERENDUM PROCEDURE FOR TAX LEVIES1

Sections:

3.40.010    Application of referendum.

3.40.020    Procedure established.

3.40.030    Exclusive procedure.


3.40.010 Application of referendum.

Every ordinance which:

(1) First imposes upon any business activity a municipal business and occupation tax; or 

(2) First imposes an additional sales and use tax under authority of RCW 82.14.030(2), or which alters the rate of any such tax; or 

(3) First imposes the additional local real estate excise tax under authority of RCW 82.46.010(2);  shall be subject to the referendum procedures set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 10 § 1, 1993]


3.40.020 Procedure established.

(1) A referendum petition seeking to repeal any city ordinance made subject to these referendum procedures by BMC 3.40.010 shall be filed with the city clerk within seven days of the passage or publication, whichever is later, of the ordinance sought to be repealed.

(2) Within 10 days, the city clerk shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and cause to be written a ballot title for the measure.

(3) The ballot title shall be posed as a question, so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within this 10-day period.

(4) After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the city and to file the signed petitions with the city clerk.

(5) Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The city clerk shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient, valid signatures are properly submitted, the city clerk shall cause the referendum measure to be submitted to the city voters at a general or special election held on one of the dates provided in RCW 29.13.010, as determined by the city council, which election shall not take place later than 120 days after the signed petition has been filed with the city clerk. [Ord. 10 § 2, 1993]


3.40.030 Exclusive procedure.

The referendum procedures adopted in this chapter shall be exclusive in all instances for any city ordinance first imposing, or increasing the specific taxes designated as subject to referendum in BMC 3.40.010 and no other taxes or rates imposed by the city shall be subject to the referendum procedures. The referendum procedure provided in Chapter 35A.11 RCW is superseded with respect to the matters designated in BMC 3.40.010. [Ord. 10 § 3, 1993]1

For provisions on the initiative and referendum process see Ch. 1.10 BMC. 


Chapter 3.42 AIRPORT LITIGATION FUND

(Repealed by Ord. 172)


Chapter 3.45 WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS FOR GRANT-RELATED ACTIVITIES

Sections:

3.45.010    Use of working capital funds.

3.45.020    Repayment of working capital cash.


3.45.010 Use of working capital funds. 

The city manager is authorized to make interest free working capital cash funding available from the general fund to the following grant-related funds in the event of deficit cash balances due to grant activities in such grant-related funds:

(1) Community development block grant (CDBG) fund;

(2) Grant fund;

(3) Airport litigation fund;

(4) Any other grant-related fund established by ordinance by the city council. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1995]


3.45.020 Repayment of working capital cash. 

Repayment of the working capital cash is to be made after final grant award reimbursement is received from the grantor agencies. [Ord. 167 § 2, 1995]


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS1 Revised 5/20

Chapters:

5.05    Business Licenses Revised 5/20

5.10    Special Activities Licenses and Permits Revised 5/20

5.15    Repealed

5.20    Repealed

5.25    Repealed

5.30    Fireworks

5.35    Repealed

5.40    Repealed

5.45    Repealed

5.50    Repealed

5.55    Taxicabs and For-Hire Vehicles Revised 5/20

5.60    Cable System Regulations Revised 5/20

5.62    Rental Housing Inspection Program (RHIP)

5.63    Rental Housing Policy

5.65    Adult Entertainment Cabarets Revised 5/20

5.70    Panoram Premises Revised 5/201

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.05.010    Exercise of revenue license power.

5.05.020    Dedicated revenue.

5.05.030    Repealed.

5.05.040    Repealed.

5.05.050    Definitions. Revised 5/20

5.05.060    Business license required.

5.05.070    Separate licenses required. Revised 5/20

5.05.075    Notification of exemption or termination of business activities. Revised 5/20

5.05.080    Change in nature or location of business. Revised 5/20

5.05.090    Exemptions from license requirement.

5.05.091    Exemptions for nonprofit festivals.

5.05.092    Exemptions – Fee waiver.

5.05.100    License – Application. Revised 5/20

5.05.110    Business license fee. Revised 5/20

5.05.120    Fee – Prorating. Revised 5/20

5.05.130    General qualifications of licensees.

5.05.140    License – Grounds for suspension or revocation.

5.05.150    Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.

5.05.160    License – Term. Revised 5/20

5.05.170    License – Renewal. Revised 5/20

5.05.180    Penalty for late application. Revised 5/20

5.05.190    Administrative rules and regulations. Revised 5/20

5.05.200    Licenses – General provisions. Revised 5/20

5.05.210    Independent contractors to be licensed. Revised 5/20

5.05.220    Confidentiality of information. Revised 5/20

5.05.230    Repealed.

5.05.240    Required – Display. Revised 5/20

5.05.250    Inspections – Right of entry.


5.05.010 Exercise of revenue license power.

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter prescribing license fees shall be strictly construed in favor of the applicability of the license fee. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 3, 1999]


5.05.020 Dedicated revenue.

The revenue generated from business license fees shall be dedicated to maintenance or capital improvements in commercial areas of the city of Burien, promotion of economic development, and costs associated with periodic auditing and collection to assure accurate business participation in the payment of the business license fee. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 4, 1999]


5.05.030 Licensing authority.

Repealed by Ord. 538. [Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 5, 1999]


5.05.040 Licensing program – Adopted by reference.

Repealed by Ord. 538. [Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 6, 1999]


5.05.050 Definitions. Revised 5/20

For purposes of this title and unless otherwise provided, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) Engaging in Business.

(a) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(b) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the city without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in this subsection (1). If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(c) Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its agent, broker, contractor (of any tier), employee, representative, or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

(i) Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible and/or intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the city.

(ii) Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place of business, or other establishment in the city.

(iii) Soliciting sales.

(iv) Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(v) Providing technical assistance or service, including but not limited to quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(vi) Constructing, installing, or supervising installation or construction of, real or tangible personal property.

(vii) Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or similar agreements.

(viii) Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(ix) Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(x) Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(xi) Rendering professional services including but not limited to those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, court reporters, dentists, detectives, doctors, engineers, laboratory operators, professional athletes, psychologists, teachers, and veterinarians.

(xii) Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are agreed to or solicited at the meeting.

(xiii) Training or recruiting agents, brokers, contractors of any tier, representatives, or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(xiv) Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(xv) In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(xvi) Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(d) If a person, or its agent, broker, contractor of any tier, employee, representative, or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

(i) Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(ii) Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(iii) Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of directors member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

(iv) Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.

(v) Attending, but not participating in, a trade show or multiple vendor events. Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(vi) Conducting advertising through the mail.

(vii) Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.

(e) A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the city. Such activities do not include those in subsection (1)(d) of this section.

The city expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.

To the extent not included herein, the term “engaging in business” also includes activities of the type subject to taxation under Chapter 3.12 BMC, nonprofit or public “persons,” contractors engaged temporarily at a job location within the city, on-site apartment management personnel, and home occupations.

(2) “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, company, person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, or nonprofit.

(3) “Home occupation” has the same meaning as that term is defined in the Burien Zoning Code but, for purposes of this chapter, includes businesses based in a dwelling unit or an accessory building outside as well as inside the city.

(4) “Employee” means an individual, whether employed full-time or part-time, located within the city, either permanently or temporarily, on the payroll of the business at the time of application for the business license.

(5) “Business Licensing Service” or “BLS” means the office within the Washington State Department of Revenue providing business licensing services to the city of Burien. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 433 § 2, 2005; Ord. 360 § 1, 2002; Ord. 322 § 13, 2001; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 7, 1999]


5.05.060 Business license required.

Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, any person engaging in business within the city, whether any office or physical facility of such business shall be located within or outside the city, will first apply for and obtain a business license and pay the fees as prescribed herein. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 2, 2002; Ord. 322 § 14, 2001; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 8, 1999]


5.05.070 Separate licenses required. Revised 5/20

A separate business license must be obtained for each separate location within the city at which business is conducted by a person. A separate business license must be obtained by a person for each different and distinct business activity conducted by them, whether at the same location, within the city, as another licensed business activity, or at a different location within the city. If two or more persons each conduct a separate business at the same permanent physical location in the city, each such person must obtain their own separate business license or licenses for their respective business and/or multiple business activities at that location. A business with no permanent place of business within the city must obtain a business license even if such nonresident business delivers the same general type of goods or services to several locations within the city or performs the same general type of work at several locations within the city. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 3, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 9, 1999]


5.05.075 Notification of exemption or termination of business activities. Revised 5/20

(1) Every person who has obtained a business license required by this chapter and who thereafter ceases to engage in business within the city must, prior to expiration of the current business license, notify the Business Licensing Service and the city clerk that the business activities have ceased. Any business for which a license has been issued will be presumed to continue in operation within the city unless notice of termination of business activities has been given, and the city may commence applicable enforcement proceedings on the basis of such presumption.

(2) Every person who engages in business in the city, which is exempt or becomes exempt from the provisions of this chapter under federal, state, or local laws, must notify the Business Licensing Service and the city clerk of the exemption and the basis therefor. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010]


5.05.080 Change in nature or location of business. Revised 5/20

Each business license authorizes a particular type of business at the designated location. Any change in the nature of the business will require obtaining a new business license for the new activity, as provided for in this chapter, prior to engaging in the new business activity. A change of location must be reported to the Business Licensing Service sufficiently prior to the proposed change to allow the city clerk to review and approve the change prior to commencing business at the new location. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 10, 1999]


5.05.090 Exemptions from license requirement.

Notwithstanding the requirements of BMC 5.05.060, the following shall not be required to apply for and obtain a business license:

(1) Casual or isolated sales made by persons who are not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved, providing that not more than four such transactions are made during any tax year;

(2) Sales, delivery, or peddling of any fruits, vegetables, berries, eggs, or any farm produce or edibles raised, gathered, produced, or manufactured by any farmer, gardener, or other person;

(3) Minors engaged in babysitting, delivery of newspapers, mowing lawns, washing cars, and similar activities; and

(4) Any instrumentality of the United States, the state of Washington, or political subdivisions thereof, including but not limited to any county, city, or special purpose district, with respect to exercise of governmental functions. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 11, 1999]


5.05.091 Exemptions for nonprofit festivals.

(1) No license shall be required of any person who operates a business in conjunction with nonprofit community festivals, as approved by the city manager or designee; provided all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The business does not operate within the city more than three consecutive days;

(b) The business does not operate within the city more than 12 days in a calendar year; and

(c) The business is authorized to participate in the community festival by the sponsor of the festival.

(2) Any person claiming the exemption set forth in this section shall register with the city, on a form prescribed by the city manager or designee, each time he or she engages in business within the city, to track the number of days said person does business within the city. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010]


5.05.092 Exemptions – Fee waiver.

The licensing provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following persons and organizations; however, the business license fees shall be waived for:

(1) Any person or organization engaged in a not-for-profit (i.e., nonprofit) enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when it is without private profit, for a public, charitable, funding-raising, educational, literary, fraternal, or religious purpose when such persons sufficiently demonstrate their not-for-profit status through Internal Revenue Service documentation or other means acceptable to the city manager or designee; and

(2) For purposes of the license by this chapter, any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the city shall submit a business license registration to the director or designee. The threshold does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit. [Ord. 702 § 1, 2018; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010]


5.05.100 License – Application. Revised 5/20

(1) No business license will be issued except upon application being made therefor through the Business Licensing Service prior to commencing business in the city. The application must include all information required for each license being requested, the total fees due for all licenses requested, and the application handling fee required by RCW 19.02.075.

(2) The city’s business license fee is nonrefundable unless the city manager or designee determines, in his or her sole discretion, that refunding a city license fee is in the best interests of the city. Upon the city’s approval of the application, the business license will be issued by the Business Licensing Service. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 4, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 12, 1999]


5.05.110 Business license fee. Revised 5/20

The city’s business license fees will be established by separate resolution of the city council. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 433 § 1, 2005]


5.05.120 Fee – Prorating. Revised 5/20

The city’s business license fee provided for in BMC 5.05.110 is for a full license year, but may be prorated as the city deems necessary, as set forth in BMC 5.05.160(2). [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 6, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 14, 1999]


5.05.130 General qualifications of licensees.

No license shall be issued to any of the following applicants:

(1) Any applicant who has been convicted of a crime which relates directly to the specific business for which the license is sought; provided, that the time elapsed between the conviction and the date of license application is less than five years for a felony conviction, and less than one year for a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor conviction.

(2) Any applicant who has suffered a civil judgment based upon fraud, misrepresentation, violation of the Washington Consumer Protection Act, or similar state or federal statutes, or any other judgment or cease and desist order, or consent degree, relating to business activities; provided, that the time elapsed between the entry of judgment and the date of application is less than two years.

(3) Any applicant who does not possess a current and valid state license for operation of their business, if a state license is required. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 15, 1999]


5.05.140 License – Grounds for suspension or revocation.

The city manager or designee may deny, suspend or revoke a business license, with cause. Cause for denial, suspension or revocation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) The license was procured by fraud or misrepresentation of fact;

(2) The licensee has failed to make timely payment of any amounts due to the city or failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinance including but not limited to the zoning code and other development regulations;

(3) The licensee, or licensee’s management personnel, has been convicted of a crime, or suffered civil judgment or consent decree which bears a direct relationship to the conduct of the business licensed pursuant to this chapter;

(4) The licensee, or licensee’s employees or agents, has violated any law or ordinance relating to the regulation of the business licensed pursuant to this chapter, or any other ordinance;

(5) The licensee has caused or permitted a public nuisance to exist;

(6) The licensee, or licensee’s employees or agents, has engaged in, has permitted or has acquiesced in unlawful activity on the business premises;

(7) The licensee has failed to pay a civil penalty or to comply with any notice and order of the city clerk; or

(8) The licensee’s continued conduct of the business will, for any other reason, result in a substantial danger to the public health, safety or welfare. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 16, 1999]


5.05.150 Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.

(1) Any person, firm or corporation whose license has been denied, suspended or revoked may appeal to the hearing examiner from such finding by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager or designee within 14 calendar days from the time such business was given notice of such denial, suspension or revocation.

(2) Appeals from the denial, suspension or revocation of a business license under this chapter will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 2.20 BMC. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 312 § 7, 2000; Ord. 281 § 17, 1999]


5.05.160 License – Term. Revised 5/20

(1) Business licenses issued are effective until the expiration date established by the Business Licensing Service, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the city, as provided in this chapter.

(2) All other licenses or permits as may be governed under other chapters of this title are effective for the license year of issuance, provided the term of licensure and the respective fee amount may be prorated as necessary. Such a license year will be effective until the expiration date established by the Business Licensing Service, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the city, as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 18, 1999]


5.05.170 License – Renewal. Revised 5/20

Application for renewal of all business licenses must be made on or before the expiration date established by the Business Licensing Service if the business is to continue.

(1) Application for renewal is made through the Business Licensing Service. A business which has timely applied for renewal of such license may remain in business under its existing license until such time as the renewal license is either approved or denied.

(2) The renewal application must include all information required for all licenses being renewed, the total fees for all licenses, and the renewal application handling fee required by RCW 19.02.075, as it may be amended.

(3) The term of the license and the respective fee amount may be prorated as necessary to allow synchronizing the expiration date with the expiration of the business license account maintained by the Business Licensing Service.

(4) Failure to submit the complete license renewal by the expiration date will incur the late renewal penalty required by RCW 19.02.085, in addition to all other fees due.

(5) Failure to complete the license renewal within 120 days after the license expiration will result in the cancellation of the license, and will require submission and approval of a new license application if business is to be continued within the city, and may incur other penalties as imposed by the city under other provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 7, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 19, 1999]


5.05.180 Penalty for late application. Revised 5/20

Any applicant who commences business in the city prior to approval of the initial license application will be subject to a city-imposed penalty equal to the initial business license fee, in addition to the actual license fee if the application is 30 or more days delinquent. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 8, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 20, 1999]


5.05.190 Administrative rules and regulations. Revised 5/20

The city manager or designee is authorized but not required to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and any other business license or regulation ordinance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of these rules and regulations. All such rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee shall be reduced to writing, shall be provided by the city to the licensee with each new or renewal business license upon request, or shall be mailed to each licensee for information of the licensee and the licensee’s employees and agents. Such rules and regulations shall also be available for public inspection at the offices of the city manager or designee. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 21, 1999]


5.05.200 Licenses – General provisions. Revised 5/20

(1) Exemptions. The license fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business, firm or corporation which the city is forbidden to tax by law.

(2) Renewal. The city manager or designee is authorized, but not required, to mail to businesses forms for application for licenses, but failure of the business to receive any such form shall not excuse the business from making application for and securing the license required and payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder.

(3) Penalties.

(a) Collection. Any license fee, penalty or tax due and unpaid and delinquent under this chapter, and all penalties thereon, may be collected by civil action, which remedy shall be in addition to any and all other existing remedies and penalties.

(b) Nuisance. Any business failing to obtain or maintain a business license and yet conducting business within the city limits of the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is subject to applicable enforcement provisions for nuisances contained in the Burien Municipal Code or otherwise at law.

(c) Beginning with the 2002 – 2003 license period, if any person engaged in business fails or refuses to pay the license fee for any year as herein provided, he shall not be granted a license for the current year until such delinquent license fees as set forth in BMC 5.05.180 have been paid, in addition to the current year’s required fee. Such fees may be collected by the city by proper legal action brought for that purpose if any person engaged in business fails or refuses to pay the license fee. This remedy is cumulative and not exclusive.

(d) Criminal Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by any other business license or regulation ordinance, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(4) Appeal of Assessed Fee.

(a) Any business aggrieved by the amount of the fee found by the city manager or designee to be required under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the hearing examiner from such assessment by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager or designee within 15 days from the time such business was given notice of such amount.

(b) The city manager or designee shall, as soon as practicable, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, which time shall be not more than 30 days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city manager or designee shall cause a notice of the time and place thereof to be mailed to the appellant.

(c) At the hearing the business shall be entitled to be heard and to introduce evidence in its own behalf. The hearing examiner before which the appeal is to be heard may, by subpoena, require the attendance of any person and may also require them to produce any pertinent books and records. Any person served with such subpoena shall appear at the time and place therein stated and produce the books and records required, if any, and shall testify truthfully under oath administered by the hearing examiner as to any matter required of them pertinent to the appeal, and it shall be unlawful for them to fail or refuse so to do.

(d) The hearing examiner shall ascertain the correct amount of the fee and make a written finding, supported by the record. The written finding will be sent to the city and the business.

(e) Failure of any business to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing to contest the amount of the assessed fee.

(f) Any business aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may seek review of that decision in the superior court of the state of Washington for King County by application for writ of certiorari, or other judicial review, within 20 calendar days following the decision of the hearing examiner. If the aggrieved party fails to obtain such judicial review within 20 calendar days following the hearing examiner’s decision, the city attorney may invoke the aid of the appropriate court to secure enforcement and compliance with the hearing examiner’s decision.

(g) Enforcement of any fee assessment will be stayed during the pendency of any timely appeal therefrom.

(5) Statute of Limitations for Unlicensed Businesses. No penalties shall be imposed or remedies sought under subsection (3) of this section more than three years following the close of the license year in which there is noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, commencing with the license year ending July 31, 2002. The previous sentence shall not apply if the city shows that the business’s operation without a business license resulted from such business’s willful intent to operate its business without a new or renewal business license.

(6) Assignability and Transferability of the Business License. A business license is personal and not transferable or assignable. In the case of a change in ownership of a business, the new owner must obtain their own business license, as provided for in this chapter, prior to commencing business in the city under the acquired business. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 9, 2002; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 22, 1999]


5.05.210 Independent contractors to be licensed. Revised 5/20

Any person, firm or corporation doing business in Burien may not employ the services of any independent contractors who have not first obtained a Burien business license under the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 23, 1999]


5.05.220 Confidentiality of information. Revised 5/20

The current provisions of RCW 82.32.330, RCW 19.02.115, and subsequent amendments thereof are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 24, 1999]


5.05.230 Business license fee owed in 2000.

Repealed by Ord. 538. [Ord. 318 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 § 25, 1999]


5.05.240 Required – Display. Revised 5/20

It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business activity in the city without first procuring a license as provided in this chapter. The license must thereafter be prominently displayed, and visible to the public, in the place of business for which it was issued. [Ord. 735 § 1, 2020; Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 360 § 10, 2002]


5.05.250 Inspections – Right of entry.

The city manager, or designee, may make such inspections of licensed premises and take such action as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of any business license ordinance. The city manager may designate any appropriate city employees, including the code enforcement officer and commissioned police officers, to undertake such inspections. Inspections shall, to the extent possible, be in compliance with the following procedures:

(1) Whenever possible inspections will be conducted at a reasonable time and seek to minimize interference with lawfully conducted business in the licensed premises.

(2) If the place of business is occupied, the inspector shall first present proper credentials and request entry and right to inspect.

(3) If the place of business is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the licensee or other person having charge or control of the premises, by at a minimum checking city and county records, and shall then present proper credentials and request entry and right to inspect.

(4) No licensee, employee, or agent, shall fail or neglect, after proper request, to admit the inspector, acting within the scope of the inspector’s employment, to any location licensed for business, or to interfere with the inspector while in the performance of the inspector’s duty.

(5) Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit undercover investigations or inspections by appropriate officers in appropriate circumstances, provided such investigations or inspections are conducted consistent with constitutional and legal requirements. [Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010]


Chapter 5.10 SPECIAL ACTIVITIES LICENSES AND PERMITS Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.10.010    Definitions.

5.10.020    Prohibited activities – Exemptions.

5.10.030    Application and fees required.

5.10.040    Regulations – Generally. Revised 5/20

5.10.050    Repealed.

5.10.060    Regulations – Public dance places/public youth dances.

5.10.070    Regulations – Pawnbrokers.

5.10.080    Regulations – Charitable solicitations.

5.10.090    Regulations – Outdoor entertainment.

5.10.100    Regulations – Peddlers/transient sales representatives and ice cream vendors.

5.10.110    Fee – Prorating.

5.10.120    License – Term.

5.10.130    License – Renewal.

5.10.140    License – Penalty for late application.

5.10.150    License – General provisions.

5.10.160    Required – Display.


5.10.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Amusement place” means an amusement, diversion, entertainment, show, performance, exhibition, display or like activities, for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public, held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. By way of illustration and not limitation, “public places of amusement” includes live entertainment, music (other than mechanical), boxing or wrestling, exhibition skating, bowling alleys, amusement parks, and carnivals.

(2) “Billiard or pool table place” means any establishment engaged primarily in the business of offering the use of pool or billiard tables for a commercial purpose.

(3) “Billiard table” means a raised oblong felt-covered table with raised cushioned edges, or any substantially similar device on which is played the game known as billiards or pool involving the use of a long tapering stick called a cue to propel pool or billiard balls.

(4) “Charitable” means and includes the words “patriotic,” “philanthropic,” “social service,” “welfare,” “benevolent,” “educational,” “civic” or “fraternal,” either actual or purported; provided, such term shall not include “religious” and “religion,” which terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.

(5) “Contributions” means and includes alms, food, clothing, money, credit, subscription, property, financial assistance or other thing of value and including any donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.

(6) “Direct gift” means and includes an outright contribution of food, clothing, money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value to be used for a charitable or religious purpose and for which the donor receives no consideration or thing of value in return.

(7) “Endorsement” shall mean the licensing approval given to one activity.

(8) “Ice cream vendor” means all persons, both principals and agents, as well as employers and employees, who shall sell, offer for or expose for sale ice cream products in the city of Burien by going up and down residential or commercial streets or from place to place.

(9) “Outdoor musical entertainment” means an entertainment, amusement, or assembly of persons wherein the primary purpose will be the presentation of outdoor, live or recorded musical entertainment or other entertainment which the person, persons, or corporation, organization, landowner or lessor believes or has reason to believe will attract 250 or more persons and where a charge or contribution is required for admission.

(10) “Pawnbroker” means and includes every person who takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange goods, wares, or merchandise or any kind of personal property whatsoever, for the repayment of security of any money loaned thereon, or to loan money on deposit of personal property, or who makes a public display of any sign indicating that he has money to loan on personal property on deposit or pledge.

(11) “Pawnshop” means every place at which the business of a pawnbroker is being carried on.

(12) “Peddler” or “transient sales representative,” unless otherwise exempt under the provisions of this chapter, shall be defined as follows:

(a) All persons, both principals and agents, as well as employers and employees, who shall sell, offer for or expose for sale, or who shall trade, deal or traffic in any personal property or services in the city by going from house to house or from place to place or by indiscriminately approaching individuals.

(b) Sales by sample or for future delivery, and executory contracts of sale by solicitors or peddlers are embraced within the preceding subsection; provided, however, that this chapter is not applicable to any salesperson or canvasser who solicits trade from wholesale or retail dealers within the city.

(c) Any person, both principals and agents, as well as employers and employees, who, while selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, stands in a doorway or any unenclosed vacant lot, parcel of land or in any other place not used by such person as a permanent place of business.

(13) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.

(14) “Pool table” means a billiard table with a pocket in each corner and at the middle of both sides, used for playing pool, the game wherein numbered balls are propelled into the pockets by persons using a cue.

(15) “Promoter” means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize a campaign of solicitation, but shall not include either a bona fide full-time salaried officer or employee of a charitable organization whose salary or other compensation is not computed on funds raised or to be raised, or a temporary employee who is employed to contact volunteer workers by telephone but who may not himself solicit contributors directly.

(16) “Public dance” means any dance which is open to the public and which is held and conducted for a profit, direct or indirect.

(17) “Public dance place” means any place where a public dance is conducted, operated or maintained and any and all areas attached to or adjacent to such premises including, but not limited to, all parking areas, hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining areas on the premises accessible to the public during the dance.

(18) “Public youth dance” means any public dance that is readily accessible to the public and which permits the entry of any persons under the age of 18 years. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “public dance” shall be construed so as to include all public youth dances except where specifically indicated otherwise.

(19) “Sale and benefit affair” means and includes, but is not limited to, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, circus, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering, theater, or variety show, which the public is requested to patronize or attend or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith.

(20) “Secondhand goods” means and includes any and all used, remanufactured, or secondhand goods purchased or kept for sale by a dealer in secondhand goods. Such term shall not be construed to include secondhand motor vehicles or boats.

(21) “Solicit” and “solicitation” mean the request within the city directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose, and includes:

(a) Any oral or written request;

(b) The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication;

(c) The making of any announcement to the press, by radio or television, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, circus, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering, theater or variety show, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith;

(d) The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, subscription, ticket, admission, article or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious organization, association or person is used or referred to in any such appeal or where in connection with any such sale any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose.

A “solicitation” shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same received any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this chapter. [Ord. 564 § 1, 2012; Ord. 459 § 1, 2006; Ord. 450 § 1, 2006; Ord. 367 § 3, 2002]


5.10.020 Prohibited activities – Exemptions. 

(1) Peddlers and transient sales representatives, as defined in BMC 5.10.010, are prohibited within the city limits unless they comply with the licensing requirements and other regulations in BMC 5.10.100, except that the following activities are not prohibited and are not required to comply with said licensing requirements and other regulations:

(a) Farmers who peddle agricultural, horticultural, or farm products which they have actually grown, harvested or produced;

(b) Any person who is specifically requested by a potential buyer to visit or call for the purpose of displaying or purchasing goods, literature or giving information about any article, service or product;

(c) Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations which have received tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) or other similar civic, charitable or nonprofit organizations;

(d) Newspaper carriers;

(e) Peddlers operating at any city-sponsored or authorized civic event for a time period not to exceed five consecutive days, so long as each peddler’s name, address and telephone number is submitted to the city, in advance of the civic event, to be maintained in the city records;

(f) Peddlers operating at a Saturday market or other city-sponsored or approved activity so long as the activity does not occur more than one time per week for more than five months of each calendar year; and provided further, that the name, address and telephone number of each peddler is provided in advance to the city of Burien to be maintained in the city records;

(g) Sales conducted as “fund-raisers” for youth athletic, scouting, or educational organizations. By way of illustration and not limitation, these organizations may include Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, youth soccer, basketball, football, softball, and other youth athletic organizations. [Ord. 564 § 2, 2012; Ord. 459 § 2, 2006; Ord. 367 § 4, 2002]


5.10.030 Application and fees required.

(1) Any person desiring to establish or conduct the following enterprises, businesses, or undertakings within the corporate limits of the city shall first apply to the city for a license or permit to conduct such activity:

(a) Amusement places;

(b) Pool and billiard table places;

(c) Public dance places, except that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to public youth dances provided by charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations which have received tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3);

(d) Pawnbrokers, except that the requirements of this chapter do not apply to the following:

(i) Dealers of prepackaged rebuilt automotive parts;

(ii) Persons exempted from the regulations set forth in Chapter 46.70 RCW, relating to the sale of used automobiles, and Chapter 46.80 RCW, relating to auto wrecking;

(iii) Those persons engaged in the purchase and/or sale of bottles, cans, or paper as part of the process of recycling such bottles, cans or paper;

(iv) Those persons conducting a sale of secondhand goods under any legal forfeiture, foreclosure, liquidation, or any repossession pursuant to any terms of any contract or sale or incidental to any legal action;

(e) Charitable solicitations, except the requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(i) Solicitations by any organization operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such organization are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies, meetings or services of any such organization;

(ii) Any charitable organization which does not solicit and collect contributions in Burien in excess of $2,500 in any one-year period and where all of such fund-raising functions are carried on by persons who are unpaid for their services;

(f) Outdoor musical entertainment;

(g) Special events;

(h) Street use activities (see Chapter 12.17 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – General Provisions, and Chapter 12.18 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – Permits); 

(i) Ice cream vendors; and

(j) Peddlers/transient sales representatives.

(2) The application shall be upon a form furnished by the city.

(3) The application must be accompanied by a check, cash or money order for the amount of the license fee. The base fee for a single endorsement (except for street use activities) shall be $100.00. For street use activities, see Chapter 12.17 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – General Provisions, and Chapter 12.18 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – Permits. The city manager may, in his or her discretion, waive permit fees for activities that the city manager deems provide a significant public or community benefit and that are “nonprofit” activities as defined in the IRS Code Section 501(c)(3). [Ord. 564 § 3, 2012; Ord. 450 § 2, 2006; Ord. 367 § 5, 2002]


5.10.040 Regulations – Generally. Revised 5/20

The rules and regulations in BMC 5.10.060 through 5.10.100 apply to the activities listed in BMC 5.10.030 for which a special license is required. The special licenses required under this chapter are separate from and in addition to the business license issued under Chapter 5.05 BMC, which may also be required when applicable. [Ord. 735 § 2, 2020; Ord. 367 § 6, 2002]


5.10.050 Regulations – Amusement device places.

Repealed by Ord. 450. [Ord. 367 § 6(A), 2002]


5.10.060 Regulations – Public dance places/public youth dances.

(1) Hours of Operation. No public dance or public dance hall shall be conducted, operated or maintained after the hour of 2:00 a.m.

(2) Public Dance/Public Youth Dance –License Application. The person desiring to conduct or operate a public dance or public youth dance shall be responsible for obtaining a license. The applicant shall complete a license application, which shall include the following: 

(a) The name (including any aliases or former names), address, day and evening telephone numbers and date of birth of the applicant. If the applicant is not a natural person, then this information shall be provided for both the applicant (excepting date of birth) and for the natural person making the application on behalf of the applicant. If the applicant is not a natural person, the applicant also shall provide the names (including any aliases or former names), addresses, day and evening telephone numbers and dates of birth of the limited partners, partners, owners, and principals of the applicant. 

(b) A statement of indemnification in a form provided by the city. 

(c) A statement from the applicant that any premises on which the applicant will conduct or operate any public or public youth dance will comply with all laws and other legal requirements, including but not limited to building, land use, health, planning and fire codes, and a statement that the applicant and any employee or agent thereof will, in the conduct of any all-ages dance, comply with all laws and other legal requirements, including but not limited to the building, land use, health, planning and fire codes. 

(d) A statement that neither the applicant, nor the natural person making the application on behalf of an applicant that is not a natural person, nor any limited partner, partner, owner or principal of an applicant that is not a natural person: (i) is currently the subject of a license suspension or revocation pursuant to BMC 5.05.140; (ii) has at any time been determined to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to Chapter 71.09 RCW or equivalent statute; or (iii) has been convicted within the 10 years preceding the filing of the license application of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating to the conduct of a public dance/public youth dance, including misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or misrepresentation.

(3) Approval or Denial of License Application – Grounds. A criminal background check will be required. The director shall grant a license unless the license applicant, or the natural person making the application on behalf of an applicant that is not a natural person, or any limited partner, partner, owner or principal of an applicant that is not a natural person: 

(a) Is currently the subject of a license suspension or revocation pursuant to BMC 5.05.140; or 

(b) Has, at any time, been determined to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to Chapter 71.09 RCW or equivalent statute; or 

(c) Has been convicted within the 10 years preceding the filing of such application of: 

(i) Any sexual crime involving a minor or child as a victim, including but not limited to: such crimes charged under Chapter 9.68A RCW (sexual exploitation of children), or Chapter 9A.44 RCW (sex offenses), or felony crimes charged under Chapter 9A.88 RCW (indecent exposure and prostitution), or such crimes included within RCW 9.94A.030(37) (sex offenses), or such crimes included within RCW 43.43.830(5) (crimes against children or other persons), or a crime for which a finding of sexual motivation has been made pursuant to RCW 9.94A.127, or extortion for sexual favors pursuant to RCW 9A.56.110; or

(ii) An attempt or conspiracy to commit any crime as set forth in subsection (3)(c) of this section, or of aiding and abetting such crime; or

(iii) Has, under circumstances not requiring license denial pursuant to subsections (3)(b) and (c) of this section, been convicted within the five years preceding the filing of such application of: 

(A) Any felony crime involving the unlawful manufacture, sale, delivery, dispensing, distribution, or the possession with intent to manufacture, sell, deliver, dispense or distribute a drug, legend drug, or controlled substance, including but not limited to those crimes charged under Chapter 69.41 RCW (legend drugs), Chapter 69.43 RCW (precursor drugs) and Chapter 69.50 RCW (Uniform Controlled Substances Act); or

(B) Any felony crime of violence as defined by RCW 9.41.010(11), a most serious offense as defined by RCW 9.94A.030 (27), a violent offense as defined by RCW 9.94A.030(44), or a felony with a deadly weapon finding or verdict under RCW 9.94A.125; or

(C) Any sexual offense, including but not limited to: a sex offense as defined by RCW 9.94A.030(37) or Chapter 9A.44 RCW, a crime for which a finding of sexual motivation has been made under RCW 9.94A.127, extortion to obtain sexual favors pursuant to RCW 9A.56.110, or sexual offenses included within RCW 43.43.830(5) (crimes against children or other persons), or felony crimes charged under Chapter 9A.88 RCW (indecent exposure and prostitution); or

(D) An attempt or conspiracy to commit any crime as set forth in subsection (3)(c) of this section, or of aiding and abetting such.

(4) Security Personnel. It shall be the obligation of every licensee under this chapter to insure: 

(a) That security personnel are employed and in attendance at all-ages dance venues during and following each all-ages dance, in order to maintain order and ensure compliance with the law. Specifically, every licensee must provide two persons who have received formal training in crowd control and event management, plus one additional person so trained for every 100 patrons admitted to the all-ages dance or all-ages dance venue in addition to the first 250 patrons so admitted. 

(b) Access – Peace Officers/Director. All peace officers of the city of Burien and/or the director shall have free access to all-ages dance venues when an all-ages dance is being conducted or operated for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 

(c) On-Site Manager. It shall be the obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to insure that at least one on-site manager is employed and in attendance at an all-ages dance venue during and following each all-ages dance, to be responsible for the direct operation and oversight of the dance and venue and supervision of other employees or workers. 

(5) Hours of Operation – Penalty. 

(a) Every person who knowingly or recklessly shall allow a person to enter or remain at a public youth dance in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It is the sole responsibility of the person or entity conducting and/or operating a public youth dance to require identification showing the age of each person admitted. 

(b) Public Youth Dance – Readmission Fee. No person or entity conducting or operating a public youth dance or public youth dance hall shall permit any person, other than an employee, to leave the dance or dance hall and return unless that person pays a readmission fee equal to, or greater than, one-half the original price of admission. [Ord. 367 § 6(B), 2002]


5.10.070 Regulations – Pawnbrokers.

(1) Limitation on Licensing. No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued which would increase the number of holders of such licenses to more than one for every 15,000 of population, according to the last preceding federal census; provided, that this population limitation shall not operate to prohibit the licensing of any pawnbroker duly licensed prior to the enactment of this chapter, if such pawnbroker is otherwise duly qualified.

(2) Records Required. Every pawnbroker shall maintain at his place of business a record in which he shall at the time of purchase of any secondhand goods enter, in the English language, written in ink, the following information:

(a) The date of the transaction;

(b) The name of the person or employee conducting the transaction and making the entries required herein;

(i) The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the business identification as designated by the Burien police department, or the name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee conducting the transaction and the location of the property;

(c) The printed name, signature, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, and address and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;

(i) The type and identifying number of identification used by the person with whom the transaction was made, which shall consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two pieces of identification issued by a government agency, one of which shall be descriptive of the person identified. At all times, one piece of current government-issued picture identification will be required;

(d) The address of the place from which the property was last removed;

(e) An accurate description of the property bought or consigned which shall include the name of the maker of such property or manufacturer thereof and the serial number, model number or name or initials, engraving, size, pattern, and color of stone or stones, or any other inscriptive or identifying marks, and in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, and type of action, and whether it is a pistol, rifle or shotgun; provided, that when the article received is furniture or the contents of any house or room, actually inspected on the premises where the sale is made, the general description of the property shall be sufficient; and

(f) The price or amount paid for the property purchased.

(3) Transcript Required. Upon request, every pawnbroker shall deliver to the Burien police department, at the close of every business week, a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions occurring during the preceding week. Secondhand goods taken on consignment or trade-in will be recorded in the same manner as goods purchased outright. These transactions shall be recorded on such forms as may be provided and in such format as may be required by the Burien police department. This information may be transmitted to the Burien police department electronically, by facsimile transmission, or by modem or similar device, or by delivery of computer disk subject to the requirements of and approval by the Burien police department.

(4) Duty to Report. It is also the duty of any pawnbroker having good cause to believe any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen, to report such act to the Burien police department immediately, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date and name of the person from whom the same was received by such pawnbroker.

(5) No Sale within 30 Days. No pawnbroker shall sell or dispose of any article received or purchased by him or permit the same to be removed from his place of business within 30 days after the receipt of such goods has been reported to the Burien police department as provided herein, except when the goods have been inspected by regular members of the Burien police department, and they have authorized the pawnbroker to dispose of such goods within a lesser period of time; provided, that consigned property sold at auction of a resale value of $75.00 or less need only be held for three days prior to sale.

(6) Certain Transactions Prohibited. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, his clerk or employee to purchase or receive any article or thing:

(a) Known by him to be stolen;

(b) From any person who is under 18 years of age;

(c) From a person who appears to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol;

(d) From any person who is known to be a thief, or a receiver of stolen property, or from any person who he has reason to suspect or believe to be such; or

(e) Where the manufacturer’s make, model or serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property has been removed, altered or obliterated.

(7) Stolen Property.

(a) Upon notification from a person claiming to be the rightful owner of an item of property that the item rightfully belongs to him, a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker shall not remove, sell or dispose of the item of property until the Burien police department verifies that the item of property is or is not an item of stolen property. If verified as an item of stolen property, the process set out in subsection (7)(b) of this section shall occur. If not verified as an item of stolen property, this item is released and the pawnbroker may remove, sell, or dispose of the item of property.

(b) Following notification from a law enforcement agency that an item of property has been reported as stolen, the pawnbroker shall hold that property intact and safe from alteration, damage, or commingling. The pawnbroker shall place an identifying tag or other suitable identification upon the property so held. Property held shall not be released for 120 days from the date of police notification unless released by written consent of the applicable law enforcement agency or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. In cases where the applicable law enforcement agency has placed a verbal hold on an item, that agency must then give written notice within 10 business days. If such notice is not received within that period of time, then the hold order will cease. The pawnbroker shall give a 20-day written notice before the expiration of the 120 days, then the hold on the property shall continue for an additional 120 days. The applicable law enforcement agency may renew the holding period for additional 120-day periods as necessary. After the receipt of notification from a pawnbroker, if an additional holding period is required, the applicable law enforcement agency shall give the pawnbroker written notice, prior to the expiration of the existing hold order. A law enforcement agency shall not place on hold any item of personal property unless that agency reasonably suspects that the item of personal property is a lost or stolen item. Any hold that is placed on an item will be removed as soon as practicable after the item on hold is determined not to be stolen or lost. [Ord. 450 § 4, 2006; Ord. 367 § 6(C), 2002]


5.10.080 Regulations – Charitable solicitations.

(1) Repealed by Ord. 564.

(2) Credentials. All persons to whom charitable solicitation permits have been issued shall furnish to each of their agents and solicitors credentials approved as to form by the city manager or his designee. Such credentials shall include the permit number, the name and telephone number of the permit holder, the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the applicant, and the name, address and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued, and the period of time during which the solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. The city manager or his designee may authorize the use of the identification approved by the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles for the State of Washington for any person or organization validly registered under the charitable solicitation law; provided the above information appears thereon. It is unlawful for any person to solicit under any such charitable solicitation permit without having in his possession the credentials required by this section. The credentials must be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited or to any Burien police officer or agent of the city manager or his designee.

(3) Written Receipts Required. Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a charitable solicitation permit shall, upon request, give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date and the amount received; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the express approval of the city manager or his designee.

(4) Repealed by Ord. 450.

(5) Repealed by Ord. 450.

(6) Religious Solicitations – Certificate of Registration – Required.

(a) No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within the city of Burien without a certificate of registration issued by the city manager or his designee; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to solicitations by any religious organization conducted among the members thereof by other officers or members voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or to solicitations for or collections of contributions at the regular assemblies, meetings or services of such organizations. Application for a certificate shall be made to the city manager or his designee upon forms provided by him. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed, and shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:

(i) The name and local address or headquarters of the person applying for the certificate;

(ii) If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant’s principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant’s records;

(iii) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;

(iv) The name and address of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed;

(v) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;

(vi) The method to be used in conducting the solicitation;

(vii) The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations;

(viii) The estimated cost of the solicitation;

(ix) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;

(x) A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds solicited by the applicant for religious purposes from the public pursuant to a certificate of registration hereunder, said statements giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof;

(xi) A detailed statement of the religious work being done by the applicant within Burien;

(xii) A statement to the effect that the certificate will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city of Burien or by any department or officer thereof.

(b) If, while any application is pending or during the term of any certificate granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city manager or his designee in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. 

(7) Religious Solicitations – Certificate of Registration – Regulations. Upon receipt of such application, the city manager or his designee shall issue the applicant a certificate of registration. The certificate shall remain in force and effect for a period of six months after the issuance thereof, and shall be renewed upon the expiration of this period upon the filing of a new application as provided for in BMC 5.10.030(1)(e) and (3). Certificates of registration shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the certificate, the date issued and a statement that the certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the city of Burien or by any of its departments or officers of the purpose or the person conducting the solicitation. All persons to whom certificates of registration have been issued shall furnish credentials to their agents and solicitors in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as set forth in subsection (2) of this section relating to credentials to solicit for charitable purposes. No person shall solicit under any such certificate of registration without such credentials in his possession, and such person shall, upon demand, present these credentials to any person solicited or to the city manager or his designee or to any police officer of Burien.

(8) Fraudulent Misrepresentation and Misstatements Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, misrepresentation, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city of Burien or in any application or report filed in connection therewith. [Ord. 564 § 4, 2012; Ord. 450 § 5, 2006; Ord. 367 § 6(D), 2002]


5.10.090 Regulations – Outdoor entertainment.

(1) Conditions for Permit Issuance. In addition to the provisions stated here, Chapter 12.17 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – General Provisions, and Chapter 12.18 BMC, Right-of-Way Use Code – Permits, shall apply.

(2) Sanitary Facilities. No permit shall be granted under BMC 5.10.030, unless the applicants obtain the written approval of the King County health department indicating that the applicants for the permit have complied with the health requirements of the department for like or similar facilities. The approval shall indicate the type and adequacy of water supply to be provided, the type and adequacy of toilet, waste collection and washing facilities to be provided, and if there is to be food served on the premises the type and adequacy of food preparation and food service facilities to be provided.

(3) Fire Prevention Standards. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant has shown that the Burien fire marshal has approved fire protection devices and equipment available at such assembly. Fire prevention standards shall be as set out in the Burien fire code. 

(4) Hours of Operation. No outdoor musical assembly shall be conducted in the city of Burien during the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; provided, that no license shall be issued for more than one 48-hour period ending at midnight. The participants shall be required to have cleared the licensed area and its immediate environs no later than 1:00 a.m. of each day of the licensed event. [Ord. 367 § 6(E), 2002]


5.10.100 Regulations – Peddlers/transient sales representatives and ice cream vendors.

(1) Generally.

(a) Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city clerk’s office a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city.

(b) All applications shall provide the following information on the application, with sufficient proof of identification:

(i) Name, date of birth and description of the applicant;

(ii) Address and telephone number;

(iii) A brief description of the business and the goods to be sold;

(iv) If employed or acting as an agent, the name and address of the employer or principal, together with the description of the exact relationship with the principal or employer;

(v) A description of vehicle including the license number;

(vi) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

(vii) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime within the last 10 years, including misdemeanors, gross misdemeanors, or violations of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and punishment or penalty assessed therefor;

(viii) Such other information as may be required by the city.

(c) Any individual, corporation, partnership or other organization which acts as the principal or employer for individual peddlers/transient sales representatives or ice cream vendors shall obtain a permit as provided herein and shall provide the following information on the application in addition to any information required as set forth above:

(i) The applicant’s name, address and telephone number and names and addresses of all individuals who are employed by or acting as an agent for the applicant;

(ii) If a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the corporation’s board of directors, principal officers and registered agent; provided, however, that the city manager or his designee may waive any portion of this requirement when disclosure would be unduly burdensome;

(iii) If a partnership, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the partners;

(iv) A list of any criminal convictions during the past 10 years for the applicant, any owners of the business, and if a corporation, the board of directors and officers;

(v) Name, address and telephone numbers (business and home) of the individual, if applicable, acting as the manager for the applicants;

(vi) A list of all other cities, towns and counties where the applicant has obtained a peddler/transient sales or ice cream vendor license or permit or similar license or permit within the past five years; and

(vii) Such other information as may be required by the city.

(2) Investigation of Applicant – Issuance and Denial of Permit.

(a) The city clerk shall refer the application to the police department which shall determine the accuracy of the information contained in the application and conduct a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. Upon completion, the police department shall forward a recommendation for approval or denial to the finance department.

(b) If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the city clerk shall issue the permit to the applicant. The city clerk shall deny the applicant the permit if the applicant has:

(i) Committed any criminal act consisting of fraud or misrepresentations;

(ii) Committed any criminal act which, if committed by a permit holder, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit;

(iii) Within the previous 10 years, been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating to the occupation of peddler/transient sales representative or ice cream vendor, including, but not limited to, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or misrepresentation;

(iv) Been refused a permit under the provisions of this chapter; providing, however, that any applicant denied a permit under the provisions of this chapter may reapply if and when the reasons for denial no longer exist; or

(v) Made any false or misleading statement in the application.

(c) The denial of a permit to an individual, corporation, partnership or other organization which serves as the employer or principal for individual peddlers/transient sales representatives or ice cream vendors shall be a sufficient basis to deny a permit to the individual applicants who are employed by or acting as an agent for the applicant.

(3) Use of Streets. No peddler, transient sales representative, or ice cream vendor shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor be permitted a stationary location, nor be permitted to operate in any congested area where operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.

(4) Hours and Notice.

(a) No person shall engage in the business of ice cream vending between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 

(b) No person shall engage in the business of peddling or transient sales between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. or at any residence or business that has a clearly posted sign stating “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” or words to that effect. [Ord. 564 § 5, 2012; Ord. 367 § 6(J) – (M), 2002]


5.10.110 Fee – Prorating.

The special activity license fee provided in BMC 5.10.030 shall be for the license year, as set forth in BMC 5.05.160. If the special activity commences operations at any time on or after February 1st of a license year, the fee for such license year shall be equal to one-half the applicable fee irrespective of when during the period from February 1st to July 31st of such license year such business commences operations and each applicant must pay the full or partial fee for the current license year or any portion thereof during which the applicant has engaged in business. [Ord. 367 § 7, 2002]


5.10.120 License – Term.

All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for the license year of issuance, except that a special event license issued pursuant to BMC 5.10.030(1)(h) shall be valid only for the duration of the event for which the license was issued. A license year shall be from August 1st through the following July 31st. Licenses issued shall be effective from the date of issue until the following July 31st, unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 450 § 6, 2006; Ord. 367 § 8, 2002]


5.10.130 License – Renewal.

All special activity licenses shall be renewed on or before July 31st of the year following the year of issuance, and each succeeding year, if the business is to be continued. Application for renewal shall be made on forms prescribed by the city manager or designee. [Ord. 367 § 9, 2002]


5.10.140 License – Penalty for late application.

Any applicant or licensee who shall fail to make application for special license activities, or for renewal of existing special license activities prior to July 31st of the applicable year, shall be subject to a penalty equal to one-half of the endorsement fee, if the application or renewal special activity license fee is 30 or more days delinquent. [Ord. 367 § 10, 2002]


5.10.150 License – General provisions.

General business license provisions including exemptions, penalties, appeal processes, assignability and transferability as amended in BMC 5.05.200 shall apply to special activity licenses. [Ord. 367 § 11, 2002]


5.10.160 Required – Display.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business activity in the city without first procuring a license as provided in this chapter. The license shall thereafter be prominently displayed in the place of business of the applicant. [Ord. 367 § 12, 2002]


Chapter 5.15 AMUSEMENT PLACES

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.20 CLOSING-OUT SALES

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.25 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.30 FIREWORKS

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Sale of fireworks unlawful.

5.30.030    Permit required for public display of fireworks.

5.30.040    Discharge of fireworks prohibited.

5.30.045    Possession of fireworks unlawful.

5.30.050    Permit fee.

5.30.060    Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

5.30.070    Application for public display permit.

5.30.080    Standards for public fireworks displays.

5.30.090    Applicability.

5.30.100    Chapter in connection with state law.

5.30.110    Enforcement.

5.30.120    Penalty for violations.


5.30.010 Definitions.

The definitions of Chapter 70.77 RCW as now stated or hereinafter amended shall govern the construction of this chapter, when applicable, and are hereby adopted by this reference. A copy of the same shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for public use and inspection. In addition, the following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:

(1) “Property” shall mean private property, rented residential premises, or private rented commercial spaces, including but not limited to a home, yard, garage, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, or used for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

(2) “Responsible person” includes:

(a) The person(s) with the right to control the property at the time that the discharge of fireworks occurs, whether such control arises by ownership, lease, or other legal right and whether or not such person(s) are present at the time of such discharge;

(b) The person(s) in immediate control of property at which the discharge of fireworks takes place; or

(c) The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows, controls, or controls access to the discharge of fireworks. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 3, 1999]


5.30.020 Sale of fireworks unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to offer for retail sale or sell any fireworks within the city. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 490 § 1, 2008; Ord. 267 § 4, 1999]


5.30.030 Permit required for public display of fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in any public display of fireworks within the city without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid permit under the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 5, 1999]


5.30.040 Discharge of fireworks prohibited.

Except as authorized by a state license and city permit granted by the local fire official pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (public display) or RCW 70.77.311(2) (use by individual or group for religious or other specified purpose on approved date and at approved location), no person shall ignite, explode or discharge any fireworks within the city. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 490 § 2, 2008; Ord. 267 § 6, 1999]


5.30.045 Possession of fireworks unlawful.

Except as authorized by a state license and city permit granted by the local fire official pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (public display) or RCW 70.77.311(2) (use by individual or group for religious or other specified purpose on approved date and at approved location), it shall be unlawful for any person to control or possess any fireworks within the city. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 491 § 1, 2008]


5.30.050 Permit fee.

The annual fee for a “public display” permit for the public display of fireworks shall be $100.00, and shall be payable to King County Fire Protection District No. 2 or the North Highline Fire District, as appropriate. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 7, 1999]


5.30.060 Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

Each public display permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for the specific authorized public display event, shall be used only by the designated permittee, and shall be nontransferable. Any transfer or unauthorized use of a permit is a violation of this chapter and shall void the permit in addition to all other sanctions provided in this code. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 8, 1999]


5.30.070 Application for public display permit.

Applications for a permit to hold, conduct or operate a public display of fireworks shall be made to King County Fire Protection District No. 2 or North Highline Fire District, as appropriate, at least 14 days prior to the scheduled event. Applicants shall meet all qualifications and requirements of state law regarding public display of fireworks and all fire and safety requirements in the standards for public display set forth below. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 9, 1999]


5.30.080 Standards for public fireworks displays.

All public fireworks displays shall conform to the following minimum standards and conditions:

(1) All public fireworks displays must be planned, organized and discharged by a state-licensed pyrotechnician;

(2) A permit must be obtained from the fire chief or designee prior to any display of public fireworks. The permit shall include the name of the applicant and his address; the name of the pyrotechnician and his address; the exact location, date and time of the proposed display; the number, type and class of fireworks to be displayed; the manner in which the fireworks are being stored prior to the public fireworks display; and shall include the name and address of the insurance company providing the bond required;

(3) A drawing shall be submitted to the fire chief or designee showing a plan view of the fireworks discharge site and the surrounding area within a 500-foot radius. The drawing shall include all structures, fences, barricades, streets, fields, streams and any other significant factors that may be subjected to ignition or that may inhibit firefighting capabilities;

(4) The fire chief or designee may require that a fire department pumper and a minimum of two trained firefighters shall be on site 30 minutes prior to and after the discharge of any fireworks;

(5) All combustible debris and trash shall be removed from the area of discharge for a distance of 300 feet in all directions;

(6) All unfired or undischarged fireworks shall be disposed of in a safe manner;

(7) A minimum of two 2A-rated pressurized water fire extinguishers and one fire blanket shall be required to be at the fireworks discharge site;

(8) The permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the fire marshal or designee due to any noncompliance, or weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may also be canceled by accidental ignition of any form of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to falling debris from the display; and

(9) Areas of public access shall be determined by the fire chief or designee and maintained in an approved manner. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 10, 1999]


5.30.090 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the sale and use of all fireworks except “toy caps,” and as is otherwise exempt pursuant to RCW 70.77.311 as now stated or as may be amended. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 11, 1999]


5.30.100 Chapter in connection with state law.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW, and shall be construed in connection with that law and any and all rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 12, 1999]


5.30.110 Enforcement.

The fire chief, or designee, is authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter and, in addition to criminal sanctions or civil remedies, he may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon any failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with the orders and directives of the fire chief or designee, and/or to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other laws or regulations. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 267 § 13, 1999]


5.30.120 Penalty for violations.

(1) “Civil infraction” has the meaning given that term by Chapter 7.80 RCW, as now or hereafter amended, and the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (“IRLJ”) and any local rule adopted thereto by the King County district court, as they may be now or hereafter amended.

(2) Except as provided below, any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment of up to 90 days or imposition of a fine of up to $1,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(3) Except as allowed under BMC 5.30.080, Standards for public fireworks displays, the possession of fireworks by an individual, group, or organization shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of $500.00 for each violation.

(4) Except as allowed under BMC 5.30.080, Standards for public fireworks displays, the discharge of fireworks by any responsible person shall be a civil infraction with a penalty of:

(a) Five hundred dollars for the first violation.

(b) Two thousand five hundred dollars for the second violation.

(c) Five thousand dollars for the third and subsequent violations.

(5) For purposes of this section, the term “individual” means a natural person and excludes any firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. [Ord. 710 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 491 § 2, 2008]


Chapter 5.35 MASSAGE PARLORS AND BATH HOUSES

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.40 TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.45 JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.50 SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS

(Repealed by Ord. 367)


Chapter 5.55 TAXICABS AND FOR-HIRE VEHICLES Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.55.100    Appointment of licensing and enforcement authority. Revised 5/20

5.55.200    Licensing and regulation of taxicab and for-hire vehicles – Adopted by reference.

5.55.300    Penalty for violations.


5.55.100 Appointment of licensing and enforcement authority. Revised 5/20

Pursuant to an interlocal agreement, the director of the King County department of executive service, as it exists or may be renamed, and his or her authorized representatives, are delegated the power to determine eligibility for licenses and the power to deny, suspend, or revoke licenses, pursuant to terms of this chapter. A copy of the interlocal agreement shall be available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. The licenses or permits so issued under the terms of this chapter are separate from and in addition to the Burien business license issued under Chapter 5.05 BMC, which may also be required when applicable. [Ord. 735 § 3, 2020; Ord. 12 § 1, 1993]


5.55.200 Licensing and regulation of taxicab and for-hire vehicles – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 6.64 KCC as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are hereby adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances:

KCC

6.64.010    Definitions.

6.64.020    Taxicab and for-hire license – Applications.

6.64.030    Taxicabs, maximum number.

6.64.040    Color scheme.

6.64.050    Expiration of licenses and license fees.

6.64.060    Unlawful to operate taxicab or for-hire vehicles without liability insurance.

6.64.070    King County taxicab or for-hire license plates.

6.64.080    Duplicate license plates.

6.64.090    Rates.

6.64.100    Display of taxicab or for-hire vehicle number.

6.64.110    Taximeter.

6.64.120    Installation of taximeters.

6.64.130    Flag to be proper position.

6.64.140    Classification and capacity.

6.64.150    Driver’s license.

6.64.160    Trip sheets.

6.64.170    Display of license.

6.64.180    Inspection of taxicab or for-hire vehicles.

6.64.190    Direct route of travel.

6.64.200    Unlawful not to pay fare.

6.64.210    Leaving taxicab or for-hire vehicle unattended.

6.64.220    Baggage.

6.64.230    Two-way radio dispatch.

6.64.240    Discontinued use as taxicab or for-hire vehicle.

6.64.250    Solicitation of fares or carrying non-paying passengers or pets of driver.

6.64.260    Condition of driver.

6.64.270    Suspension – Revocation of for-hire driver’s license.

6.64.280    Licensing fees.

6.64.290    For-hire driver’s license required – Application.

6.64.300    Qualifications for a for-hire driver’s license.

6.64.310    Seattle-King County Health Department.

6.64.320    Fingerprints and photographs to accompany application.

6.64.330    Investigation of applicants for driver’s license.

6.64.340    Temporary permit.

6.64.345    Required training.

6.64.350    Issuance of for-hire driver’s license.

6.64.360    Expiration and renewals of for-hire driver’s license.

6.64.370    For-hire driver’s license fee.

6.64.380    Damaged or worn-out for-hire driver’s licenses to be replaced.

6.64.390    Identification of drivers.

6.64.400    Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

6.64.420    Civil penalty.

6.64.430    Additional enforcement.

6.64.440    Scope of authority.

6.64.470    Moratorium.

6.64.480    Transfer of permit.

6.64.490    Driving record.

6.64.500    Passenger complaints process.

6.64.510    Industry reporting.

6.64.520    Response times.

6.64.530    Annual report.

6.64.540    Annual determination of fares and number of licenses.

6.64.550    Interlocal agreement.

6.64.560    Severability.

6.64.570    Taxicab Commission. 

[Ord. 12 § 2, 1993]


5.55.300 Penalty for violations.

Any person who violates or fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 12 § 3, 1993]


Chapter 5.60 CABLE SYSTEM REGULATIONS Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.60.010    Definitions.

5.60.020    Franchise grant. Revised 5/20

5.60.030    Franchise purposes.

5.60.040    Nonexclusive franchise.

5.60.050    Application.

5.60.060    Duration.

5.60.070    Franchise territory.

5.60.080    Police powers.

5.60.090    Use of rights-of-way.

5.60.100    Pole or conduit agreements.

5.60.110    Franchise fees.

5.60.120    Taxes.

5.60.130    Customer service standards.

5.60.140    Other authorizations.

5.60.150    Rules and regulations of the city.

5.60.160    Delegation of powers.

5.60.170    Coverage.

5.60.180    Technical standards.

5.60.190    Construction standards.

5.60.200    Street cut or repair.

5.60.210    Safety requirements.

5.60.220    Regulation of rates and charges.

5.60.230    Privacy.

5.60.240    Discriminatory practices prohibited.

5.60.250    Equal employment opportunity.

5.60.260    Reimbursement.

5.60.270    Franchise renewal.

5.60.280    Franchise revocation.

5.60.290    Acceptance.

5.60.300    Miscellaneous provisions.


5.60.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number.

(1) “Applicant” means any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.

(2) “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as any of them may be amended.

(3) “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons, including a franchisee, who provide(s) cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system or who otherwise control(s) or is (are) responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.

(4) “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to customers of video programming or other programming service, and customer interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(5) “Cable system” means any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple customers within a community, but such term does not include (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves customers without using any public right-of-way; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) (47 U.S.C. 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to customers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (d) an open video system that complies with federal statutes and regulations; or (e) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

(6) “City” means the city of Burien, a municipal corporation of the state of Washington, and all of the area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time.

(7) “City council” means the Burien city council, or its successor, the governing body of the city.

(8) “Customer” means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by a franchisee by means of or in connection with the cable system and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to receive cable service from a franchisee’s cable system.

(9) “Customer service representative” or “CSR” shall mean any person employed by the cable operator to assist or provide service to customers, whether by answering public telephone lines, answering customers’ questions or performing other customer service related tasks.

(10) “Customer service standards” means those customer service standards set forth herein and as hereafter amended that are applicable to cable operators.

(11) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

(12) “Franchise” means an agreement that authorizes a person or entity to construct, operate, maintain or reconstruct a cable system. Upon the written acceptance by a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract between the city and franchisee.

(13) “Franchise area” means the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city to be served by a franchisee as specified in the franchise.

(14) “Franchisee” means the person, firm, corporation or entity to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the city council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm, corporation or entity.

(15) “Normal business hours” shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the city are open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.

(16) “Normal operating conditions” shall mean those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

(17) “Right-of-way” or “rights-of-way” means all of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and are located within the city: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements and similar public property and areas.

(18) “Service interruption” shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. [Ord. 451 § 3, 2006]


5.60.020 Franchise grant. Revised 5/20

It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation or maintenance of a cable system in the city without a franchise issued under this chapter. The city council may, by ordinance, issue a nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or any portion of the city to any person or entity, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who applies for authority to furnish cable service which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter; and provided, that such person or entity also agrees to comply with all of the provisions of the franchise. However, this shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or entity. The city council may restrict the number of franchises should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest. The franchise required under this chapter is separate from and in addition to the business license issued under Chapter 5.05 BMC, which may also be required when applicable. [Ord. 735 § 4, 2020; Ord. 451 § 4, 2006]


5.60.030 Franchise purposes.

A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall:

(1) Permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating a cable system and providing cable service within the city;

(2) Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair, reconstruct, replace and retain wires, cables, related electronic equipment, conduits and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across rights-of-way within the city; and

(3) Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 5, 2006]


5.60.040 Nonexclusive franchise.

Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and not preclude the city from granting other or future franchises or permits. [Ord. 451 § 6, 2006]


5.60.050 Application.

(1) An applicant for an initial franchise shall submit to the city a written application in a format provided by the city, at the time and place specified by the city for accepting applications, and accompanied by the designated application fee. An application fee in the amount of $20,000 shall accompany the application to cover costs associated with processing the application, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, the costs of consultants, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. Conversely, if such costs are less than the application fee, the city shall refund the difference to the applicant.

(2) An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, at a minimum:

(a) A statement as to the proposed franchise and information relating to the characteristics and location of the proposed cable system;

(b) A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of the applicant in the cable system field;

(c) Information demonstrating the applicant’s legal, technical and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable system;

(d) A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, members, if a limited liability company, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation;

(e) A list of officers, directors and key employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background and experience of all such persons;

(f) The names and addresses of any parent entity or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;

(g) A proposed construction and service schedule;

(h) Any other reasonable information that the city may request.

The city shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow-up questions and obtain further information from whatever source. A refusal by an applicant to cooperate or provide requested information is sufficient grounds for the city to deny an application.

(3) Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after obtaining any additional information the city in its sole discretion deems appropriate from any source, a hearing shall be scheduled to allow public comment. At the hearing, the city council shall receive public comment regarding the following:

(a) Whether the public will benefit from granting a franchise to the applicant;

(b) Whether the applicant appears to have adequate legal, financial and technical qualifications and capabilities to build, operate and maintain a cable system in the city;

(c) Whether the applicant has any conflicting interests, either financial or commercial, that will be contrary to the interests of the city;

(d) Whether the applicant will comply with all of the terms and conditions placed upon a franchisee by the franchise, this chapter and other applicable local laws and regulations;

(e) Whether the applicant will comply with all relevant federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system.

(4) Within 60 days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The city council’s decision shall be based upon the application, any additional information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the city from any source and public comments. The city council may grant one or more franchises or may decline to grant any franchise. [Ord. 451 § 7, 2006]


5.60.060 Duration.

The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 8, 2006]


5.60.070 Franchise territory.

The franchise territory shall include all areas within the city or a lesser area as specified in the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 9, 2006]


5.60.080 Police powers.

In accepting any franchise, the franchisee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to such power. [Ord. 451 § 10, 2006]


5.60.090 Use of rights-of-way.

For the purposes of operating and maintaining a cable system in the city, a franchisee may place and maintain within the rights-of-way such property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system. Prior to construction of the cable system in the rights-of-way, the franchisee shall procure all necessary permits, pay all applicable fees in connection therewith and comply with all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and ordinances, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning requirements. [Ord. 451 § 11, 2006]


5.60.100 Pole or conduit agreements.

No franchise shall relieve a franchisee of any of its obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit agreements from any department of the city, any utility company or from others maintaining facilities in the rights-of-way. [Ord. 451 § 12, 2006]


5.60.110 Franchise fees.

The franchisee shall pay the city franchise fees in accordance with the terms of the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 13, 2006]


5.60.120 Taxes.

Nothing in this chapter shall limit the franchisee’s obligation to pay applicable local, state and federal taxes. [Ord. 451 § 14, 2006]


5.60.130 Customer service standards.

(1) Policy. A cable operator will first resolve customer inquiries and complaints without delay and without involvement of the city. Where a given complaint is not addressed by the cable operator to the customer’s satisfaction, the city may intervene.

These standards are intended to be of general application. A cable operator is free to exceed these standards for the benefit of its customers. However, the cable operator shall be relieved of obligations hereunder if it is unable to perform due to a force majeure event affecting a significant portion of the franchise area.

(2) Customer Service.

(a) Courtesy. All employees of the cable operator shall be courteous, knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory service in all contacts with customers.

(b) Availability and Accessibility – In Person. The cable operator must maintain, at a minimum, one bill payment location in Burien. The bill payment location shall be open Monday through Saturday, excluding legal holidays, with sufficient hours necessary to meet customer demand. If a bill payment location is required to relocate, the cable operator shall be allowed a reasonable period of time to establish a new location.

(c) Availability and Accessibility – On the Telephone. A CSR will be available to respond to customer inquiries during normal business hours. The cable operator shall maintain local or toll-free telephone access lines that shall be available during normal business hours for service/repair requests and billing inquiries.

The cable operator shall retain sufficient CSRs and telephone line capacity to ensure that, during normal operating conditions, telephone calls to service/repair and billing inquiry lines are answered within 30 seconds or less, and that any transfers are made within 30 seconds. This standard shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis under normal operating conditions. Under normal operating conditions, the total number of calls receiving busy signals shall not exceed three percent of the total telephone calls.

The cable operator shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with any of the telephone answering standards above unless and until the city requests such actions based on a historical record of customer complaints indicating a clear failure to comply.

(3) Responsiveness.

(a) The cable operator shall complete all standard installations within seven business days after an order has been placed, unless otherwise requested by the customer. “Standard” installations shall include those that are located within 125 aerial feet of the cable operator’s distribution system. This standard must be met 95 percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis. If the customer requests a nonstandard installation, or the cable operator determines that a nonstandard installation is required, the cable operator shall provide the customer in advance with a total installation cost estimate and an estimated date of completion.

(b) Under normal operating conditions, all temporary cable drops shall be converted to a permanent drop within no more than three calendar weeks from the initial installation or at a time mutually agreed upon between the cable operator and customer.

(c) Customers requesting installation of cable service or repair service to an existing installation may choose any available four-hour block of time for the appointment during normal business hours.

(d) The cable operator shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives within the agreed-upon time. If the customer is absent when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of timely arrival. A record that notice was provided shall be kept by the cable operator.

(e) If a cable operator representative fails to keep an installation or service appointment for any reason, the cable operator will contact the customer before the end of the scheduled appointment and reschedule the appointment at a time convenient for the customer.

(f) The cable operator shall respond to a customer’s letter in writing within one week of receipt of the letter. The cable operator shall respond to a customer’s inquiry, complaint, general question or comment made by telephone or e-mail within 48 hours.

(g) Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the CSR shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall use his/her best efforts to contact the customer within eight hours of initial contact and resolve the problem within a mutually agreeable timeframe.

(4) Repairs and Outages.

(a) The cable operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions that the cable operator anticipates will last more than four hours shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable system as reasonably determined by the cable operator.

(b) If a customer calls to report poor signal quality or interruptions attributable to the cable operator’s equipment, the cable operator shall begin working on the problem no later than the next day following the customer’s call; provided, that the customer is available or at such later time as is convenient for the customer. If an appointment is necessary, the customer may choose a four-hour block of time during normal business hours or such other time that is convenient for the customer.

(c) Upon discovery of an outage affecting three or more customers, the cable operator shall initiate its outage repair process within two hours, under normal operating conditions.

(d) A cable operator shall initiate repairs to customer-reported service interruptions, for any cause beyond the control of the cable operator, within 24 hours after the conditions beyond its control have been corrected.

(e) Under normal operating conditions, if after 24 hours service is not restored to a customer, a cable operator shall, upon a customer’s request, provide a refund or credit or other compensation of equal or greater value.

(f) The cable operator will track and record all outages and service interruptions that occur within the franchise area.

(g) The cable operator shall endeavor to notify the city the next business day of any outage of at least one continuous hour that affects 100 or more of its customers.

(5) Bills, Credits, Refunds and Deposits.

(a) The cable operator shall provide a clear and concise bill every month.

(b) If a customer requests disconnection of any or all services, billing for affected services shall end on the same day as the request, or on the future date for which the disconnect is ordered. However, the customer may continue to be billed for equipment until returned to the cable operator. The cable operator shall issue a credit or refund to a customer within 30 business days after the close of the billing cycle following the return of the equipment and request for disconnection. If a customer was required to provide a deposit, that deposit must be returned with any interest accrued on the deposit.

(6) Treatment of Property Owner’s Property.

(a) Removal or trimming of trees and shrubs in the right-of-way will be subject to the regulations of the city.

(b) The cable operator shall repair any damage or restore any property to as good a condition as before the work causing such damage or disturbance was initiated. The cable operator shall repair, replace or compensate all property owners for damages resulting from the cable operator’s installation, construction, service or repair activities.

(c) Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service interruption to a large number of customers, the cable operator shall give reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed; provided, that in the case of planned construction operations, such notice shall be delivered or provided at least 24 hours prior to entry. All work done in the right-of-way shall be subject to time requirements of the permit.

(d) Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to private property, or any other property, where such right to access or entry is not otherwise provided by law.

(e) For the installation of pedestals or other major construction or installation projects, the cable operator shall notify by mail or door hanger the adjacent property owners/legal tenants in advance of the right-of-way work. In the case of an emergency, the cable operator shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and in the event personal contact is not made, the cable operator shall leave a door hanger notice.

(f) The cable operator shall clean all areas surrounding any work site of debris caused by the cable operator’s activities and ensure that all cable materials are disposed of properly.

(7) Services for Customers with Disabilities.

(a) For any customer with a disability, the cable operator shall at no charge deliver and pick up converters at the customer’s home. In the case of malfunctioning equipment, the cable operator’s service technician shall provide and install substitute equipment, ensure that it is working properly and recover the defective equipment for the cable operator at that time.

(b) The cable operator shall provide TDD/TYY service with trained operators who can provide every type of assistance for any hearing-impaired customer at no charge.

(c) The cable operator shall provide free use of a remote control unit to mobility-impaired customers.

(d) Any customer with a disability may request the remote control unit or special services described above by providing the cable operator with a letter from the customer’s physician stating the need, any other official certification of disability or by making the request to the cable operator’s installer or service technician, where the need for the special equipment or services can be visually confirmed.

(8) Customer Information.

(a) The cable operator shall provide to customers an accurate, comprehensive service agreement and customer installation packet for use in establishing customer service. The installation packet shall also be provided during any reconnection or cable service upgrade requiring a home visit by the cable operator (excluding reconnections to the same customer within 12 months). Upon installation and annually thereafter or at any time the customer requests, the cable operator shall provide the following information, in clear, concise written form:

(i) Products and services offered by the cable operator, including channel positions of programming carried on the cable system.

(ii) The cable operator’s complete range of service options and the prices for those services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.

(iii) Installation and service maintenance policies, including the customer’s and cable operator’s responsibilities for equipment.

(iv) Billing and complaint procedures for investigation and resolution of customer service complaints, including the address and telephone number of the cable operator’s office(s), the cable operator’s policies on deposits, credit balances and returned check charges.

(v) Policies concerning protection of customer privacy.

(vi) The availability of a parental control/lockout device and the procedures for channel blocking.

(vii) Days, hours of operation and the bill payment location.

(viii) Information on how to contact the city person who is responsible for administering the franchise including the address, telephone number and e-mail address.

(ix) Service termination procedure.

(x) A description of the manner that will be used to provide notice of changes in rates, services or service terms and conditions.

(xi) The address and phone number of the customer service department that is responsible for handling cable questions and complaints for the cable operator. This information shall be prominently displayed in the installation packet.

(b) Upon request by the city, a sample of the required notices provided to the customer shall be provided to the city.

(c) The cable operator shall provide customers with written notification of any changes in rates, programming, services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Customers shall be given a description of the changes, their options for changing services they receive, a phone number for questions and the effective date. Notice must be given to customers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable operator shall notify customers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the above subsection. Within 30 days following material policy changes, information regarding the changes will be provided to customers.

(d) All officers, agents and employees of the cable operator, its contractors and subcontractors who are in personal contact with customers shall have visible identification cards bearing their name and photograph.

(e) Every vehicle of the cable operator used for providing services to customers shall be clearly identified to the public as working for the cable operator.

(9) Safety.

(a) The cable operator shall install and locate its facilities, cable system and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local and company safety standards, and in such manner as shall not unduly interfere with or endanger persons or property.

(b) Whenever the cable operator receives notice that an unsafe condition exists with respect to its equipment, the cable operator shall investigate such condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove or eliminate any unsafe condition.

(10) Complaint Procedure.

(a) The cable operator shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving customer complaints, and crediting customer accounts in accordance with company policies, and shall publicize such procedures through printed documents at the cable operator’s sole expense.

(b) The written procedures shall describe a simple process by which any customer may submit a complaint in person or by telephone, electronic mail or by letter to the cable operator regarding an alleged violation of any provision of these customer service standards, any terms or conditions of the customer’s contract with the cable operator or reasonable business practices.

(c) The cable operator will use its best efforts to resolve customer concerns or complaints at the first contact.

(d) The cable operator shall also notify the customer of the customer’s right to file a complaint with the city in the event the customer is dissatisfied with the cable operator’s decision.

(e) Complaints to the City. Any customer shall be entitled to lodge any complaint directly with the city. The customer may lodge the complaint either by calling the city or by filing a written complaint, by letter or in electronic form.

(f) If the city decides that further action is warranted, the city may intercede and attempt to help reach a resolution and/or require the cable operator to address the inquiry within 24 hours. Upon request by the city, the cable operator shall notify the city of the status of the inquiry within 48 hours and any subsequent resolution.

(g) The cable operator shall maintain, in a manner consistent with the privacy rights of customers, an accurate and comprehensive file of complaints regarding the cable system or the cable operator’s operation of the cable system, by number and type and their disposition; service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their disposition; outages, service interruptions and their disposition; and customer privacy information.

(h) Overall Quality of Service. The city may evaluate the overall quality of customer service provided by the cable operator to customers in the city, at its sole discretion, based on the number of customer complaints received directly by the city or reported by the cable operator in its reports.

(11) Verification of Compliance. Upon written request by the city, the cable operator shall document its compliance with all of the standards required through quarterly reports.

(12) Noncompliance with Standards. Noncompliance with any provision of these standards may result in a violation of the franchise.

(13) Remedying Violations. If the city has reason to believe that the cable operator has failed to comply with any of these standards, or has failed to perform in a timely manner, or if similar complaints repetitively arise, the city may require in writing that the cable operator remedy the alleged noncompliance. If the alleged noncompliance is denied or not remedied to the satisfaction of the city, the city may opt to follow the liquidated damages procedures or seek other remedies set forth in the franchise, or pursue any other remedies at law or in equity. [Ord. 456 § 1, 2006; Ord. 451 § 15, 2006]


5.60.140 Other authorizations.

The franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits, licenses and other authorizations required by federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and applicable resolutions and ordinances which are now existing or hereafter lawfully adopted. [Ord. 451 § 16, 2006]


5.60.150 Rules and regulations of the city.

In addition to the inherent powers of the city to regulate and control any franchise it issues, the authority granted to it by the Cable Act, and those powers expressly reserved by the city, or agreed to and provided for in a franchise, the right and power is reserved by the city to promulgate such additional rules and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a franchise and this chapter, and as permitted by applicable state and federal law. [Ord. 451 § 17, 2006]


5.60.160 Delegation of powers.

Any right or power of the city may be delegated by the city to any officer, employee, department or board of the city, or to such other person or entity as the city may designate to act on its behalf. [Ord. 451 § 18, 2006]


5.60.170 Coverage.

The franchisee shall design, construct and maintain its cable system to pass every residential dwelling unit in the franchise area, subject to any density requirements contained within the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 19, 2006]


5.60.180 Technical standards.

The franchisee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, FCC technical standards and any other applicable standards set forth in the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 20, 2006]


5.60.190 Construction standards.

(1) All facilities constructed or operated under this chapter shall be installed and maintained at such places in or upon such rights-of-way and public places as shall not interfere with the free passage of traffic and the free use of adjoining property, and shall conform to federal standards, state requirements and city regulations.

(2) The franchisee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the city with regard to the placement and screening of the franchisee’s facilities and equipment located in the rights-of-way and on other public property. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to, the use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and a requirement that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area.

(3) The franchisee shall comply with any applicable ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city regarding geographic information systems mapping for users of the rights-of-way; provided, that all similarly situated users of the rights-of-way must also accordingly comply. [Ord. 451 § 21, 2006]


5.60.200 Street cut or repair.

The franchisee shall guarantee the durability and structural integrity of any street cut or repair made by it or its agents which is necessary for the construction, installation, operation, repair or maintenance of the franchisee’s facilities for the life of the street; provided, that no action by an unrelated third party materially affects the integrity of the franchisee’s street cut or repair. The franchisee shall repair or replace, at no expense to the city, any failed street cut or repair which was completed by the franchisee or the franchisee’s agent(s), as determined by the city. [Ord. 451 § 22, 2006]


5.60.210 Safety requirements.

The franchisee shall, at all times, employ professional care and install, maintain and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. In furtherance thereof, the franchisee must comply with the city’s traffic control requirements, including, for example, but without limitation, the use of signal devices, warning signs and flaggers when appropriate. All of the franchisee’s structures, cables, lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the rights-of-way and public ways or other places in the franchise area, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe condition. [Ord. 451 § 23, 2006]


5.60.220 Regulation of rates and charges.

The city may regulate the franchisee’s rates and charges to the full extent permitted by law. [Ord. 451 § 24, 2006]


5.60.230 Privacy.

The franchisee will be bound by all of the provisions of applicable federal, state and local privacy laws. [Ord. 451 § 25, 2006]


5.60.240 Discriminatory practices prohibited.

(1) The franchisee shall not deny cable service or otherwise discriminate against customers or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability or other protected classes.

(2) Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential customers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. [Ord. 451 § 26, 2006]


5.60.250 Equal employment opportunity.

The franchisee shall strictly adhere to and comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local laws. [Ord. 451 § 27, 2006]


5.60.260 Reimbursement.

To the extent allowed by applicable law, the city may require a franchisee to reimburse the city, up to a maximum of $20,000, for the city’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a sale or transfer of a franchise or a change in control of a franchise or franchisee, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee or controlling party, costs of consultants, notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. In connection with the foregoing, the city will send the franchisee an itemized description of all such charges, and the franchisee shall pay such amount within 30 days after the receipt of such description. [Ord. 451 § 28, 2006]


5.60.270 Franchise renewal.

Franchise renewals shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law. The city and the franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of a franchise. [Ord. 451 § 29, 2006]


5.60.280 Franchise revocation.

Any franchise granted by the city may be revoked during the period of such franchise, as provided in the franchise, subject to the procedural requirements provided for therein. A failure by the franchisee to comply with any of the material provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a material violation of a franchise. [Ord. 451 § 30, 2006]


5.60.290 Acceptance.

No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until a separate ordinance granting the same has become effective. Within 45 days after the adoption by the city council of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the city council in its discretion or franchise may authorize, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk its written and unconditional acceptance of the franchise. [Ord. 451 § 31, 2006]


5.60.300 Miscellaneous provisions.

(1) This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state and local laws, and shall apply to any franchise hereafter accepted by a franchisee.

(2) The captions throughout this chapter are intended to facilitate the reading hereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any part of this chapter.

(3) A franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any or all of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to demand prompt compliance.

(4) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all cable operators and cable systems to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law. [Ord. 451 § 32, 2006]


Chapter 5.62 RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION PROGRAM (RHIP)

Sections:

5.62.010    Purpose.

5.62.020    Applicability – Conflicts.

5.62.030    Definitions.

5.62.040    Scope.

5.62.050    Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

5.62.060    Denial or revocation of license – Appeal.

5.62.070    Certificates of inspection.

5.62.080    Notice that rental is unlawful when certificate not provided.

5.62.090    Other inspections.

5.62.100    Director is authorized to make rules.

5.62.110    Correction notice prior to enforcement.

5.62.120    Immediate health and safety threats.

5.62.130    Immunity, no warranty by city, and no private right of action.

5.62.140    Notice – Additional penalties.

5.62.150    Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.


5.62.010 Purpose.

The city of Burien finds that the establishment of a rental housing safety inspection program (“RHIP”) will protect the public health, safety, and welfare of tenants by encouraging the proper maintenance of rental housing by identifying and requiring correction of substandard housing conditions. By establishing this program, the city intends to prevent conditions of deterioration and blight that would adversely impact the quality of life in Burien. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.020 Applicability – Conflicts.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply in addition to the provisions of any other code provision or ordinance. Where there is a conflict, the more restrictive provision shall apply. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases have the meanings prescribed below:

(1) “Accessory dwelling unit or ADU” means a second, subordinate housing unit that is accessory to a single-family residence and which meets the definition and requirements of BMC 19.10.012.

(2) “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used for supporting or sheltering a use of any kind.

(3) “Building code” means all code provisions adopted in and throughout Chapter 15.40 BMC.

(4) “Business license” means a business license as required by Chapter 5.05 BMC.

(5) “Certificate of inspection” means the document signed and dated by a qualified rental housing inspector and submitted to the city as the result of an inspection conducted by a qualified rental housing inspector that certifies that the residential housing units that were inspected comply with the requirements and standards of this chapter.

(6) “Declaration of compliance” means a statement submitted to the city by the owner or the landlord that certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, after an on-site review of the conditions of the rental unit, each residential housing unit complies with the requirements and standards of this chapter.

(7) “Department” means the city of Burien department of community development.

(8) “Director” means the city of Burien department of community development director or his or her designee.

(9) “Fire code” means all code provisions adopted in and throughout Chapter 15.20 BMC.

(10) “Landlord” means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the rental unit or the rental property of which it is a part and, in addition, means any person designated as representative of the owner, lessor, or sublessor including, but not limited to, an agent, a resident manager, or a designated property manager.

(11) “Mobile home” means a mobile home or a manufactured home as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW.

(12) “Owner” means one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested:

(a) All or any part of the legal title to property; or

(b) All or part of the beneficial ownership, and a right to present use and enjoyment of the property.

(13) “Qualified rental housing inspector” and “RHI” mean a private inspector who possesses at least one of the following credentials and who has been approved by the director as an RHI based on a process developed by the director consistent with the intent of this chapter:

(a) American Association of Code Enforcement Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector certification;

(b) International Code Council Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector certification;

(c) International Code Council Residential Building Code Inspector;

(d) Washington State-licensed home inspector; or

(e) Other acceptable credential the director establishes by rule.

(14) “Rental property” means all residential dwelling units rented or leased on a single parcel of land managed by the same landlord.

(15) “Rental property complex” means all residential dwelling units rented or leased on a contiguous parcel or parcels of land managed by the same landlord as a single rental complex.

(16) “Rental unit” means a residential housing unit occupied or rented by a tenant or available for rent by a tenant.

(17) “Residential housing unit” means any building or part of a building in the city of Burien that is used or may be used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, including but not limited to single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses, multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings, condominiums, and similar living accommodations.

(18) “Shelter” means a facility with overnight sleeping accommodations, owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless.

(19) “Single-family residence” means a single detached building containing only one residential housing unit that is completely separated by open space on all sides from any other structure, except its own garage or shed.

(20) “Tenant” means a person entitled to occupy a residential housing unit pursuant to a rental agreement or who pays rent for occupancy or possession.

(21) “Transitional housing” means residential housing units owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity in which supportive services are provided to individuals or families that were formerly homeless, with the intent to stabilize them and move them to permanent housing within a period of not more than 24 months.

(22) “Unit unavailable for rent” means a residential housing unit that is not offered or available for rent as a rental unit, and that prior to offering or making the unit available as a rental unit, the owner is required to obtain a residential rental registration for the rental property in which the unit is located and comply with applicable regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.040 Scope.

(1) Exempt Residential Housing Units. This chapter does not apply to the following residential housing units:

(a) Owner-occupied single-family residences;

(b) Units unavailable for rent;

(c) Housing accommodations in a hotel, motel, short-term rentals such as Airbnbs, etc., or other similar transient lodging;

(d) Housing accommodations at an institution, whether public or private, where residence is merely incidental to detention or the provision of medical, religious, educational, recreational, or similar services, including but not limited to correctional facilities, licensed nursing homes, monasteries and convents, and hospitals;

(e) Owner-occupied mobile homes or manufactured homes, both as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW;

(f) Shelters and transitional housing;

(g) Rental units that a government unit, agency, or authority owns, operates, or manages, or that are specifically exempted from such a registration requirement by state or federal law or administrative regulation. This exemption does not apply once the governmental ownership, operation, or management is discontinued; and

(h) Accessory dwelling units.

(2) Business License Required. As a condition of operation, each and every owner or landlord renting or leasing a residential housing unit within the city limits shall, in accordance with Chapter 5.05 BMC, obtain and maintain a business license. The issuance of such a license shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the landlord, and the possession of such license shall not entitle the landlord to a new business license for subsequent years.

(a) Exemptions. Landlords are exempt from the requirement to obtain a business license for the following rental units:

(i) Single-family residences;

(ii) Mobile homes or manufactured homes, both as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW;

(iii) Condominiums and townhomes; and

(iv) All residential housing units exempt from the residential rental housing registration requirements under subsection (1) of this section.

(b) Penalty for Not Obtaining Business License. In addition to the penalties set forth in Chapter 5.05 BMC, there shall be assessed a penalty of $100.00 per day for each day that a residential housing unit operates without a valid and current business license for the first 10 days of noncompliance with this chapter, and up to $400.00 per day for each day in excess of 10 days of noncompliance with this chapter.

(c) Display of Program Information. Information regarding the rental housing and safety inspection program shall be posted on the inside of each residential housing unit or in a common area; provided, that the director may by rule establish one or more alternative or additional methods for conveying the information to tenants.

(d) Declaration of Compliance. As a condition to the issuance and/or renewal of a business license, an applicant shall provide a valid declaration of compliance addressing each rental unit in the rental property prior to the issuance of a license. A declaration of compliance submitted under this chapter must state that each unit complies with the requirements of this chapter and that there are no conditions presented in the units that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.050 Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

Pursuant to BMC 5.05.160, the business licensing period shall run from January 1st through December 31st. Licenses issued shall be effective from the date of issue until the following December 31st, unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. Any application for a license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by an initial certificate of inspection and a fee as established in Chapter 5.05 BMC and any resolution established in accordance with that chapter. Business license applications for residential rental housing shall comply with the requirements of BMC 5.05.100. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.060 Denial or revocation of license – Appeal.

(1) Denial or Revocation of License. A business license issued to a residential rental housing unit or units may be denied or revoked for the following reasons:

(a) Failure to obtain a certificate of inspection as required by this chapter;

(b) The certificate of inspection or business license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;

(c) The applicant or registration holder has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter;

(d) The applicant or registration holder is in default in any fee due to the city under this chapter;

(e) Any reason set forth in BMC 5.05.130 and 5.05.140;

(f) The property is subject to a notice of violation for a code violation which has been deemed committed or found to have been committed pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC or violation of the Revised Code of Washington.

(2) Process – Appeal. The denial or revocation of a business license for a residential rental housing unit or units shall comply with the business license revocation procedures set forth in BMC 5.05.140. The denial or revocation of a business license required by this chapter may be appealed in conformance with the requirements of BMC 5.05.150.

(3) If a business license issued for a residential rental housing unit(s) is revoked, or an application for a license is denied, the landlord will be granted a business license only after:

(a) Any and all deficiencies on which the revocation or denial was based have been corrected;

(b) In the event an inspection has been required, the applicant has provided to the city a valid certificate of inspection that meets the requirements of this chapter; and

(c) The applicant pays a license fee as determined by ordinance.

(4) Tenant relocation assistance shall be provided as required by RCW 59.18.085, and pursuant to the process set forth therein. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.070 Certificates of inspection.

(1) All residential rental properties subject to the requirements of this chapter must be inspected once every three years by a qualified rental housing inspector and will require a certificate of inspection within a time period established by the director. The property selection process shall be based on a methodology determined by the director that will further the purpose of this chapter.

(2) The director is authorized to create and publish a checklist to be used for declarations of compliance and inspections submitted or conducted under this chapter, and is authorized to include additional standards including, but not limited to, those within the building code, fire code, or RCW 59.18.060.

(3) All certificates of inspection submitted under this chapter must state that all units subject to inspection have been inspected, and that all units inspected comply with the requirements of the checklist.

(4) A certificate of inspection shall be based upon a physical inspection by the qualified rental housing inspector of the residential housing units conducted not more than 90 days prior to the date of the certificate of inspection.

(5) The certificate of inspection shall list and show compliance with the minimum standards for each residential housing unit that was inspected using the checklist provided by the city and shall contain such other information as determined by the director to carry out the intent of this chapter.

(6) Limitations and Conditions on Inspection of Units for Certificate of Inspection.

(a) The unit selection process shall be based on a methodology determined by the director that will further the purpose of this chapter.

(b) The city may only require a certificate of inspection on a rental property no more frequently than once every three years in accordance with RCW 59.18.125.

(c) A rental property that has received a certificate of occupancy within the last four years and has had no code violations reported on the property during that period is exempt from inspection.

(d) For properties that require an inspection, the owner or landlord must send written notice of the inspection to all units at the rental property. The notice must advise tenants that some of the units at the property will be inspected and that the tenants whose units need repairs or maintenance should send written notification to the landlord as provided in RCW 59.18.070. The notice must also advise tenants that if the landlord fails to adequately respond to the request for repairs or maintenance, the tenants may contact city of Burien officials. A copy of the notice must be provided to the inspector upon request on the day of inspection.

(e) If a rental property has 20 or fewer rental units, no more than four rental units at the rental property may be selected by the city to provide a certificate of inspection as long as the initial inspection reveals that no conditions exist that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant.

(f) If a rental property has 21 or more rental units, no more than 20 percent of the units, rounded up to the next whole number, on the rental property, and up to a maximum of 50 units at any one property, may be selected by the city to provide a certificate of inspection as long as the initial inspection reveals that no conditions exist that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant.

(g) If an owner or landlord is asked to provide a certificate of inspection for a sample of units on the rental property and a selected unit fails the initial inspection, the city may require up to 100 percent of the units on the rental property to provide a certificate of inspection.

(h) If a rental property has had conditions that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant reported since the last required inspection, the city may require 100 percent of the units on the rental property to provide a certificate of inspection.

(i) An inspector conducting an inspection under this chapter may only investigate a rental property as needed to provide a certificate of inspection.

(7) Notice to Tenants.

(a) The landlord shall provide written notification of his or her intent to allow an inspector to enter an individual unit for the purposes of providing the city with a declaration of compliance or certificate of inspection in accordance with RCW 59.18.150(6). The written notice must indicate the date and approximate time of the inspection and the company or person performing the inspection, and that the tenant has the right to see the inspector’s identification before the inspector enters the individual unit. A copy of this notice must be provided to the inspector upon request on or before the day of inspection.

(b) A tenant who continues to deny access to his or her unit is subject to the penalties in RCW 59.18.150(8). [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.080 Notice that rental is unlawful when certificate not provided.

When a certificate of inspection or a declaration of compliance is required for a specified residential housing unit under this chapter and a valid certificate of inspection or declaration of compliance has not been provided to the city, the director is authorized to notify the owner or landlord that until a valid certificate of inspection or declaration of compliance is provided to the city, it is unlawful to rent or to allow a tenant to continue to occupy the residential housing unit. It shall be unlawful to rent or allow a tenant to occupy or continue to occupy such unit. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.090 Other inspections.

Nothing in this chapter precludes additional inspections conducted under RCW 59.18.150, Chapter 1.15 BMC, or at the request or consent of a tenant, pursuant to a warrant, or pursuant to the tenant remedy provided by RCW 59.18.115 of the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.100 Director is authorized to make rules.

The director is authorized to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations, consistent with this chapter and the standards in this chapter, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.110 Correction notice prior to enforcement.

Before the city suspends or revokes a registration or imposes the penalties set forth in this chapter, an attempt shall be made to give the owner or landlord a written notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the existence of a violation, that enforcement action is contemplated, and that such person shall have a specified period of time in which to correct the violation. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.120 Immediate health and safety threats.

Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city’s ability to inspect properties and issue citations for property-related conditions that may constitute an immediate health or safety threat. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.130 Immunity, no warranty by city, and no private right of action.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or designate any particular class of persons who will or should be specially protected by its terms. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the city or its employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of an owner, landlord, inspector, or other individual to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the city or its employees. By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, neither the city, its agents or employees, nor the city council warrants or guarantees the safety, fitness, nor suitability of any dwelling in the city or any unit inspected under this program. Owners, landlords, and occupants shall take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interest, health, safety, and welfare. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to create a private right of action. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.140 Notice – Additional penalties.

(1) Prior to imposing any penalties set forth in this chapter, the city shall provide notice and an opportunity to correct pursuant to BMC 1.15.100.

(2) Any person who knowingly submits or assists in the submission of a falsified certificate of inspection, or knowingly submits falsified information upon which a certificate of inspection is issued, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and must be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000 as provided in RCW 59.18.125.

(3) The penalties imposed in this chapter are not exclusive when the acts or omissions constitute a violation of another chapter of the Burien Municipal Code. In addition to all other penalties, remedies, or other enforcement measures established within this chapter, or as otherwise provided by law, the acts or omissions that constitute violations of this chapter may be subject to penalties and enforcement provisions as provided by other chapters of the Burien Municipal Code, and such penalties and enforcement provisions may be imposed as set forth therein. All remedies under this chapter are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition, the city of Burien may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.62.150 Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.

The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of Chapter 59.18 RCW. [Ord. 715 § 2 (Exh. A), 2019]


Chapter 5.63 RENTAL HOUSING POLICY

Sections:

5.63.010    Purpose and intent.

5.63.020    Definitions.

5.63.030    Distribution of information required.

5.63.040    Deposit requirements and installment payments permitted.

5.63.050    Notice requirement generally – Reasonable accommodation request.

5.63.060    Notice of proposed sale of low-income housing.

5.63.070    Just cause eviction.

5.63.075    Housing ombudsman.

5.63.080    Compliance and enforcement.


5.63.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations supporting the topic of increasing housing security, and to establish standards and enforcement mechanisms as they relate to rental housing within the city limits of Burien. It is the city’s intent to continue its long-term commitment to maintain vibrant and diverse neighborhoods within Burien. The regulations contained in this chapter balance the needs of the landlord, tenant, and the city while creating a partnership to ensure safe, healthy, and thriving rental housing in Burien. The city recognizes that the renting of residential property is a commercial venture where owners and landlords must evaluate risk, profit, and loss. Providing housing for Burien residents directly impacts quality of life at the most basic level, and therefore requires regulations to ensure that it is equitably undertaken. This chapter strives to ensure housing security for current and future residents, and addresses potential retaliation against tenants who make complaints about housing conditions. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.020 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter:

(1) “Assisted housing development” means a multifamily rental housing development that both receives government assistance and is defined as federally assisted housing in RCW 59.28.020, or that receives other federal, state, or local government assistance and is subject to use restrictions.

(2) “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise provided.

(3) “Director” means the city of Burien director of planning and community development, or the director’s designee.

(4) “Dwelling unit” means a structure or part of a structure used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one, two, or more persons maintaining a common household, including, but not limited to, single-family residences and multiplexes, apartment buildings, and mobile homes.

(5) “Housing costs” means the compensation or fees paid or charged, usually periodically, for the use of any property, land, buildings, or equipment for residential purposes. For purposes of this chapter, housing costs include the basic rent charge, but do not include utility charges that are based on usage and that the tenant has agreed in the rental agreement to pay, unless the obligation to pay those charges is itself a change in the terms of the rental agreement.

(6) “Immediate family member” includes the spouse or domestic partner, dependent children, and other dependent relatives.

(7) “Landlord” means a landlord as defined in and within the scope of RCW 59.18.030 and 59.18.040 of the Residential Landlord Tenant Act of 1973 (“RLTA”) in effect at the time the rental agreement is executed. As of the effective day of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the RLTA defines “landlord” as “the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part, and in addition means any person designated as representative of the owner, lessor, or sublessor including, but not limited to, an agent, a resident manager, or a designated property manager.”

(8) “Nonrefundable move-in fees” means nonrefundable payment paid by a tenant to a landlord to cover administrative, pet, or damage fees, or to pay for cleaning of the dwelling unit upon termination of the tenancy, but does not include payment of a holding fee authorized by RCW 59.18.253(2).

(9) “Owner” means the owner of record as shown on the last King County tax assessment roll or such owner’s authorized agent.

(10) “Rent” or “rental amount” means recurring and periodic charges identified in the rental agreement for the use and occupancy of the premises, which may include charges for utilities. These terms do not include nonrecurring charges for costs incurred due to late payment, damages, deposits, legal costs, or other fees, including attorneys’ fees. Provided, however, that if, at the commencement of the tenancy, the landlord has provided an installment payment plan for nonrefundable fees or deposits for the security of the tenant’s obligations and the tenant defaults in payment, the landlord may treat the default payment as rent owing.

(11) “Rental agreement” means all agreements which establish or modify the terms, conditions, rules, regulations, or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit.

(12) “Security deposit” means a refundable payment or deposit of money, however designated, the primary function of which is to secure performance of a rental agreement or any part of a rental agreement. “Security deposit” does not include a fee.

(13) “Substantial rehabilitation” means extensive structural repair or extensive remodeling and requires a building, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical permit for the tenant’s dwelling unit at issue. Any “substantial rehabilitation” as provided herein requires displacement of a tenant.

(14) “Tenant” means any person who is entitled to occupy a dwelling unit primarily for living or dwelling purposes under a rental agreement. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.030 Distribution of information required.

(1) Distribution of Resources by Landlord.

(a) At the time a prospective tenant applies to reside in a dwelling unit, the landlord shall provide the prospective tenant with the landlord’s written rental criteria and, once created by the city, with a city of Burien informational website address designated by the city for the purpose of providing information about the property and its landlord, which may include, but is not limited to, local code enforcement information relating to properties within city limits, and a website address for the Washington Secretary of State for the purpose of providing information on how to register to vote or change their address, if the individual is already registered to vote.

(b) In the event a prospective tenant cannot reasonably access the internet and at their request, a landlord shall provide the prospective tenant a paper copy of the property and landlord information that can be found on the website identified above.

(2) Distribution of Information Packets by Landlord.

(a) The director shall prepare, and update as necessary, summaries of this chapter, the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 15.40 BMC), state RLTA (Chapter 59.18 RCW), Forcible Entry and Forcible and Unlawful Detainer (Chapter 59.12 RCW), and fair housing laws, describing the respective rights, obligations, and remedies of landlords and tenants, including information about legal resources available to tenants.

(b) A landlord shall provide a copy of the summaries prepared by the director to any tenant or prospective tenant when a rental agreement is offered, whether or not the agreement is for a new or renewal agreement.

(c) Where there is an oral rental agreement, the landlord shall give the tenant copies of the summaries described herein, either before entering into the oral rental agreement or as soon as reasonably possible after entering into the oral rental agreement.

(d) For existing tenants, landlords shall, within 30 days after the summaries are made available by the city, distribute current copies of the summaries to existing tenants.

(e) The initial distribution of information to tenants must be in written form and landlords shall obtain the tenant’s signature documenting tenant’s receipt of such information. If a tenant refuses to provide a signature documenting the tenant’s receipt of the information, the landlord may draft a declaration stating when and where the landlord provided tenant with the required information. After the initial distribution of the summaries to tenants, a landlord shall provide existing tenants with updated summaries by the city, and may do so in electronic form unless a tenant otherwise requests written summaries.

(f) The packet prepared by the director includes informational documents only, and nothing in the summaries therein shall be construed as binding on or affecting any judicial determination of the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants, nor is the director liable for any misstatement or misinterpretation of the applicable laws.

(3) Notice of Resources. A landlord is required to provide a copy of a resource summary, prepared by the city, to any tenant when the landlord provides a notice to a tenant under RCW 59.12.030. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.040 Deposit requirements and installment payments permitted.

(1) Installment Payments, Generally. Upon a tenant’s written request, tenants may pay security deposits, nonrefundable move-in fees, and/or last month’s rent in installments as provided herein; except that the tenant cannot elect to pay the security deposit and nonrefundable move-in fees in installments if (a) the total amount of the security deposit and nonrefundable move-in fees does not exceed 25 percent of the first full month’s rent for the tenant’s dwelling unit; and (b) payment of last month’s rent is not required at the inception of the tenancy. Landlords may not impose any fee, charge any interest, or otherwise impose a cost on a tenant because a tenant elects to pay in installments. Installment payments are due at the same time as rent is due. All installment schedules must be in writing, signed by both parties.

(2) Fixed-Term Tenancies for Three Months or Longer. For any rental agreement term that establishes a tenancy for three months or longer, the tenant may elect to pay the security deposit, nonrefundable move-in fees, and last month’s rent, excluding any payment made by a tenant to the landlord prior to the inception of tenancy to reimburse the landlord for the cost of obtaining a tenant screening report, in three consecutive, equal monthly installments that begin at the inception of the tenancy.

(3) Month-to-Month or Two-Month Tenancy. For any rental agreement term that establishes a tenancy from month to month or two months, the tenant may elect to pay the security deposit, nonrefundable move-in fees, and last month’s rent, excluding any payment made by a tenant to the landlord prior to the inception of tenancy to reimburse the landlord for the cost of obtaining a tenant screening report, in two equal installments. The first payment is due at the inception of the tenancy, and the second payment is due on the first day of the second month or period of the tenancy.

(4) A tenant’s failure to pay a security deposit, nonrefundable move-in fees, and last month’s rent according to an agreed payment schedule is a breach of the rental agreement and subjects the tenant to a 10-day notice pursuant to RCW 59.12.030(4), and shall mean that the entire amount of any outstanding payments shall become due when the next rent payment is due, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the landlord and tenant.

(5) Paying in installments does not apply to a landlord obtaining a tenant screening report, which report cost paid by the tenant shall be limited to the standard and actual cost of the tenant screening report.

(6) No security deposit may be collected by a landlord unless the rental agreement is in writing and a written checklist or statement specifically describing the condition and cleanliness of or existing damages to the premises and furnishings, including, but not limited to, walls, floors, countertops, carpets, drapes, furniture, and appliances, is provided by the landlord to the tenant at the beginning of the tenancy. The checklist or statement shall be signed and dated by the landlord and the tenant, and the tenant shall be provided with a copy of the signed checklist or statement.

(7) A landlord must place any required security deposit in a trust account and provide a written receipt and notice of the name, address, and location of the depository and any subsequent change thereof to the tenant, in compliance with the requirements of RCW 59.18.270.

(8) Nothing in this chapter prohibits a landlord from bringing an action against a tenant to recover sums exceeding the amount of the tenant’s security deposit for damage to the dwelling unit for which the tenant is responsible. The landlord may seek attorney’s fees for such an action as authorized by Chapter 59.18 RCW. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.050 Notice requirement generally – Reasonable accommodation request.

A landlord shall review and comply with all reasonable accommodation requests received from a tenant related to the service of any notice required by this chapter. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.060 Notice of proposed sale of low-income housing.

Owners of a multifamily rental housing building having five or more housing units, any one of which rents for an amount that is affordable to households at or below 80 percent of area median income, as median income was most recently determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Seattle metropolitan statistical area, as adjusted for household size, shall notify the director of the owner’s intent to sell the building. The notice shall be in writing and include the owner’s name, phone number, and the address of the rental housing building that will be listed for sale. The notice shall be mailed no later than 60 days prior to the building being listed with any real estate service or advertised for sale either in a printed newspaper or website. For the purposes of this section, a building is “listed” when an owner has signed a listing agreement with a real estate agent. Owners of multifamily buildings having five or more housing units who are otherwise required by law or agreement to notify the director of the owner’s intent to sell or transfer the building and who have provided such notice are exempt from the notice requirement of this subsection. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.070 Just cause eviction.

(1) Pursuant to provisions of the Washington State Residential Landlord-Tenant Act (RCW 59.18.290), owners may not evict residential tenants without a court order, which can be issued by a court only after the tenant has an opportunity in a show cause hearing to contest the eviction (RCW 59.18.380). Owners of housing units shall not evict or attempt to evict any tenant, or otherwise terminate or attempt to terminate the tenancy of any tenant unless the owner can prove in court that just cause exists. Owners may not evict residential tenants from rental housing units if the units are not licensed with the city of Burien as required by Chapter 5.62 BMC, regardless of whether just cause for eviction may exist. An owner is in compliance with licensing requirement if the rental housing unit is licensed with the city of Burien pursuant to Chapter 5.62 BMC before entry of a court order authorizing eviction or before a writ of restitution is granted. A court may grant a continuance in an eviction action in order to give the owner time to license the rental housing unit. The reasons for termination of tenancy listed below, and no others, shall constitute just cause under this section:

(a) The tenant fails to comply with a 14-day notice to pay rent or vacate pursuant to RCW 59.12.030(3); a 10-day notice to comply or vacate pursuant to RCW 59.12.030(4); or a three-day notice to vacate for waste, nuisance (including a drug-related activity nuisance pursuant to Chapter 7.43 RCW), or maintenance of an unlawful business or conduct pursuant to RCW 59.12.030(5);

(b) The tenant habitually fails to pay rent when due which causes the owner to notify the tenant in writing of late rent four or more times in a 12-month period;

(c) The tenant fails to comply with a 10-day notice to comply or vacate that requires compliance with a material term of the rental agreement or that requires compliance with a material obligation under RCW 59.18.130;

(d) The tenant habitually fails to comply with the material terms of the rental agreement which causes the owner to serve a 10-day notice to comply or vacate three or more times in a 12-month period;

(e) The owner seeks possession so that the owner or a member of his or her immediate family may occupy the unit as that person’s principal residence and no substantially equivalent unit is vacant and available in the same building, and the owner has given the tenant at least 90 days’ advance written notice of the date the tenant’s possession is to end. The director may reduce the time required to give notice to no less than 60 days if the director determines that delaying occupancy will result in a personal hardship to the owner or to the owner’s immediate family. Personal hardship may include but is not limited to hardship caused by illness or accident, unemployment, or job relocation. There is a rebuttable presumption of a violation of this subsection (1)(e) if the owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family fails to occupy the unit as that person’s principal residence for at least 60 consecutive days during the 90 days immediately after the tenant vacated the unit pursuant to a notice of termination or eviction using this subparagraph as the cause for eviction;

(f) The owner elects to sell a dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this chapter and gives the tenant at least 90 days’ written notice prior to the date set for vacating, which date shall coincide with the end of the term of a rental agreement, or if the agreement is month to month, with the last day of a monthly period. The director may reduce the time required to give notice to no less than 60 days if the director determines that providing 90 days’ notice will result in a personal hardship to the owner. Personal hardship may include but is not limited to hardship caused by illness or accident, unemployment, or job relocation. For the purposes of this subsection, an owner “elects to sell” when the owner makes reasonable attempts to sell the dwelling within 30 days after the tenant has vacated, including, at a minimum, listing it for sale at a reasonable price with a realty agency or advertising it for sale at a reasonable price in a newspaper of general circulation. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner did not intend to sell the unit if:

(i) Within 30 days after the tenant has vacated, the owner does not list the single-family dwelling unit for sale at a reasonable price with a realty agency or advertise it for sale at a reasonable price in a newspaper of general circulation, or

(ii) Within 90 days after the date the tenant vacated or the date the property was listed for sale, whichever is later, the owner withdraws the rental unit from the market, rents the unit to someone other than the former tenant, or otherwise indicates that the owner does not intend to sell the unit;

(g) The tenant’s occupancy is conditioned upon employment on the property and the employment relationship is terminated;

(h) The owner seeks to do substantial rehabilitation in the building and gives the tenant at least 120 days’ written notice prior to the date set for vacating. To utilize this basis as the rationale for termination, the owner must obtain at least one permit necessary for the rehabilitation before terminating the tenancy;

(i) The owner elects to demolish the building, convert it to a cooperative, or convert it to a nonresidential use and gives the tenant at least 120 days’ written notice prior to the date set for vacating. To utilize this basis as the rationale for termination, the owner must obtain a permit necessary to demolish or change the use before terminating any tenancy or converting the building to a condominium;

(j) The owner seeks to discontinue use of a housing unit unauthorized by BMC Title 19 after receipt of a notice of violation;

(k) The owner seeks to reduce the number of individuals residing in a dwelling unit to comply with the maximum limit of individuals allowed to occupy one dwelling unit as required by BMC Title 15; and

(i) (A) The number of such individuals was more than is lawful under the current version of BMC Title 15; and

(B) That number has not increased with the knowledge or consent of the owner; and

(C) The owner is either unwilling or unable to obtain a permit to allow the unit with that number of residents; and

(ii) The owner has served the tenants with a 30-day notice, informing the tenants that the number of tenants exceeds the legal limit and must be reduced to the legal limit; and

(iii) After expiration of the 30-day notice, the owner has served the tenants with and the tenants have failed to comply with a 10-day notice to comply with the limit on the number of occupants or vacate; and

(iv) If there is more than one rental agreement for the unit, the owner may choose which agreements to terminate; provided, that the owner may either terminate no more than the minimum number of rental agreements necessary to comply with the legal limit on the number of occupants, or, at the owner’s option, terminate only those agreements involving the minimum number of occupants necessary to comply with the legal limit;

(l) An emergency order requiring that the housing unit be vacated and closed has been issued pursuant to BMC Title 15 and the emergency conditions identified in the order have not been corrected;

(m) The owner seeks to discontinue sharing with a tenant of the owner’s own housing unit, i.e., the unit in which the owner resides, seeks to terminate the tenancy of a tenant of an accessory dwelling unit that is accessory to the housing unit in which the owner resides, or seeks to terminate the tenancy of a tenant in a single-family dwelling unit and the owner resides in an accessory dwelling unit on the same lot. This subsection does not apply if the owner has received a notice of violation of the development standards of BMC Title 19;

(n) A tenant, or with the consent of the tenant, the tenant’s subtenant, sublessee, resident, or guest, has engaged in criminal activity on the premises, or on the property or public right-of-way abutting the premises, and the owner has specified in the notice of termination the crime alleged to have been committed and the general facts supporting the allegation, and has assured that the department has recorded receipt of a copy of the notice of termination. For purposes of this subsection a person has “engaged in criminal activity” if he or she:

(i) Engages in drug-related activity that would constitute a violation of Chapter 69.41, 69.50, or 69.52 RCW; or

(ii) Engages in activity that is a crime under the laws of this state, but only if the activity substantially affects the health or safety of other tenants or the owner.

(2) Any rental agreement provision which waives or purports to waive any right, benefit or entitlement created by this section shall be deemed void and of no lawful force or effect.

(3) With any termination notices required by law, owners terminating any tenancy protected by this section shall advise the affected tenant or tenants in writing of the reasons for the termination and the facts in support of those reasons.

(4) If a tenant who has received a notice of termination of tenancy claiming subsection (1)(e), (f) or (m) of this section as the ground for termination believes that the owner does not intend to carry out the stated reason for eviction and makes a complaint to the director, then the owner must, within 10 days of being notified by the director of the complaint, complete and file with the director a certification stating the owner’s intent to carry out the stated reason for the eviction. The failure of the owner to complete and file such a certification after a complaint by the tenant shall be a defense for the tenant in an eviction action based on this ground.

(5) In any action commenced to evict or to otherwise terminate the tenancy of any tenant, it shall be a defense to the action that there was no just cause for such eviction or termination as provided in this section.

(6) It shall be a violation of this section for any owner to evict or attempt to evict any tenant or otherwise terminate or attempt to terminate the tenancy of any tenant using a notice which references subsection (1)(e), (f), (h), (k), (l) or (m) of this section as grounds for eviction or termination of tenancy without fulfilling or carrying out the stated reason for or condition justifying the termination of such tenancy.

(7) An owner who evicts or attempts to evict a tenant or who terminates or attempts to terminate the tenancy of a tenant using a notice which references subsection (1)(e), (f) or (h) of this section as the ground for eviction or termination of tenancy without fulfilling or carrying out the stated reason for or condition justifying the termination of such tenancy shall be liable to such tenant in a private right for action for damages up to $2,000, costs of suit, or arbitration and reasonable attorney’s fees. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.075 Housing ombudsman.

(1) It is the intent of the city of Burien to establish, in addition to other remedies or rights of appeal of any person under local, state or federal law, an independent, impartial local office readily available to the public and empowered to investigate housing disputes; to direct tenants, landlords and persons to the right avenue of recourse and/or the proper venue for recourse for conflicts; to assist in resolving problems and grievances between a landlord and a tenant; to document and identify issues and problems with residential rental housing and landlord-tenant relationships; and to recommend needed changes to laws to the city of Burien city council.

(2) The office of housing ombudsman is hereby established in the city of Burien for the health, safety and welfare of citizens seeking or who have obtained residential housing, or who offer or provide residential housing in the city of Burien.

(3) The housing ombudsman shall report to the city manager. This arrangement helps to guarantee the independence of the housing ombudsman, who is not only providing a direct service to citizens but is performing a role in legislative oversight of the city of Burien housing ombudsman program by reporting to the city manager.

(4) The housing ombudsman shall be a person of recognized judgment, objectivity and integrity who is well equipped to analyze problems of law, administration and public policy.

(5) No person while serving as ombudsman:

(a) Shall engage in any other occupation, business, or profession likely to detract from the full-time performance of his or her duties as ombudsman; or

(b) Shall engage in any other occupation, business or profession likely to result in a conflict of interest or an appearance of impropriety or partiality.

(6) The housing ombudsman shall follow the policies, rules and procedures as adopted by the city of Burien for the office of housing ombudsman. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


5.63.080 Compliance and enforcement.

(1) Powers and Duties of the Director.

(a) The director is authorized to enforce this chapter and may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this chapter, provided that the director shall hold one or more public hearings prior to adoption of final rules and regulations.

(b) The director shall attempt to settle by agreement any alleged violation or failures to comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that nothing herein shall create a right or entitlement of a landlord to settlement by agreement.

(c) The director is authorized to request records from landlord and the landlord shall allow the director access to such records, as well as a complete roster of tenants’ names and contact information, when requested, with at least five business days’ notice and at a mutually agreeable time, to investigate potential violations of the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Notice of Violation.

(a) If a violation of this chapter occurs, the director shall issue a notice of violation. A notice of violation shall include:

(i) The street address or a description of the building, structure, premises, or land in terms reasonably sufficient to identify its location where the violation occurred;

(ii) A description of the violation and a reference to the provisions of this chapter which have been violated;

(iii) A description of the action required to comply with the provisions of this chapter;

(iv) A statement that the landlord to whom a notice of violation is directed may request a hearing. Such request for hearing must be submitted in writing and must be received by the city clerk no later than 10 days after the notice of violation has been issued;

(v) A statement that penalties will accrue as provided in this chapter;

(vi) An advisory letter to provide the landlord with a timeline of the process and an invitation to conciliate.

(b) The notice of violation shall be delivered, in writing, to the person to whom the notice of violation is issued by personal delivery or first-class mail.

(3) Civil Penalties.

(a) Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as outlined below.

(i) For a violation of distribution of information required (BMC 5.63.030), deposit requirements and installment payments (BMC 5.63.040), or notice requirement generally (BMC 5.63.050), a landlord shall be subject to the following penalties:

(A) For the first violation for each affected dwelling unit, $500.00; and

(B) For each affected dwelling unit for each subsequent violation within a three-year period, $1,000.

(ii) Unless otherwise stated in BMC 5.63.070(7), for a violation of just cause eviction (BMC 5.63.070) a landlord shall be subject to the following penalties:

(A) For each violation from the date the violation begins for the first 10 days of noncompliance, $250.00 per day, per dwelling unit;

(B) For each violation for each day beyond 10 days of noncompliance until compliance is achieved, $500.00 per day, per dwelling unit.

(b) The director may waive or reduce the penalty if the landlord comes into compliance within 10 days of the notice of violation or shows that its failure to comply was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. If the director finds a willful violation of this chapter, which resulted in a notice of violation outlined above, the director may issue a penalty that shall be $1,000.

(c) Any civil penalties paid by the landlord shall be kept by the city.

(4) Administrative Review by the Director.

(a) General. A person to whom a notice of violation or penalty is assessed may request an administrative review of the notice of violation or penalty.

(b) How to Request Administrative Review. A person may request an administrative review of the notice of violation or penalty by filing a written request with the director within 10 days from the date the notice of violation or penalty was issued. The request shall state, in writing, the reasons the director should review the notice of violation or penalty. Failure to state the basis for the review in writing shall be cause for dismissal of the review. Upon receipt of the request for administrative review, the director shall review the information provided. The city has the burden to prove a violation exists by a preponderance of the evidence.

(c) Decision of Director. After considering all of the information provided, the director shall determine whether a violation has occurred and shall affirm, vacate, suspend, or modify the notice of violation or penalty. The director’s decision shall be delivered, in writing, to the person to whom the notice of violation was issued by personal delivery or first-class mail.

(5) Appeals to the Hearing Examiner of Director’s Decision. Appeal of the director’s decision shall be made within 10 days from the date of the director’s decision by filing a written notice of appeal, clearly stating the grounds that the appeal is based upon, with the hearing examiner, which appeal shall be governed by Chapter 2.15 BMC. [Ord. 716 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


Chapter 5.65 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.65.010    Purpose and intent.

5.65.020    Findings.

5.65.030    Definitions.

5.65.040    License required. Revised 5/20

5.65.050    License prohibited to certain classes.

5.65.060    License types.

5.65.070    Cabaret license fees.

5.65.080    Appeal.

5.65.090    Standards of conduct and operation – Adult cabarets.

5.65.100    License term – Assignment – Renewals.

5.65.110    License suspension and revocation – Hearing.

5.65.120    Liquor regulations.

5.65.130    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.65.140    Nuisance declared.

5.65.150    Additional enforcement.


5.65.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses and related activities to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Burien and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. It is not the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the city that it should be the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the state or federal Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented material to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. [Ord. 282 § 2, 2000]


5.65.020 Findings.

Based upon a wide range of evidence presented to the Burien city council and to other jurisdictions, including but not limited to the testimony of law enforcement officers and members of the public, and on other evidence, information, publications, articles, studies, documents, case law and material submitted to and reviewed and considered by the city council and staff, the councils of other cities within the region and in other jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations and other legislative bodies, the city council makes the following findings:

(1) Certain conduct occurring on premises offering sexually-oriented business creates secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore such conduct must be regulated as provided herein.

(2) Regulation of the sexually-oriented business industry through permitting and/or licensing is necessary because, in the absence of such regulation, significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred.

(3) Proximity between entertainers and patrons during adult entertainment performances can facilitate sexual contact, prostitution and related crimes. Concerns about crime and public sexual activity are legitimate and compelling concerns of the city which demand reasonable regulation of adult entertainment establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(4) It is necessary to license entertainers in the sexually-oriented industry to prevent the exploitation of minors, to ensure that each such entertainer is an adult, and to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible.

(5) The evidence supporting the need to protect minors and families from the criminal and other unlawful activities associated with the operation of sexually-oriented businesses is compelling. The provisions of this chapter are necessary to ensure that sexually-oriented uses in Burien are conducted a reasonable distance away from places where minors regularly gather, often in large numbers.

(6) It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of sexually-oriented businesses at such times as such establishments are offering sexually-oriented business so there will, at all necessary times, be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.

(7) The license fees required herein are nominal fees imposed as necessary cost recoupment measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the city in regulating the sexually-oriented businesses, and in increased police costs in enforcement.

(8) Enterprises providing sexually-oriented businesses are increasingly associated with ongoing prostitution, disruptive conduct and other criminal activity. Such businesses are currently not subject to effective regulation and constitute an immediate threat to the public peace, health and safety. The hours of operation of such businesses have a significant impact on the occurrence of illegal drug transactions and other criminal activities.

(9) Due to the information presented regarding the connection of prostitution with sexually-oriented businesses, there is concern over sexually-transmitted diseases which is a legitimate health concern of the city and thus requires regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the public.

(10) Many cities, including Seattle and Tacoma, have experienced negative secondary impacts from sexually-oriented business land uses. The skid row effect is one of these secondary impacts and is evident in certain parts of Seattle. Such an effect would be significantly magnified in Burien due to the difference in size and characteristics of the city.

(11) The city of Burien may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities, counties and organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually-oriented business uses, operations and licensing.

(12) The city takes notice of studies and experiences of other cities and counties in combating the specific adverse impacts of sexually-oriented businesses.

(13) Regulation of sexually-oriented businesses should be developed to prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.

(14) Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses. Additionally, hidden ownership interests for the purpose of skimming profits, avoiding payment of taxes, and racketeering have historically occurred in sexually-oriented businesses, in the absence of regulations.

(15) The city council therefore finds that the protection and the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare requires establishment of this chapter.

(16) There are sufficient important and substantial government interests to provide a constitutional basis for reasonable regulation of time, place, and manner under which sexually-oriented businesses can operate.

(17) Police officers in the city of SeaTac have conducted numerous investigations at the city of SeaTac’s existing adult entertainment establishment. These investigations conducted by both uniformed officers and undercover officers have resulted in the issuance of numerous citations for criminal violations. A majority of the violations involved physical contact between an entertainer and a patron.

(18) It is not the intent of this chapter to unconstitutionally suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution nor Article 1, Section 5 of the Washington State Constitution, but to enact content-neutral ordinances which address the secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses, as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.

(19) In a family community, sexually-oriented businesses are not uniformly compatible with community standards, as defined during the numerous public hearings.

(20) The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by sexually-oriented businesses are limited and are best conserved by regulating and licensing sexually-oriented businesses and those associated with them.

(21) In order to assure that all conditions, regulations, etc. are met, the city has established a reasonable time period for review of license applications. [Ord. 282 § 3, 2000]


5.65.030 Definitions.

(1) “Adult cabaret” means any commercial premises, including any cabaret premises, to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live adult entertainment to any member of the public.

(2) “Adult entertainment” means:

(a) Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

(b) Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the following specified sexual activities:

(i) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal,

(ii) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or

(iii) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

(c) Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing.

(3) “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking a cabaret license in the city of Burien.

(4) “Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret business, based on responsibility for management of the adult cabaret business.

(5) “Cabaret” means any room, place or space whatsoever in the city in which any music, singing, dancing, or other similar entertainment is permitted in connection with any hotel, restaurant, cafe, club, tavern, eating place, directly selling, serving, or providing the public, with or without charge, food or liquor. The words “music and entertainment” as used herein, shall not apply to radios or mechanical devices.

(6) “Clerk” means such city employees or agents as the city manager shall designate to administer this chapter, or any designee thereof.

(7) “Employee” means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any cabaret.

(8) “Entertainer” means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.

(9) “Liquor” means all beverages defined in RCW 66.04.200.

(10) “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret, and includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.

(11) “Operator” means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret.

(12) “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized. 

(13) “Member of the public” means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or admitted to a cabaret.

(14) “Sexual conduct” means acts of:

(a) Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or

(b) Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object; or

(c) Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus or another; or

(d) Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or

(e) Touching of the sex organs or anus, whether clothed or unclothed, of oneself or of one person by another. [Ord. 282 § 4, 2000]


5.65.040 License required. Revised 5/20

(1) It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.

(2) It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret.

(3) It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so.

(4) It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so.

(5) All licenses or permits required under this chapter are separate from and in addition to the business license issued under Chapter 5.05 BMC, which may also be required when applicable. [Ord. 735 § 5, 2020; Ord. 282 § 5, 2000]


5.65.050 License prohibited to certain classes.

No license shall be issued to:

(1) A natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18 years with respect to cabarets where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.

(2) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager or an adult cabaret, the manager has obtained a manager’s license.

(3) A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.

(4) A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof. [Ord. 282 § 6, 2000]


5.65.060 License types.

(1) Adult Cabaret License.

(a) All applications for an adult cabaret license shall be submitted to the clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult cabaret on the business premises and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, which shall require the following information:

(i) For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number, if any, social security number if any, and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.

(ii) If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.

(iii) Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including motion picture theaters and panorams, from the city or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.

(iv) A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.

(v) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.

(vi) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.

(vii) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(viii) The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.

(ix) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

(x) A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, by Burien police department employees.

(xi) A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing.

(b) An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

(c) A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.

(d) Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true.

(e) If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city clerk, no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult cabaret license application.

(f) The adult cabaret license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult cabaret. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

(g) No person granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult cabaret business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.

(h) Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the clerk shall provide copies to the police, fire, and community development departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 30 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the clerk whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

(i) An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the clerk within 30 days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the clerk fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days.

(2) Adult Cabaret Manager and Entertainer Licenses.

(a) No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer’s or manager’s license from the city. Each applicant for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall complete an application on forms provided by the city containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application. A copy of the application shall be provided to the police department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager’s or entertainer’s license application shall require the following information:

(i) The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Burien police department employees, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.

(ii) The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.

(iii) Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

(A) A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(B) A state issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date or birth;

(C) An official passport issued by the United States of America;

(D) An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or

(E) Any other identification that the city determines to be acceptable.

(iv) A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.

(v) A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.

(vi) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of applicant, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

(vii) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(viii) Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to his or her performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret.

(b) The clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

(c) An adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued by the clerk within 14 days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the clerk has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager’s license within 14 days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days.

(d) An applicant for an adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. [Ord. 282 § 7, 2000]


5.65.070 Cabaret license fees.

(1) Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret license shall first pay a license fee of $500.00 per year.

(2) Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret manager’s license shall first pay a license fee of $100.00 per year.

(3) Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret entertainer’s license shall first pay a license fee of $100.00 per year. [Ord. 282 § 8, 2000]


5.65.080 Appeal.

(1) Denial of License. Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner, by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk within 14 calendar days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew.

(2) Appeals under this section will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 2.20 BMC. The decision of the hearing examiner will set an effective date for the decision. [Ord. 312 § 14, 2000; Ord. 282 § 9, 2000]


5.65.090 Standards of conduct and operation – Adult cabarets.

(1) The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are allowed to be present:

(a) No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least 24 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least 10 feet from the nearest member of the public.

(b) No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (1)(a) of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.

(c) No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.

(d) No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer.

(e) No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute.

(f) No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a torso-to-torso distance of no less than 10 feet from any member of the public.

(g) No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any member of the public. Any gratuity offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult cabaret or provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.

(2) At any adult cabaret, the following are required:

(a) Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.

(b) Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult cabaret.

(c) No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include but are not limited to: the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.

(3) The responsibilities of the manager of an adult cabaret shall include but are not limited to:

(a) A licensed manager shall be on duty at an adult cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer’s license.

(b) The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.

(c) The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one manager or assistant manger is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the adult cabaret.

(d) The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.

(4) Premises – Specifications.

(a) Performance Area. The performance area of the adult cabaret where adult entertainment is provided shall be a stage or platform at least 24 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager’s station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.

(b) Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and shall be illuminated so that patrons, on any part of the premises open to the public, shall be able to read a program, menu, or list printed in eight-point type.

(c) Signs. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the premises stating the following:

THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF BURIEN. ENTERTAINERS ARE:

A. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT

B. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE, EXCEPT ON STAGE

C. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE

D. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS WHILE PERFORMING UPON ANY STAGE AREA

(d) Recordkeeping Requirements.

(i) All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.

(ii) Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and their employees, as an entertainer. This information shall be open to inspection by the clerk during hours of operation of the business upon 24 hours’ notice to the licensee.

(e) Inspections. In order to insure compliance with this chapter all areas of licensed adult cabarets which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.

(5) It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.

(6) This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:

(a) Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;

(b) Classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or

(c) Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene. These exemptions shall not apply to the sexual conduct defined in BMC 5.65.030(14), or the sexual conduct described in RCW 7.48A.010(2) (b)(ii) and (iii).

(7) Whether or not activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:

(a) Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex; and

(b) Whether the activity depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards, sexual conduct as described in RCW 7.48A.010(2) (b); and

(c) Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. [Ord. 282 § 10, 2000]


5.65.100 License term – Assignment – Renewals.

(1) There shall be no prorating of the license fees set out in BMC 5.65.070 and such licenses shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of each year, except that in the event that the original application is made subsequent to June 30th, then one-half of the annual fee may be accepted for the remainder of said year. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be assignable.

(2) Application for renewal of licenses issued hereunder shall be made to the clerk no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of adult cabaret licenses, and no later than 14 days prior to the expiration of cabaret licenses and adult cabaret manager and entertainer licenses. The renewal license shall be issued in the same manner and on payment of the same fees as for an original application under this chapter. There shall be assessed and collected by the clerk, an additional charge of $100.00 on applications not made on or before said date.

(3) The clerk shall renew a license upon application unless the clerk is aware of facts that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which he or she seeks renewal; and further provided, that the application complies with all provisions of this chapter as now enacted or as the same may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 282 § 11, 2000]


5.65.110 License suspension and revocation – Hearing.

(1) The clerk may, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or his/her designee and as provided in subsection (2) of this section, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time where the same was procured by fraud or false representation of fact; or for the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter by the licensee or by any of his servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees; or for the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of his servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises in which his cabaret is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees.

(2) A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

(3) The clerk shall provide at least 10 days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such notice shall also schedule a hearing before the hearing examiner, no earlier than 10 days and no later than 45 days from the date of the written notice. The hearing examiner shall render a decision within 15 days following the close of the appeal hearing. Said decision will set an effective date for the decision. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless appealed, by writ of certiorari, prohibition or mandamus, to the King County superior court within 15 days of the effective date of the hearing examiner’s decision. The decision of the clerk or hearing examiner shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal except as provided in subsection (4) of this section. If the licensee fails to obtain such a writ within 15 days following the effective date of the hearing examiner’s decision, the city attorney may invoke the aid of the appropriate court to secure enforcement and compliance with the hearing examiner’s decision.

(4) Where the Burien building official or fire marshal or their designees or the King County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of a cabaret or adult cabaret which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection (3) of this section; provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. [Ord. 282 § 12, 2000]


5.65.120 Liquor regulations.

Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any rules or regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the applicable rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board shall control. [Ord. 282 § 13, 2000]


5.65.130 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 282 § 14, 2000]


5.65.140 Nuisance declared.

(1) Public Nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the city of Burien or the state of Washington shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Moral Nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW. [Ord. 282 § 15, 2000]


5.65.150 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and, the city may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 282 § 16, 2000]


Chapter 5.70 PANORAM PREMISES Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.70.010    Purpose and intent.

5.70.020    Findings.

5.70.030    Definitions.

5.70.040    Panoram premises license required. Revised 5/20

5.70.050    License – Fees – Term – Assignment – Renewals.

5.70.060    Application.

5.70.070    License prohibited to certain classes.

5.70.080    Suspension or revocation of licenses.

5.70.090    Appeal and hearing.

5.70.100    Premises regulation.

5.70.110    Standards of conduct and operation of panoram premises and personnel.

5.70.120    Conflicting sections or provisions.

5.70.130    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.70.140    Nuisance declared.

5.70.150    Additional enforcement.


5.70.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses and related activities to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Burien and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. It is not the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of the city that it should be the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the state or federal Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented material to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of the city that it should be the purpose or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. [Ord. 289 § 2, 2000]


5.70.020 Findings.

Based upon a wide range of evidence presented to the Burien city council and to other jurisdictions, including but not limited to the testimony of law enforcement officers and members of the public, and on other evidence, information, publications, articles, studies, documents, case law and material submitted to and reviewed and considered by the city council and staff, the councils of other cities within the region and in other jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations and other legislative bodies, the city council makes the following findings:

(1) Certain conduct occurring on premises offering sexually-oriented business creates secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore such conduct must be regulated as provided herein.

(2) Regulation of the sexually-oriented business industry through permitting and/or licensing is necessary because, in the absence of such regulation, significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred.

(3) The evidence supporting the need to protect minors and families from the criminal and other unlawful activities associated with the operation of sexually-oriented businesses is compelling. The provisions of this chapter are necessary to ensure that sexually-oriented uses in Burien are conducted a reasonable distance away from places where minors regularly gather, often in large numbers.

(4) It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of sexually-oriented businesses at such times as such establishments are offering sexually-oriented business so there will, at all necessary times, be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.

(5) The license fees required herein are nominal fees imposed as necessary cost recoupment measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the city in regulating the sexually-oriented businesses, and in increased police costs in enforcement.

(6) Enterprises providing sexually-oriented businesses are increasingly associated with ongoing prostitution, disruptive conduct and other criminal activity. Such businesses are currently not subject to effective regulation and constitute an immediate threat to the public peace, health and safety. The hours of operation of such businesses have a significant impact on the occurrence of illegal drug transactions and other criminal activities.

(7) Due to the information presented regarding the connection of prostitution with sexually-oriented businesses, there is concern over sexually-transmitted diseases which is a legitimate health concern of the city and thus requires regulation of sexually-oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the public.

(8) Many cities, including Seattle and Tacoma, have experienced negative secondary impacts from sexually-oriented business land uses. The skid row effect is one of these secondary impacts and is evident in certain parts of Seattle. Such an effect would be significantly magnified in Burien due to the difference in size and characteristics of the city.

(9) The city of Burien may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities, counties and organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually-oriented business uses, operations and licensing.

(10) The city takes notice of studies and experiences of other cities and counties in combating the specific adverse impacts of sexually-oriented businesses.

(11) Regulation of sexually-oriented businesses should be developed to prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.

(12) Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of sexually-oriented businesses. Additionally, hidden ownership interests for the purpose of skimming profits, avoiding payment of taxes, and racketeering have historically occurred in sexually-oriented businesses, in the absence of regulations.

(13) The city council therefore finds that the protection and the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare requires establishment of this chapter.

(14) There are sufficient important and substantial government interests to provide a constitutional basis for reasonable regulation of time, place, and manner under which sexually-oriented businesses can operate.

(15) It is not the intent of this chapter to unconstitutionally suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution nor Article 1, Section 5 of the Washington State Constitution, but to enact content-neutral ordinances which address the secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses, as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.

(16) The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by sexually-oriented businesses are limited and are best conserved by regulating and licensing sexually-oriented businesses and those associated with them.

(17) In order to assure that all conditions, regulations, etc. are met, the city has established a reasonable time period for review of license applications. [Ord. 289 § 3, 2000]


5.70.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(1) “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking a panoram premises license in the city of Burien.

(2) “Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the panoram premises, based upon responsibility for management of the panoram premises.

(3) “Clerk” means such city employees or agents as the city manager shall designate to administer this chapter, or any designee thereof.

(4) “Employee” means any and all persons including managers and independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any panoram premises.

(5) “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs or conduct of any portion of any activity involving a panoram premises, and includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.

(6) “Operator” means any person operating, conducting or maintaining any panoram premises.

(7) “Panoram,” “preview,” “picture arcade” or “peep show” means any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee, or other charge, is used to view, exhibit or display a film or videotape. All such devices are denominated in this chapter by the terms “panoram” or “panoram device.” The terms “panoram” and “panoram premises” do not include games which employ pictures, views or video displays, or gambling devices regulated by the state.

(8) “Panoram premises” means any premises or portion of any premises on which any panoram device is located and to which members of the public are admitted. The term “panoram premises” does not include movie or motion picture theater auditoriums capable of seating more than five people.

(9) “Panoram station” means the portion of any panoram premises on which a panoram device is located and where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the panoram device.

(10) “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.

(11) “Member of the public” means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or admitted to a panoram premises.

(12) “Sexual conduct” means acts of:

(a) Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or

(b) Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object; or

(c) Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus or another; or

(d) Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or

(e) Touching of the sex organs or anus, whether clothed or unclothed, of oneself or of one person by another. [Ord. 289 § 4, 2000]


5.70.040 Panoram premises license required. Revised 5/20

(1) It is unlawful to display, exhibit, expose or maintain upon any premises to which members of the public are admitted any panoram device without a valid and current license for such premises, to be designated a “panoram premises license.”

(2) It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate a panoram premises unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license, to be designated a “panoram premises manager’s license,” from the city to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.

(3) It is unlawful for any employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly provide any service related to the operation of, an unlicensed panoram premises.

(4) A separate license is required for each panoram premises and the same shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained therein.

(5) The clerk shall prescribe the form of such license, number the same, and shall indicate thereon the number of panoram devices which may be operated thereunder, and the location of the licensed panoram premises.

(6) The licenses or permits required under this chapter are separate from and in addition to the business license issued under Chapter 5.05 BMC, and which may also be required when applicable. [Ord. 735 § 6, 2020; Ord. 289 § 5, 2000]


5.70.050 License – Fees – Term – Assignment – Renewals.

(1) The license is valid for one year and shall be renewed annually.

(2) Licenses issued under this chapter may not be assigned or transferred to another operator, premises, or manager.

(3) Applications for renewal of licenses issued under this chapter shall be filed with the clerk no later than 30 days prior to the expiration date provided for on the face of the panoram premises license and no later than 14 days prior to the expiration of the panoram premises manager’s license in the same manner and accompanied by the payment of the same fees as are in effect for an original application for that license for the license year applied for. There shall be assessed and collected by the clerk an additional charge of $50.00 on renewal applications not made on or before the license expiration date.

(4) The clerk shall renew a license upon application unless the clerk is aware of facts that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which he or she seeks renewal; and further provided, that the application complies with all provisions of this chapter as now enacted or as the same may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 289 § 6, 2000]


5.70.060 Application.

(1) Panoram Premises License.

(a) Any person seeking a panoram premises license shall file a written application with the clerk on a form provided by the clerk for that purpose. All panoram premises license applications shall be submitted in the name of the person or entity proposing to provide panoram devices on the business premises and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall require the following information:

(i) For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number, if any, and business mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.

(ii) If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.

(iii) Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including motion picture theaters and other panoram premises, from the city or another city, county, or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.

(iv) A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owing or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor.

(v) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or bail forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction or bail forfeiture, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.

(vi) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.

(vii) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(viii) The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed panoram premises, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.

(ix) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

(x) A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, by King County sheriff’s office employees.

(xi) A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed panoram premises, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Panoram stations, restrooms, manager’s office and stations, restrooms, and service and sales areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for a panoram premises shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with BMC 5.70.100.

(b) An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

(c) A nonrefundable application fee of $200.00 must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.

(d) Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true.

(e) If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of a panoram premises license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises, or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city clerk, no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original panoram premises license.

(f) The panoram premises license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed panoram premises. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place, at or near the entrance to the panoram premises so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

(g) No person granted a panoram premises license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the panoram premises business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.

(h) The clerk, upon presentation of such application and before acting upon the same, shall provide copies to the police, fire, and community development departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed panoram premises with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 30 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the clerk whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any panoram premises license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not be open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed panoram premises is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

(i) A panoram premises license shall be issued by the clerk within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete license application and fee, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a panoram premises license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the clerk fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review period time for more than an additional 20 days.

(2) Panoram Premises Manager’s License.

(a) No person shall work as a manager or assistant manager at a panoram premises without a manager’s license from the city. Each applicant for a manager’s license shall complete an application on forms provided by the city containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application. A copy of the application shall be provided to the police department for its review, investigation, and recommendation. All applications for a manager’s license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager’s license application shall require the following information:

(i) The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, and fingerprints taken by King County sheriff’s office employees.

(ii) The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.

(iii) Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

(A) A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(B) A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(C) An official passport issued by the United States of America;

(D) An immigration card issued by the United States of America;

(E) Any other identification that the city determines to be acceptable.

(iv) A complete statement of all criminal convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions.

(v) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

(vi) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(vii) Every panoram premises manager shall keep his or her license readily available for inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the panoram premises.

(b) The clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

(c) A panoram premises manager’s license shall be issued by the clerk within 14 days of the date of filing of a complete license application and fee, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a panoram premises manager’s license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the clerk fails to issue or deny the license within 14 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable law, commence work as a panoram premises manager until notified by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review period time for more than an additional 20 days.

(d) An applicant for a panoram premises manager’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. [Ord. 289 § 7, 2000]


5.70.070 License prohibited to certain classes.

No license shall be issued to:

(1) A natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons which have attained the age of 18 years with respect to panoram premises where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.

(2) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager of an adult panoram premises, the manager has obtained a manager’s license.

(3) A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.

(4) A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof. [Ord. 289 § 8, 2000]


5.70.080 Suspension or revocation of licenses.

(1) After an investigation and upon the recommendation of the chief of police or his or her designee, director of the department of community development, or the fire chief or his or her designee, the clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter where one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) The license was procured by fraud or false representation of material fact in the applicant or in any report or record required to be filed with the clerk; or

(b) The building, structure, equipment or location of the business for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of this chapter or any other applicable standards or regulations of the city code relating to buildings, structures, equipment, and zoning; or

(c) The failure of the licensee or any of his or her servants, agents or employees to comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.90 BMC, Chapter 9.95 BMC, or any other similar local or state law when the licensee knows or should have known of the violations committed by his or her servants, agents or employees; or

(d) The conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises; or

(e) The conviction of any of the licensee’s servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the panoram premises when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his or her servants, agents or employees.

(2) A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or another applicable ordinances, statutes, or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for a third and subsequent violation within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

(3) The clerk shall provide at least 10 day’s prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the basis for the action and of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension. The decision of the clerk shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal. [Ord. 289 § 9, 2000]


5.70.090 Appeal and hearing.

(1) Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk in refusing to issue or renew any license under this chapter or in temporarily or permanently suspending or revoking any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the city of Burien hearing examiner, by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk within 14 calendar days of receiving notice of the action from which the appeal is taken.

(2) Appeals under this chapter will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 2.20 BMC.

(3) If, following the effective date of the decision of the hearing examiner a writ of review is not obtained pursuant to BMC 2.20.040, the city attorney may invoke the aid of the appropriate court to secure enforcement and compliance with the hearing examiner’s decision. [Ord. 312 § 11, 2000; Ord. 289 § 10, 2000]


5.70.100 Premises regulation.

The clerk shall not license any panoram premises which do not conform to the following requirements, and shall revoke or suspend the license of any panoram premises, and the license of any operator thereof, which do not maintain conformity with the following requirements:

(1) The entire interior of the panoram premises shall be arranged in such a manner so that each panoram station therein is entered from a continuous main aisle at least five feet in width.

(2) The view from the continuous main aisle of any person inside a station shall not be obstructed except by a door, curtain or other screening device of no greater dimensions than that permitted in this section, and in no event may the view from the continuous main aisle into the station be obstructed, or the station be designed in such a way as to prevent the determination of the number of persons therein.

(3) The bottom of any door, curtain or screening device shall be not less than 27 inches above the floor of the panoram station in panoram stations where the occupant sits in a chair or on a seating surface to view the panoram. In panoram stations where the occupant stands to view the panoram, the bottom of any door, curtain or screening device shall not be less than 36 inches above the floor of the panoram station.

(4) No panoram station having a door, curtain or other screening device at its entrance shall contain any chair or other seating surface unless the door, curtain or screening device has, at a location between 66 and 78 inches above the floor, an opening 12 inches in height and at least 24 inches in width which provides an unobstructed view through either open space or clean window glass, to the side walls and back wall of the station. Any chair or seating surface in such panoram station shall not provide a seating surface more than 20 inches in either length of width and shall not be higher than 20 inches from the floor. There shall be no more than one such chair or seating surface in any panoram station.

(5) The licensee shall not permit any doors to areas on the premises which are available for use by persons other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to be locked during business hours.

(6) The licensee shall maintain illumination generally distributed in all parts of the premises available for use by the public so that all objects are plainly visible at all times when the premises are open or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain therein. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers is required for all areas of the panoram premises where members of the public are permitted.

(7) The entire floor area of a panoram station must be level with the continuous main aisle. No steps or risers are allowed in any such station.

(8) All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.

(9) Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of all applicable city ordinances, the laws of the state of Washington and the United States. The premises must meet the requirements of all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations including but not limited to the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city of Burien. All premises and devices must be inspected prior to issuance of a license.

(10) In order to ensure compliance with this chapter all areas of a panoram premises that are open to members of the public must be open to inspection by agents and employees of the city during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections must be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections of panoram premises are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(11) A panoram premises may not be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. 289 § 11, 2000]


5.70.110 Standards of conduct and operation of panoram premises and personnel.

(1) All employees of a panoram premises must adhere to the following standards of conduct:

(a) An employee may not perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or an act that constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington moral nuisance statute, or any provision regulating offenses against public morals.

(b) An employee may not permit actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or an act that constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute, or any provision regulating offenses against public morals by any other employee or member of the public.

(2) At a panoram premises, the following are required:

(a) Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or older. An owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the panoram premises may not knowingly permit or allow any person under the age of 18 years to be in or upon the premises whether an owner, operator, manager, patron, member, customer, agent, employee, independent contractor, or in any other capacity. This section is not intended to be used in a prosecution of a minor on or within a panoram premises.

(b) No photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation depicting any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be located outside of the adult entertainment establishment.

(c) A member of the public may not be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the panoram premises that includes but is not limited to, rooms provided for the benefit of employees, or storage areas. However, a person delivering goods, merchandise, or materials, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform the person’s job duties.

(d) Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment and/or panoram devices.

(e) All ventilation devices or openings between panoram booths must be covered by a permanently affixed louver or screen. No portion of a ventilation opening cover may be located more than one foot below the top of the booth walls or one foot from the bottom of booth walls. There may not be any other holes or openings between the booths.

(f) No panoram booth or station may be occupied by more than one person.

(g) There must be permanently posted and maintained in at least two conspicuous locations on the interior of all adult panoram premises a sign stating substantially the following:

OCCUPANCY OF ANY STATION OR BOOTH IS AT ALL TIMES LIMITED TO ONE PERSON.

THERE MAY BE NO CRIMINAL ACTIVITY IN THE STATIONS, BOOTHS, OR ON THE PREMISES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO: SEXUALLY EXPLICIT CONDUCT (RCW 9.68A.011), ACTS OF PROSTITUTION, DRUG ACTIVITY, OR SEXUAL CONDUCT, AS DEFINED BY CHAPTER 5.70 BURIEN MUNICIPAL CODE.

VIOLATORS ARE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.

Each sign must be conspicuously posted and not screened from the patron’s view. The letters and numerals must be on a contrasting background and be no smaller than one inch in height.

(h) Doors to areas of the panoram premises which are available for use by persons other than the owner, manager, operator, or their agents or employees, may not be locked during business hours.

(i) No person may operate or maintain any warning system or device, of any nature or kind, for the purpose of alerting, warning, or aiding and abetting the warning of any patrons, members, customers, owners, operators, managers, employees, agents, independent contractors, or any other persons in the adult entertainment establishment, that police officers or city code enforcement, fire, licensing, or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the premises.

(3) The responsibilities of the manager of a panoram premises shall include:

(a) A licensed manager shall be on duty at a panoram premises at all times members of the public are present on the premises. The full name and license of the manger shall be prominently posted during business hours.

(b) The manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation from a manager’s station of each member of the public. All panoram stations or booths must open to the public room so that the area and occupant inside the booths are fully and completely visible by direct line of sight to the manager located at the manager’s station which shall be located at the main entrance way to the public room containing the panoram stations or booths. No curtain, door, wall, merchandise, display rack, or other enclosure, material, or application may obscure in any way the manager’s view of any portion of the activity or occupant of the panoram premises.

(c) The manager shall be responsible for and shall ensure that the actions of members of the public, and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 289 § 12, 2000]


5.70.120 Conflicting sections or provisions.

In the event there is a conflict or inconsistency between the sections and provisions set forth in this chapter and those set forth elsewhere in the municipal code, the sections and provisions of this chapter govern and supersede those set forth elsewhere. [Ord. 289 § 13, 2000]


5.70.130 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 289 § 14, 2000]


5.70.140 Nuisance declared.

(1) Public Nuisance. Any panoram premises operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the city of Burien or the state of Washington shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a panoram premises contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Moral Nuisance. Any panoram premises operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW. [Ord. 289 § 15, 2000]


5.70.150 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 289 § 16, 2000]


Title 6 ANIMALS1

Chapters:

6.05    Administration 

6.10    Dog Leash Law 

6.15    Rabies Control 

6.20    Fowl and Rabbits 

6.25    Repealed

6.30    Exotic Animals 

6.35    Guard Dogs 

6.40    Feeding of Birds and Wildlife 1

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 6.05 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

6.05.100    Animal control authority appointment. 

6.05.200    General provisions and licensing – Adopted by reference. 

6.05.300    Enforcement and procedures – Adopted by reference. 

6.05.400    Appeals. 

6.05.500    Violation – Penalty. 


6.05.100 Animal control authority appointment.

The animal control authority of the city shall be the persons or legal entities employed by or under contract with the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 1, 1993]


6.05.200 General provisions and licensing – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of Chapter 11.04 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city, references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances, references to KCC 21A shall be deemed to be references to BMC Title 19, and references to “animal care and control authority or section” shall be deemed to be references to the city of Burien for the purposes of the licensing responsibilities of Chapter 11.04 KCC and shall be deemed to be references to the city’s animal control entity and personnel for the purposes of the enforcement and inspection responsibilities of Chapter 11.04 KCC, and except that in KCC 11.04.035(A)(3), discounted pet licenses issued to seniors and disabled persons are good for the lifetime of the pet, and in KCC 11.04.520, the city may accept proof of sufficient rabies titer test results in place of rabies vaccination documentation:

KCC

    11.04.010	Purpose and scope – Conflicts.

    11.04.020	Definitions.

    11.04.030	Pet licenses – Required –Issuance – Penalty – Fee use – Improper checks – Exceptions.

    11.04.033	Animal shelter, kennel, grooming service, cattery and pet shop – General licenses –Requirements.

    11.04.035	License fees and penalties.

    11.04.050	Animal shelter, cattery, pet shop, grooming service and kennel license – Information required.

    11.04.060	Hobby kennel or hobby cattery licenses – Required – Limitations – Requirements – Issuance and maintenance – Special hobby kennel license.

    11.04.070	Animal shelters, kennels, hobby kennels, catteries, hobby catteries or pet shops – Reporting required.

    11.04.080	Animal shelters, kennels, catteries, grooming service or pet shops – Inspections – Unsanitary conditions unlawful.

    11.04.090	Animal shelters, kennels, grooming services, catteries, and pet shops – Conditions.

    11.04.100	Animal shelters, kennels, catteries, grooming services, and pet shops – Indoor facilities.

    11.04.110	Animal shelters, kennels, catteries, and pet shops – Outdoor facilities.

    11.04.130	Grooming parlors – Conditions.

    11.04.140	Animal shelters, hobby kennels, kennels, pet shops, grooming parlors, guard dog purveyors, guard dog trainers and guard dog owners – Additional conditions.

    11.04.150	Licenses, registrations – Revocation, suspension or refusal to renew.

    11.04.160	Licenses, registrations – Revocation or refusal waiting period.

    11.04.165	Individual private animal placement permit – Required – Qualifications – Limitations – Inspection, denial and revocation.

    11.04.167	Organizational private animal placement permit – Required qualifications – Limitations – Inspection, denial and revocation.

    11.04.400	Mandatory spaying and neutering.

    11.04.520	Rabies vaccination required.

    11.04.550	Monitoring and reporting.

    11.04.560	Public information education.

(2) Pet Shop License Exemption for Feed Stores for Seasonal Sales. Feed stores which sell live chickens, ducks, or rabbits on a seasonal or other temporary basis are exempt from obtaining a pet shop license under KCC 11.04.040. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 579 § 1, 2013; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 227 § 1, 1998; Ord. 11 § 2, 1993]


6.05.300 Enforcement and procedures – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of Chapter 11.04 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city, references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances, references to “animal care and control authority or section” shall be deemed to be references to the city’s animal control agency and personnel, and references to the King County board of appeals shall be deemed to be references to the city’s hearing examiner:

KCC

    11.04.170	Enforcement power.

    11.04.180	Violations – Deemed nuisance – 	Abatement.

    11.04.190	Violations – Misdemeanor – Penalty.

    11.04.200	Violations – Civil penalty.

    11.04.210	Impounding.

    11.04.220	Additional enforcement.

    11.04.225	Additional enforcement – Cruelty to animals.

    11.04.230	Nuisances defined.

    11.04.235	Transfer of unaltered dogs and cats prohibited.

    11.04.240	Unlawful acts against police department dogs.

    11.04.250	Violations – unlawful acts – Cruelty to animals – database.

    11.04.260	Violations – Notice and order.

    11.04.270	Appeals.

    11.04.280	Redemption procedures.

    11.04.290	Vicious animals – Corrective action.

    11.04.300	Civil penalty and abatement costs – Liability of owner.

    11.04.310	Costs of additional enforcement.

    11.04.330	Additional rules and regulations.

    11.04.335	Waiver of fees and penalties.

(2) Removal of Animal Waste – Civil Penalty. It is a violation for any person to fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by an animal on public property before the person leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited. Any violation of this section is subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00.

(3) A new subsection (B)(3) is to be added at the end of KCC 11.04.290, as adopted by reference pursuant to this section, with such new subsection to read as follows:

3. Any dog or other animal which inflicts severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property or kills a domestic animal without provocation while the dog or other animal is off the owner’s property is declared to be a public nuisance and shall not be kept within the corporate limits of the City of Burien forty-eight hours following the owner’s receipt of written notice from the city’s animal control authority. Such animal or animals found in violation of this section are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded and disposed of as an unredeemed animal, and the owner or keeper of such animal(s) has no right to redeem such dog or animal. For purposes of this subsection, the terms “Unprovoked,” “Severe Injury” and “Injury” shall have the following meanings:

“Unprovoked” means that an animal is not “provoked.” An animal is “provoked” if the animal was being tormented, physically abused or hurt at the time of the incident. An animal also is “provoked” if a reasonable person would conclude that the animal was defending itself, its owner or an immediate family member of its owner, or another person within its immediate vicinity from an actual assault or was defending real property belonging to its owner or an immediate family member of its owner from a crime being committed on the owner’s property at that time. An animal is not “provoked” if the victim is alleged to have provoked the animal and the victim is less than six (6) years old.

“Severe injury” means any injury that results in broken bones, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures (or according to a licensed physician would have required sutures) or cosmetic surgery, or causes a permanent impairment of the physical condition that limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual. It also means transmittal of an infectious or contagious disease by an animal.

“Injury” means any physical injury that causes physical pain or the impairment of the physical condition including, but not limited to, cuts, scrapes, bruises or punctures.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 483 § 1, 2007; Ord. 11 § 3, 1993]


6.05.400 Appeals.

The city’s hearing examiner is designated to hear appeals and to review determinations relating to licensing and to violations of city animal control ordinances, in accordance with KCC 11.04.270. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 4, 1993]


6.05.500 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who allows an animal to be maintained in violation of this title, or otherwise violates or fails to comply with any requirement of this title, shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance, which violation shall constitute a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 11, 1993]


Chapter 6.10 DOG LEASH LAW

Sections:

6.10.100    Dog leash law – Adopted by reference. 


6.10.100 Dog leash law – Adopted by reference.

The entire city, with the exception of city-recognized off-leash dog parks, is designated a dog control zone and the following sections of Chapter 11.08 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances:

KCC

    11.08.010	Purpose.

    11.08.020	Definitions.

    11.08.030	Dogs at large prohibited in dog control zones.

    11.08.050	Violations – Misdemeanor penalty.

    11.08.060	Violations – Civil penalty.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 5, 1993]


Chapter 6.15 RABIES CONTROL

Sections:

6.15.100    Rabies control – Adopted by reference. 


6.15.100 Rabies control – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 11.12 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances:

KCC

    11.12.010	Quarantine order.

    11.12.020	Notice of rabies hazard – Quarantine period.

    11.12.030	Violation of quarantine.

    11.12.040	Euthanizing of infected animals.

    11.12.050	Vaccination order.

    11.12.060	Enforcement.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 6, 1993]


Chapter 6.20 FOWL AND RABBITS

Sections:

6.20.100    Disposition of fowl and rabbits – Adopted by reference. 


6.20.100 Disposition of fowl and rabbits – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 11.20 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances:

KCC

    11.20.010	Age restriction for disposition or coloration.

    11.20.020	Penalty for violations.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 7, 1993]


Chapter 6.25 LIVESTOCK

(Repealed by Ord. 543)


Chapter 6.30 EXOTIC ANIMALS

Sections:

6.30.100    Exotic animals – Adopted by reference. 


6.30.100 Exotic animals – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 11.28 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city, references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances, and references to “animal care and control authority or section” shall be deemed to be references to the city’s finance department for the purposes of the licensing responsibilities of Chapter 11.28 KCC and shall be deemed to be references to the city’s animal control entity and personnel for the purposes of the enforcement and inspection responsibilities of Chapter 11.28 KCC:

KCC

    11.28.010	Chapter intent.

    11.28.020	Definitions.

    11.28.030	Possession unlawful – Exception – Rules and regulations compliance.

    11.28.040	License – Issuance generally – Fees.

    11.28.050	License – Application – Content.

    11.28.070	Periodic inspection of premises.

    11.28.080	License revocation – Notice – Hearing.

    11.28.090	Violation – Penalty.

    11.28.100	Euthanasia in exigent circumstances.

    11.28.110	Chapter limitations.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 9, 1993]


Chapter 6.35 GUARD DOGS

Sections:

6.35.100    Guard dogs – Adopted by reference. 


6.35.100 Guard dogs – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 11.32 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city, references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances, and references to “animal care and control authority or section” shall be deemed to be references to the city’s finance department for the purposes of the licensing responsibilities of Chapter 11.32 KCC and shall be deemed to be references to the city’s animal control entity and personnel for the purposes of the enforcement and inspection responsibilities of Chapter 11.32 KCC:

KCC

    11.32.010	Intent.

    11.32.020	Definitions.

    11.32.030	Guard dog purveyor – License – Fees.

    11.32.040	Guard dog purveyor – License – Application.

    11.32.050	Guard dog trainer – License – Fees.

    11.32.060	Guard dog trainer – License – Application – Contents.

    11.32.070	Guard dog – Registration.

    11.32.080	Guard dog – Registration – Application – Contents.

    11.32.090	Inspections.

    11.32.100	Enforcement authorization.

    11.32.110	Limitations.

    11.32.120	Severability.

[Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 11 § 10, 1993]


Chapter 6.40 FEEDING OF BIRDS AND WILDLIFE

Sections:

6.40.100    Outdoor feeding. 

6.40.200    Enforcement. 


6.40.100 Outdoor feeding.

It is unlawful for any person to feed or allow any domestic or wild animals or birds to feed outdoors at such times and in such numbers that:

(1) Such feeding creates an unreasonable disturbance or accumulation of droppings on surrounding properties including public property; or

(2) Allows such feed or edible waste to remain uneaten for more than four hours. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 207 § 1, 1997]


6.40.200 Enforcement.

Violation of this chapter shall be enforced as provided in Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 677 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 543 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 207 § 2, 1997]


Title 7 CITY PARKS AND RECREATION

Chapters:

7.10    General

7.20    Administration/Facility Use Permits

7.30    Rules Governing Use of Facilities

7.40    Penalties


Chapter 7.10 GENERAL

Sections:

7.10.010    Parks authority – Appointment.

7.10.020    Definitions.

7.10.030    Facilities and programs – Purpose.

7.10.040    Parks of local or regional significance.


7.10.010 Parks authority – Appointment.

The parks director is designated as the parks authority of the city of Burien. The parks director shall have authority to and be responsible for the management, maintenance and operation of all parks located in the city of Burien. Such authority shall include, but not be limited to, establishment of reasonable rules and regulations governing the management, use and operation of parks that are not inconsistent with this title, setting hours of operations, collecting fees for use of parks and park facilities, and entering into agreements on behalf of the city for parks purposes and within the limits and authority otherwise set by the city council. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.10.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise; when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires:

(1) “Alcoholic beverages” or “liquor” shall be defined as set forth in RCW 66.04.010 and shall include alcohol, spirits, wine and beer.

(2) “Camping” means erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of, or in such a way as will permit, remaining overnight; or, parking a trailer, van, recreational vehicle, bus, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.

(3) “City employee” means any duly appointed city of Burien employee or certain contractors who are contracted to provide city services.

(4) “City” means the city of Burien, Washington.

(5) “City park” or “park” means and includes any area of land, with or without water, and appurtenances, structures, and other improvements located thereupon and any recreational facility, that is designated by the governing body of the city as a city park; that is designated by the city manager in writing as a city park; provided, that such designation is on file with the city clerk; or that is otherwise under the management and control of the parks, recreation and cultural services department.

(6) “Department” means the city of Burien parks, recreation and cultural services department.

(7) “Facility” or “facilities” means any building, equipment, sign, material, shelter, swimming pool, or other physical property including but not limited to trees, shrubs, plants, lawns, play equipment, picnic areas, athletic fields, parking lots, trails or structures, administered, operated, managed or maintained by the parks director, pursuant to his or her authority under this title.

(8) “Marine area” or “associated marine area” means any salt or fresh water area within 100 feet of any city of Burien trail, open space, marine reserve, park area or marine facility such as a dock, pier, float, buoy, log boom, or other object which is part of a city of Burien park area; provided, that such area does not include private property.

(9) “Marine reserve” is a nonterrestrial marine or estuarine area that is designated so the city may achieve one or more of the following: protect or restore rare, threatened or endangered native plants, animals or habitats in marine areas; protect or restore outstanding, representative or imperiled marine species, communities, habitats and ecosystems; protect or restore diverse marine gene pools; or contribute to the understanding and management of marine resources and ecosystems by providing the opportunity for scientific research in outstanding, representative or imperiled marine habitats or ecosystems.

(10) “Motorized vehicle” means any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road, and in, upon, or by which any persons or property may be transported or drawn, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, golf carts, mopeds and all-terrain vehicles, jeeps or similar type two- or four-wheel-drive vehicles, and snowmobiles, whether or not they can be legally operated upon the public highways. This does not include personal mobility devices such as non-motorized wheelchairs, motorized wheelchairs or authorized maintenance, police or emergency vehicles or other vehicles authorized by the city.

(11) “Parks director” means the director of the parks, recreation and cultural services department of the city, or his or her designee.

(12) “Person” means any individual, group, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or club.

(13) “Facility use permit” means a document that is issued by the parks department to individuals, groups or organizations permitting use of a certain city park or facility for a special or private event.

(14) “Special event permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 12.15 BMC.1

(15) “Trail” means any path, track, or right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles, or other non-motorized modes of transportation or which are otherwise defined in the Burien comprehensive plan. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.10.030 Facilities and programs – Purpose.

The facilities and programs of the department are established by the city to enhance the community by providing and promoting diverse, safe, well-maintained parks, facilities, recreation and cultural opportunities for all. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.10.040 Parks of local or regional significance.

The city manager shall have the authority to establish and update as necessary a list of parks that are deemed to be of local or regional significance. A park may be deemed to be of local or regional significance if the city manager determines that the park meets one or more of the following criteria:

(1) The park contains significant recreation or cultural opportunities or facilities, such as outdoor amphitheaters and music shells, auditoriums and concert halls, museums, community centers, sports complexes, regional trails, marinas, etc.;

(2) The location, geography, configuration or facilities of the park is especially appropriate for use by particular population groups (e.g., the elderly, pre-school children, the disabled);

(3) Because of its location, age, or scale, it is an easily identifiable visual feature and contributes to the distinctive quality or identity of the city;

(4) The park area contains unusual or special botanical resources;

(5) The park contains environmentally sensitive areas that serve a significant role or provide a significant function in the natural systems within the city of Burien planning area;

(6) The park is associated in a significant way with an historic event, structure, or person with a significant effect upon the city, state, or nation; or

(7) The park is associated in a significant way with a significant aspect of cultural heritage of the city, state, or nation. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]1

Code reviser’s note: Chapter 12.15 BMC was repealed by Ord. 395. Special event permits are covered in Chapter 12.18 BMC and the city will be enacting new temporary use permit provisions in the near future. 


Chapter 7.20 ADMINISTRATION/FACILITY USE PERMITS

Sections:

7.20.010    Administrative rules – Hours and operation.

7.20.020    Facility use permits.

7.20.030    Cancellation of facility use permit.

7.20.040    Facilities and outdoor field lights hours.

7.20.050    Cleanup.

7.20.060    Liability.

7.20.070    Adults to accompany minors.

7.20.080    Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.

7.20.090    Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

7.20.100    Adoption of rules and regulations by director.


7.20.010 Administrative rules – Hours and operation.

The director shall publish and post rules establishing the times that parks and park facilities will be open and closed for use by the public. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.020 Facility use permits.

Parks and park facilities are available for public use during hours of operation when city programs are not scheduled. Facility use permits or scheduling of use of facilities is required for any community special or private event held in a park facility and is completed by contacting the parks and recreation department office. For purposes of this section, a “community or special event” is any organized assemblage of persons at any park or park facility which is to gather for a common purpose and under the direction and control of a person and either (a) is anticipated to exceed or exceeds 75 people in number, or (b) will require exclusive use of park area or a park facility.

Groups or individuals that desire to use a city park facility may be granted facility use permits by the parks director, and may be charged a fee. Where appropriate, special conditions of use will be established by the parks director and so noted on the facility use permit, such as permission for use of amplifying devices. Charges for special services in the city recreational facilities will be established by the parks director.

Certain events may be required to obtain a special event permit from the city of Burien pursuant to Chapter 12.15 BMC.1 Special event permits that are required for any community special or private event held in whole or in part in a park or park facility shall be reviewed by the parks director prior to issuance. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.030 Cancellation of facility use permit.

The parks director reserves the right to cancel a facility use permit for cause or to meet the needs of the department to accommodate programs or other city-related activities as determined in the sole discretion of the parks director. Notice of cancellation shall be given in accordance with rules established by the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.040 Facilities and outdoor field lights hours.

Unless otherwise posted, all parks and park facilities are closed to the public at dusk or no later than 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved in the facility use permit or by the parks director. Outdoor lights at park athletic fields shall not be illuminated past 10:30 p.m. unless otherwise approved in the facility use permit or by the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.050 Cleanup.

All persons using a facility must leave the facility in a clean and neat condition considered satisfactory to the parks director. Cleanup guidelines, procedures and a checklist will be established by the parks director to assist compliance. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.060 Liability.

(1) Indemnity. Persons using facilities by facility use permit may be required to protect, save and hold the city of Burien, its elected and appointed officials and employees, harmless from and against all claims, demands and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising out of the use of facilities.

(2) Liability Insurance. During all periods of use, persons using facilities by facility use permit shall, except when a waiver is obtained from the parks director, obtain and maintain public liability insurance acceptable to the city and/or other insurance necessary to protect the public and the city on the premises to be used, with limits of liability not less than those limits as established by the city. Persons shall provide a certificate of insurance or, upon written request of the city, a duplicate of the policy, as evidence of the insurance protection provided. This insurance shall not be canceled or reduced without prior written notice to the city at least 20 days in advance of the cancellation. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.070 Adults to accompany minors.

When facilities are used pursuant to a facility use permit or special events permit, and children under the age of 18 are present, adults must be present and supervise them at all times. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.080 Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.

The misuse of a park facility or the failure to conform with park regulations, the instructions of city employees, or the conditions of a permit will be sufficient reason to terminate an event or eject a person from a park or park facility. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.090 Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

The use of park facilities for financial gain shall be allowed only through concession contracts secured by the city’s competitive bid process and a negotiated concession contract, or by facility use permit issued by the department or pursuant to special events permit. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.20.100 Adoption of rules and regulations by director.

The parks director shall have the authority to develop and adopt reasonable rules and regulations essential to the safe and efficient operation, management and use of the parks, and shall post them in conspicuous places in the parks. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]1

Code reviser’s note: Chapter 12.15 BMC was repealed by Ord. 395. Special event permits are covered in Chapter 12.18 BMC and the city will be enacting new temporary use permit provisions in the near future. 


Chapter 7.30 RULES GOVERNING USE OF FACILITIES

Sections:

7.30.010    Restrictions.

7.30.020    Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.

7.30.030    Use of motor vehicles.

7.30.040    Littering.

7.30.050    Food waste, washing of clothes or animals.

7.30.060    Outside household or commercial waste.

7.30.070    Washing of vehicles.

7.30.080    Waste from vehicles.

7.30.090    Paths and trails located within parks and open space areas.

7.30.100    Interference with trails.

7.30.110    Camping.

7.30.120    Tents and shelters in parks.

7.30.130    Overnight moorage.

7.30.140    Ice.

7.30.150    Game fish.

7.30.160    Shellfish and food fish.

7.30.170    Pets in city park facilities.

7.30.180    Disturbances by animals prohibited.

7.30.190    Horseback riding.

7.30.200    Physical impacts to park facilities.

7.30.210    Swimming.

7.30.220    Skateboards and in-line skates in designated areas only.

7.30.230    Presence in city parks during hours when the park is closed.

7.30.240    Trespassing.

7.30.250    Fires.

7.30.260    Games in parks.

7.30.270    Damage to property.

7.30.280    Damage to wildlife.

7.30.290    Removal of property.

7.30.300    Dumping in water prohibited.

7.30.310    Solicitation.

7.30.320    Fireworks.

7.30.330    Firearms, weapons.

7.30.340    Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances.

7.30.350    Intoxication.

7.30.360    Noise controls – Exterior noise levels at parks of local or regional significance.


7.30.010 Restrictions.

The following acts are prohibited within parks and are unlawful:

(1) Unless provided for in a facility use permit or special events permit, it is unlawful to use, place, or erect any sign board, sign, billboard, bulletin, post, pole, or device of any kind of advertising, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rope or cord to any tree, shrub, railing, post, or structure, or place or erect in any park a structure of any kind.

(2) To use a metal detection device without first obtaining a permit from the parks department, on such application form as the city shall provide. Permits shall be issued on condition that the user cause no permanent damage to park property, and that any grass, other vegetation and soil that is invaded or disturbed by the user in efforts to recover detected items be promptly restored to substantially the same condition it was originally in. The permit of any person who shall fail to abide by such conditions shall be subject to immediate revocation by the parks director. Metal detection devices shall be allowed or used without a permit on unimproved park lands only. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.020 Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.

Unless provided by facility use permit or special event permit, games of any kind are prohibited in parking lots and roadways of all parks. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.030 Use of motor vehicles.

(1) Parking. No operator of any motor vehicle, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other vehicle shall park such vehicle in any park area, except where the operator is using the area for the designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in the designated parking area, or in another area with the permission of the parks director or through an appropriate use permit issued by the city. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a vehicle in any park area after closing time except persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the department. Any vehicle found in violation of this section may be towed away at the owner’s expense. This section shall not apply to maintenance and emergency vehicles or vehicles authorized by the department.

(2) Roads and Trails. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a trail in any park, unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a park area except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots, parking areas, or where otherwise permitted by proper posting. This section shall not apply to emergency, maintenance or authorized vehicles.

(3) Speed Limits. No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any city park at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour or as otherwise posted, having due regard for traffic on, and the surface and width of the road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property, or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in picnic, utility, or areas of general public assemblage.

(4) Trucks and Commercial Vehicles. No person shall cause a truck or other vehicle while being used for commercial purpose to enter upon, use, or traverse any portion of any park area, parking lot or any park road except with the express permission of a city employee; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to city roads, county roads or state highways. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.040 Littering.

No person shall leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes, food, waste paper, cans, green waste or other rubbish in a park area, except in a garbage can or other receptacle designed for such purpose. Park patrons shall not dispose of litter on any adjacent property without express written permission. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.050 Food waste, washing of clothes or animals.

No person shall clean fish, or other food, or wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use, or any dog or other animal except at designated areas. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.060 Outside household or commercial waste.

No person shall bring in or deposit household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste, or rubbish which is brought in such form from any private property in any park area garbage can or other receptacle. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.070 Washing of vehicles.

No person shall clean, wax or wash any automobile or other vehicle in any park area or parking lot. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.080 Waste from vehicles.

No person shall drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper, automobile or other vehicle in any park area. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.090 Paths and trails located within parks and open space areas.

(1) For the purposes of this section, “travel” shall be construed to include all forms of movement or transportation on a park path or trail, including but not limited to foot, bicycle, horse, skateboard, roller skates and in-line skates.

(2) Park paths and trails are open to all nonmotorized users unless otherwise designated and posted. Path and trail restrictions may be posted at park entrances, trailheads or, in some cases, on individual trails.

(3) Every person traveling on a park path or trail shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device or trail sign unless otherwise directed.

(4) No motorized vehicles shall be allowed on park trails or paths.

(5) Community paths and neighborhood trails in public rights-of-way shall be governed by Chapter 12.20 BMC. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.100 Interference with trails.

No person shall place, deposit, or otherwise locate any object, structure or device, whether natural or artificial, that threatens or endangers any trail, or that threatens or endangers any person traveling thereon.

This section shall not apply to city employees or agents in the performance of their duties or to persons acting pursuant to written direction of the city of Burien. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.110 Camping.

No person shall camp in any park area including any park parking lot. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.120 Tents and shelters in parks.

Unless authorized by the parks director, no person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy a temporary tent or shelter in any park area unless there is an unobstructed view through such tent or shelter from at least two sides. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize overnight camping. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.130 Overnight moorage.

No person shall moor, anchor or dock a boat or other object overnight on or within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark at any city beachfront park or other bodies of water in other city park areas without authorization from the department. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.140 Ice.

No person shall go out onto ice in any park area. This includes but is not limited to lakes, ponds, streams and other bodies of water. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.150 Game fish.

All laws, rules and regulations of the State Game Commission relating to season, limits, and methods of fishing are applicable to fishing for game fish in park areas. No person may fish for or possess any fish taken from any lake, pond, stream or other body of water which is posted with a sign prohibiting fishing. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.160 Shellfish and food fish.

(1) All laws, rules and regulations of the State Department of Fish and Wildlife relating to season, limits, and methods of taking are applicable to the taking of shellfish or food fish in city park areas and, in addition to such laws, the city of Burien may close certain city park areas to the taking of shellfish. Such closed areas shall be posted with appropriate signs.

(2) Seahurst Park and Eagle Landing Park are designated as marine reserve areas. The taking or intentional damaging of shells, rocks, plants, driftwood, shellfish, or animals dead or alive from the beaches within marine reserve areas is prohibited. This marine reserve designation shall allow and encourage the protection of fragile marine ecosystems and the education of the public regarding proper beach uses. The intentional taking or damaging of shells, rocks, plants, driftwood, shellfish, or animals dead or alive from the beaches or associated marine areas within these areas is prohibited. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.170 Pets in city park facilities.

(1) Dogs, pets, or domestic animals are not permitted on any designated beach, picnic area, tennis courts or play area in any park or in any recreation facility unless specifically permitted by posting. This section shall not apply to service animals or to specific recreation programs as may be authorized by the parks director.

(2) In posted areas, dogs or other pets or domestic animals must be kept on a leash no greater than 15 feet in length, and under control at all times.

(3) Any person whose pet animal is in any city park area shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal and for removing feces deposited by such animal from the park area. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.180 Disturbances by animals prohibited.

No person shall allow his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bite, disturb or harass any park users, wildlife or other pets. No person shall permit his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bark or make noise continuously or otherwise disturb the peace and tranquility of the park. No person shall permit dogs, pets or domestic animals to damage, destroy or remove park vegetation. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.190 Horseback riding.

Horses are not permitted in any park area, except over bridle trails and other designated areas. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.200 Physical impacts to park facilities.

Activities which present the risk of damage to facilities including, but not limited to, golf, team football or team rugby activities, shall not be permitted in any park area unless permission is obtained in advance from the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.210 Swimming.

(1) Swimming in the marine waters and nearshore areas of Burien’s parks shall be confined to:

(a) Designated swimming areas, or

(b) Swimming areas marked with buoys, log booms, or other markers, clearly designating the boundaries of such areas. Swimming shall be permitted only within these areas.

(c) The city shall not be liable for unintentional injuries to park users who swim in unsupervised areas not designated for swimming (Recreational Immunity Statute, RCW 4.24.210).

(2) Skin-diving and scuba diving in the marine waters and nearshore areas of Burien’s parks shall be prohibited:

(a) Within 100 feet of any public boat ramp, patrolled public beach designated as a swimming area, except pursuant to permit therefor issued by the department and except for commercial diving, or

(b) In any other area unless the diver shall be accompanied by a watercraft or the area in which he or she is diving shall be marked by an adequately displayed diver’s flag. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.220 Skateboards and in-line skates in designated areas only.

No person shall be permitted to skateboard or in-line skate in park facilities unless otherwise designated by the parks director. No person shall be permitted to ride or drive any bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, roller skates, scooter, or any other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle on any tennis court. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.230 Presence in city parks during hours when the park is closed.

No person shall enter or be present in a city park area during hours the park is closed except persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the parks director or city employees or authorized agents. Park areas are closed one hour after sunset and open at sunrise except for activities authorized by the parks director and unless another closing and/or opening time is established for a particular park by the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.240 Trespassing.

No person except an authorized city employee, or other person duly authorized pursuant to law, shall enter or go upon any area which has been designated and posted as a “No Admittance” or “No Trespassing” area or during any time during which the park is posted as being closed to the public. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.250 Fires.

No person shall ignite or maintain any fire or participate in igniting, maintaining or using any fire, including wood, gas or briquette devices, within a park except in a designated picnic area barbeque unit or fire pit unless authorized by the department. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.260 Games in parks.

Activities including but not limited to sports and physical play which interfere or tend to interfere with or endanger other park users are prohibited unless permission is obtained in advance from the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.270 Damage to property.

No person shall remove, damage, or destroy any park facility, or remove, destroy, mutilate, damage or deface any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, fern, plant, flower, lawn, lighting system, sprinkler system or other property lawfully within any park. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.280 Damage to wildlife.

Except for fishing and shell fishing in authorized areas and subject to rules established by the Washington State Fish and Wildlife Commission, it is unlawful in any park to feed, capture, attempt to capture, tease, annoy, disturb, or strike any wild bird or wild animal, or to throw or otherwise propel any object at or in the vicinity of any wild bird or wild animal. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.290 Removal of property.

No person shall move any city property from its original position in any park area without the permission of the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.300 Dumping in water prohibited.

(1) No person shall deposit any waste or refuse of any nature, including human or animal waste, fertilizers, pesticides, or chemicals, into any stream, lake or other body of water running in, through, or adjacent to any park area.

(2) No person shall flush any marine head or similar sanitary sewage device into an associated marine area, nor cause any human or animal waste to be deposited into an associated marine area or when entering or leaving the area. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.310 Solicitation.

No person shall solicit, sell, or peddle any goods, services, food or drink, or distribute or post any handbills, circulars, or signs in any park area, except by concession contract or by facility use permit issued by the department. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.320 Fireworks.

No person shall possess, discharge, or cause to be discharged, in any park area or parks department facility, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive, or similar device unless so authorized by the city. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.330 Firearms, weapons.

No person shall discharge across, in, or onto any park area a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow, air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property. This section shall not apply where the parks director has authorized, in writing, a special recreational activity upon finding that it is not inconsistent with park use. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.340 Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances.

No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage or liquor or illegal controlled substance in any city park area, including unopened beverage containers, except in designated areas approved by the director or his or her designee and under the following conditions:

The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permissible indoors at the Burien Community Center and certain other indoor recreation facilities as may be designated by the parks director by facility use permit or special use permit; provided, that the activities conform to the requirements of the Washington State Liquor Control Board and state law. A state liquor permit must be displayed in the area where the activity is to be conducted, and adherence to other applicable facility use permit requirements is required. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.350 Intoxication.

Being or remaining in, or loitering about in any city park, recreation area, or associated marine area while in a state of intoxication is prohibited. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.30.360 Noise controls – Exterior noise levels at parks of local or regional significance.

(1) Except for outdoor amphitheaters and music shells, golf courses, ball fields, outdoor spectator sports areas, amusement areas, riding stables, nature trails, and wildlife refuges, park and recreation areas designated as being of local or regional significance as specified by the city shall not be subjected to adverse land uses which result in exterior noise level exposures which exceed 55 dBA Ldn.

(2) Outdoor amphitheaters and music shells designated as being of local or regional significance as specified by the city shall not be subjected to adverse land uses which result in exterior noise level exposures which exceed 50 dBA Ldn.

(3) Golf courses, ball fields, outdoor spectator sports areas, amusement areas, riding stables, nature trails, and wildlife refuges designated as being of local significance as specified by the city shall not be subjected to adverse land uses which result in exterior noise level exposures which exceed 60 dBA Ldn.

(4) Proponents of projects which will increase noise levels to which park and recreation areas are exposed above those established in this section must submit a noise mitigation plan to the city for review and approval before the required permits may be issued to allow the project to proceed. The city manager, with the assistance of the director of the department of community development, is authorized and directed to develop criteria for such review and approval. Such criteria shall be available in writing to applicants and shall, at minimum, require that the best available technology be employed to achieve no more than the maximum allowable noise standard set forth in this section. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


Chapter 7.40 PENALTIES

Sections:

7.40.010    Infractions.

7.40.020    Criminal violation.

7.40.030    Administrative sanctions.


7.40.010 Infractions.

Except as otherwise provided herein, violation of any provision of Chapter 7.30 BMC, Rules Governing Use of Facilities, shall be a Class 1 civil infraction and any person found to have committed such a civil infraction shall be assessed a monetary fine of $250.00, not including statutory assessments for each such violation. Violation of BMC 7.30.030(3) is a traffic violation. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.40.020 Criminal violation.

Any person who violates BMC 7.30.230, 7.30.240 or 7.30.320 is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who violates BMC 7.30.270 or 7.30.330 is guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


7.40.030 Administrative sanctions.

In addition to any prescribed penalty, any person failing to comply with any provision of Chapter 7.30 BMC shall be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges for such reasonable period of time as shall be determined by the parks director. [Ord. 475 § 2, 2007]


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY1 Revised 3/20

Chapters:

8.05    Administration

8.10    Pollution

8.15    Solid Waste Disposal System

8.20    Public Toilets

8.25    Dwellings

8.30    Food

8.35    Swimming Pools

8.37    Bicycle Helmet Regulations

8.40    Consumer Protection – Real Property

8.45    Nuisances

8.46    Repealed

8.50    Law Against Discrimination

8.55    Graffiti Removal

8.56    Restricting the Use and Sale of Single-Use Plastic Bags

8.57    Restricting the Use and Sale of Noncompostable Food Service Products Revised 3/20

8.60    Repealed1

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 8.05 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

8.05.010    Health and sanitation authority – Appointment.

8.05.020    Definitions – Adopted by reference.

8.05.030    Enforcement – Penalty.


8.05.010 Health and sanitation authority – Appointment.

Pursuant to interlocal agreement, King County and the Seattle-King County department of public health are designated as agent for the city with full authority to make inspections and to enforce all licenses, permits and standards adopted by this title, and to collect such filing fees, user fees and other fees, including handling fees, as are normally imposed by King County. [Ord. 22 § 1, 1993]


8.05.020 Definitions – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.04 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.04.010    Application in interpretation.

8.04.020    Bakery.

8.04.030    Restaurant or kitchen.

8.04.040    Confectionery.

8.04.050    Candy – Kitchen.

8.04.060    Basement.

8.04.070    Cellar.

8.04.080    Person – Singular words – Masculine words.

8.04.090    County health officer.

8.04.100    Standard disinfectal solution and standard disinfectant.

8.04.110    Garbage.

[Ord. 22 § 2, 1993]


8.05.030 Enforcement – Penalty.

The director of the Seattle-King County department of public health, the director of the King County department of public health, and city personnel occupying similar positions and authorities are authorized to enforce the provisions of this title, and any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, and any applicable United States statutes, and any person violating any provision of this title shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 22 § 17, 1993]


Chapter 8.10 POLLUTION

Sections:

8.10.100    Air pollution standards – Adopted by reference.

8.10.200    Water pollution standards – Adopted by reference.


8.10.100 Air pollution standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.08 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.08.010    Definition.

8.08.060    Smoke.

8.08.070    Opacity of smoke emissions.

8.08.080    Dust from fuel burning equipment.

8.08.090    Dust from heat processing equipment or other sources.

8.08.100    Traceable dust generally.

8.08.110    Enforcement.

8.08.120    Notice.

8.08.130    Hearing.

8.08.150    After hearing.

8.08.160    Unlawful use.

8.08.170    Outdoor fire control.

8.08.180    Regulations on prior permits.

[Ord. 22 § 3, 1993]


8.10.200 Water pollution standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.12 KCC as now in effect, and may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.12.010    Deposit of matter in Lake Washington – Purification of sewage.

8.12.020    Enforcement.

8.12.030    Pollution of fresh water prohibited – Permit required for making deposits in bodies of water – Application, hearing on application and investigation for permit.

8.12.040    Certain uses of contaminated and impure water prohibited.

[Ord. 22 § 4, 1993]


Chapter 8.15 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM

Sections:

8.15.100    Garbage disposal standards – Adopted by reference.

8.15.110    Keeping and use of solid waste containers.

8.15.200    Designation of city agency.

8.15.210    Comprehensive solid waste management plan.


8.15.100 Garbage disposal standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.16 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.16.010    Type of container required and method of disposal – Type of treatment required before feeding to animals.

8.16.020    Leaving manure in certain places prohibited – Limited period given for disposal.

[Ord. 22 § 5, 1993]


8.15.110 Keeping and use of solid waste containers.

(1) Each person in possession, charge or control of any dwelling, flat, roominghouse, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse or eating place, or in possession, charge or control of any shop, place of business or manufacturing establishment, or any place where garbage, refuse or swill is created or accumulated shall at all times, keep or cause to be kept portable solid waste containers, for the deposit therein of garbage and refuse, and to deposit, or cause to be deposited the same therein.

(2) The portable solid waste containers shall be kept secured and shall not be left open, except at the time when garbage or refuse is being deposited into the portable solid waste container.

(3) Any violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of $250.00. Any such matter may be commenced by the filing of a notice of infraction at the Southwest division of the King County district court. [Ord. 290 § 1, 2000]


8.15.200 Designation of city agency.

(1) The King County solid waste disposal system, operated by the department of public works, solid waste division, is designated as the agency for disposal of all solid waste, including moderate risk waste, generated or collected within the corporate limits of the city and the county is authorized to designate disposal sites for the disposal of all such solid waste, except for solid waste which is eliminated through waste reduction or waste recycling activities.

(2) In addition, and pursuant to Section 8.5.a of the interlocal agreement, all such waste generated, or collected from, within the limits of the city of Burien which is delivered to the system for disposal shall comply in every respect with the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC sec. 6901 et seq.), Chapter 70.95 RCW, all applicable King County board of health rules and regulations including but not limited to Number 8, and any and all other applicable federal, state, and local environmental health laws, rules, and regulations. King County is specifically authorized to enforce all such laws, rules, and regulations within the corporate limits of the city of Burien. [Ord. 21 § 1, 1993]


8.15.210 Comprehensive solid waste management plan.

King County is designated to prepare a comprehensive solid waste management plan which shall include the city’s plan, pursuant to RCW 70.95.080(3). The city declares that it is a member of the designated interlocal forum for the purpose of resolving solid waste issues and facilitating regional cooperation in solid waste management. [Ord. 21 § 2, 1993]


Chapter 8.20 PUBLIC TOILETS

Sections:

8.20.100    Public toilet standards – Adopted by reference.


8.20.100 Public toilet standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.20 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.20.010    Permit required.

8.20.020    Renewal of permit – Suspension or revocation.

8.20.030    Sanitation and construction requirements.

[Ord. 22 § 6, 1993]


Chapter 8.25 DWELLINGS

Sections:

8.25.100    Boarding homes and schools for children standards – Adopted by reference.

8.25.200    Rodent control standards – Adopted by reference.

8.25.300    Unsafe dwelling standards – Adopted by reference.


8.25.100 Boarding homes and schools for children standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.24 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.24.010    Conditions required permit – Maintenance requirements – Quality of food and sleeping quarters.

[Ord. 22 § 7, 1993]


8.25.200 Rodent control standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.38 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.38.010    Right of entry for inspection.

8.38.020    Adequate protection required.

[Ord. 22 §§ 8, 10, 1993]


8.25.300 Unsafe dwelling standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.36 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference.

KCC

8.36.010    Use of certain dwellings prohibited – Authority of health officer.

[Ord. 22 § 9, 1993]


Chapter 8.30 FOOD

Sections:

8.30.100    Food service establishment standards – Adopted by reference.

8.30.200    Meat standards and licensing – Adopted by reference.

8.30.300    Milk standards – Adopted by reference.

8.30.400    Frozen dairy food products standards – Adopted by reference.


8.30.100 Food service establishment standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.30 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.40.010    Definitions.

8.40.020    Food supplies.

8.40.030    Food protection.

8.40.040    Personnel health and disease control.

8.40.050    Cleanliness.

8.40.060    Equipment and utensils.

8.40.070    Cleanliness of equipment and utensils.

8.40.080    Water supply.

8.40.090    Sewage disposal.

8.40.100    Plumbing.

8.40.110    Toilet facilities.

8.40.120    Hand-washing facilities.

8.40.130    Garbage and rubbish disposal.

8.40.140    Vermin control.

8.40.150    Floors, walls and ceilings.

8.40.160    Lighting.

8.40.170    Ventilation.

8.40.180    Dressing rooms and lockers.

8.40.190    Housekeeping.

8.40.200    Compliance.

8.40.210    Plan review of future construction.

8.40.220    Permit required.

8.40.230    Issuance of permits.

8.40.240    Inspection of good service establishments – Access.

8.40.250    Inspection report form.

8.40.260    Notice to permit holder.

8.40.270    Examination and condemnation of food.

8.40.280    Imported foods.

8.40.290    Procedure when inspection is suspended.

8.40.310    Severability.

[Ord. 22 § 11, 1993]


8.30.200 Meat standards and licensing – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.44 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.44.010    Statute authority.

8.44.020    Validity.

8.44.030    Definitions.

8.44.040    Licenses required.

8.44.050    Fees.

8.44.060    Expiration – Transfer.

8.44.070    Display.

8.44.080    Issuance of wrapper and cutter licenses.

8.44.090    Application.

8.44.100    Application for meat distribution facilities license outside county.

8.44.110    Application when slaughterhouse outside county.

8.44.120    Distribution facilities inspection.

8.44.130    Food and beverage service worker’s permit required.

8.44.140    Sale to consumer from licensed shop only.

8.44.150    Retail meat shop operation authorization.

8.44.160    Retail processed meat shop operation authorization.

8.44.170    Wholesale meat shop operation authorization.

8.44.180    Wholesale meat dealer operation authorization.

8.44.190    Wholesale commission meat dealer operation authorization.

8.44.200    Meat warehouse operation authorization.

8.44.210    Meat cutter operation authorization.

8.44.220    Apprentice meat cutter authorization.

8.44.230    Meat wrapper operation authorization.

8.44.240    Meat wrapper salesman operation authorization.

8.44.250    Granting license after revocation.

8.44.260    Employing unlicensed person.

8.44.270    Examination – Meat cutter – Meat wrapper salesman.

8.44.280    Meat worker’s health permits.

8.44.290    Fraudulent and unlawful use or removal of licenses, certificates, inspection marks, and numbers.

8.44.300    Compliance required.

8.44.310    Walls and ceilings.

8.44.320    Doors and windows.

8.44.330    Floors.

8.44.340    Lighting.

8.44.350    Ventilation.

8.44.360    Plumbing.

8.44.370    Refrigeration.

8.44.380    Toilets, lavatories and dressing rooms.

8.44.390    Cleaning of equipment and premises.

8.44.400    Equipment.

8.44.410    Water and ice supply.

8.44.420    Personnel.

8.44.430    Special inspection services.

8.44.440    Availability of records.

8.44.450    Examination of distribution facilities.

8.44.460    Application to state for inspection permit.

8.44.470    Inspector qualifications.

8.44.480    Meat inspection fund.

8.44.490    Conditions generally – Fresh meat.

8.44.500    Meat cutter or apprentice responsibility.

8.44.510    Meat case temperature.

8.44.520    Cutting and packaging responsibility.

8.44.530    Packaging and labeling requirements.

8.44.540    Conditions generally – Frozen meat.

8.44.550    Enclosure requirements.

8.44.560    Storage temperature.

8.44.570    Inspection.

8.44.580    Self-service frozen meat cabinet temperature.

8.44.590    Pet food.

8.44.600    Refreezing.

8.44.610    Labeling.

8.44.620    Grading required.

8.44.630    Labeling required.

8.44.640    Approval – Misbranding.

8.44.650    Possession of ungraded meat.

8.44.660    Deceptive or false assertion prohibited.

8.44.670    Statement of true portion required.

8.44.680    Grade designation.

8.44.690    Artificial lights.

8.44.700    Weight and portion of pork.

8.44.710    Picture advertising.

8.44.720    Ground beef.

8.44.730    Advertising frozen meat.

8.44.740    Wrapping materials.

8.44.750    Transportation.

8.44.760    Peddling prohibited.

8.44.770    Sale prohibited.

8.44.780    Sale of adulterated sausage or ground beef.

8.44.790    Contents of adulterated sausage or ground beef.

8.44.800    Sale or disposition of horse meat.

[Ord. 22 § 12, 1993]


8.30.300 Milk standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.48 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.48.010    Definitions.

8.48.030    Milk and milk products which may be sold.

8.48.040    Adulterated or misbranded milk or milk products.

8.48.050    Labeling.

8.48.060    Handling of raw milk.

[Ord. 22 § 13, 1993]


8.30.400 Frozen dairy food products standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.52 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.52.010    Definitions.

8.52.020    Pasteurization of mix.

8.52.030    Permits.

8.52.040    Examination of frozen dairy foods.

8.52.050    Sanitation standards.

8.52.060    Transferring and dispensing frozen dairy foods.

8.52.070    Inspection of dairy food establishments.

8.52.080    Personnel health and disease control.

8.52.100    Dairy food plants.

[Ord. 22 § 14, 1993]


Chapter 8.35 SWIMMING POOLS1

Sections:

8.35.100    Public and semipublic swimming pool standards – Adopted by reference.


8.35.100 Public and semipublic swimming pool standards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.56 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.56.010    Definitions.

8.56.020    Swimming pool advisory committee.

8.56.040    Retroactivity.

8.56.050    Permit to operate required – Application – Issuance.

8.56.060    Plans and specifications for construction, alteration or renovation.

8.56.070    Maintenance required.

8.56.080    Operation, maintenance and use responsibility.

8.56.090    Water quality.

8.56.100    Disinfection.

8.56.110    Recirculation and filtration.

8.56.120    Waste.

8.56.130    Cross-connections.

8.56.140    Operating records.

8.56.150    Alternate materials, equipment or procedures.

8.56.160    Severability.

[Ord. 22 § 15, 1993]1

Code reviser’s note: See also BMC 15.50.020 for pool construction provisions. 


Chapter 8.37 BICYCLE HELMET REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.37.010    Title.

8.37.020    Purpose and policy declared.

8.37.030    Findings.

8.37.040    Definitions.

8.37.050    Requirements regarding bicycle helmets.

8.37.060    Enforcement.


8.37.010 Title.

This chapter may be cited and referred to as the “Burien bicycle helmet regulations.” [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


8.37.020 Purpose and policy declared. 

(1) This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the authority of the city council of the city of Burien to protect and preserve the public health and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.

(2) It is the express purpose of this chapter to provide for and to promote the health and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

(3) It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon any person falling within its scope, and no provision of, nor term used in, this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city of Burien or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

(4) Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or to form the basis for, a liability on the part of the city of Burien, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any person to comply with this chapter. [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


8.37.030 Findings.

The following findings of fact were adopted by the King County Board of Health in Chapter 9.04 KCC. The city council of the city of Burien hereby adopts the same findings as set forth below. 

(1) Head injuries are a major cause of death and disability associated with the operation of a bicycle on public roadways and bike paths. Every year, approximately 1,000 Americans die of bicycle-related injuries. Approximately 75 percent of those deaths are due to head injuries. A significant number of those individuals who survive head injuries do not return to a normal life. They are often left with profound, disabling and long-lasting conditions. From 1989 through 1998, there were 35 bicycle-related deaths and 2,003 bicycle-related hospitalizations in King County, including Seattle.

(2) Bicycle helmets have been shown to prevent head injuries suffered by bicycle riders during a crash or fall. Studies completed in 1989 and 1996 by investigators at Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound and the Harborview Injury Prevention and Research Center show that helmet use could reduce the number of head injuries involving bicycling by between 69 percent and 85 percent. The medical examiner noted that of the eight bicycle-related deaths in 2000, four were not wearing helmets. Moreover, the King County Child Death Review (CDR) found that of the five children who died while riding a bicycle from July 1998 to April 2002, four were not wearing helmets when injured; the CDR experts concluded that three of the children would have likely survived if a helmet had been worn. Finally, using tools developed by The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, it is estimated that nearly $10,000,000 would be saved annually in both direct and indirect costs for bicycle-related head injuries in King County if every cyclist would wear a helmet.

(3) Educational and promotional efforts in King County have increased helmet use from two percent in 1985 to 61 percent in 1999 for children ages five through 12. In 1999, bicycle helmet use in adults was observed to be 71 percent. However, these results have reached a plateau. Additional efforts are needed to augment helmet use.

(4) Studies in the United States and elsewhere demonstrate that legislation is effective in increasing helmet use. Helmet laws in Georgia, Maryland, and New York increased helmet use from between 26 percent and 40 percent. In North Carolina, helmet use increased two to three times after legislation. Furthermore, New Zealand found a 30 percent reduction in head injuries after passage of a helmet law. Thus, regulations requiring the use of bicycle helmets enhance the effectiveness of educational efforts to reduce the number and severity of head injuries resulting from bicycle crashes. The city council of the city of Burien therefore finds that bicycle helmets are required for the safe operation of bicycles not powered by motor on public roadways, bicycle paths or any right-of-way or publicly owned facility located in the city of Burien. [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


8.37.040 Definitions.

(1) “Bicycle” means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two tandem wheels, any one of which is more than twenty inches in diameter. For purposes of this chapter, the term bicycle shall include any attached trailers, sidecars, and/or device being towed by a bicycle. 

(2) “Guardian” means a parent, legal guardian or temporary guardian who maintains responsibility, whether voluntary or otherwise, for the safety and welfare of a person under the age of 18 years of age. [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


8.37.050 Requirements regarding bicycle helmets.

(1) Any person operating or riding a bicycle not powered by motor on a public roadway, bicycle path or any right-of-way or publicly owned facilities located in the city of Burien must wear a protective helmet designed for bicycle safety. Such helmet shall meet or exceed the safety standards adopted by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 15 USCS 6004, or Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Foundation, the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the United States might adopt. The helmet must be equipped with either a neck or chinstrap that shall be fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion.

(2) The guardian of a person under the age of 18 years shall not knowingly allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent, that person from operating of riding on a bicycle not powered by motor on a public roadway, bicycle path or on any right-of-way or publicly owned facilities located in the city of Burien unless that person is wearing a helmet that meets the requirements of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) No person shall transport another person upon a bicycle not powered by motor on a public roadway, bicycle path or on any right-of-way or publicly owned facilities located in the city of Burien unless that person is wearing a helmet that meets the requirements of subsection (1) of this section.

(4) No person shall sell or offer for sale a bicycle helmet that does not meet the requirements of subsection (1) of this section.

(5) No person shall rent a bicycle not powered by motor for use to another person unless that other person possesses a helmet that meets the requirements of subsection (1) of this section. [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


8.37.060 Enforcement.

(1) A violation of this chapter is designated a civil infraction, to which the provisions of Chapter 7.80 RCW shall apply, except as set forth hereafter.

(2) Any duly commissioned law enforcement officer having law enforcement authority at the place where a violation of this chapter occurs is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Any person found to have committed a violation of this chapter shall be assessed a monetary penalty of $42.00 for each such violations, not including the filing fee assessed by the district court in which the city files such notice of infraction.

(4) Whenever a court imposes a monetary penalty under this chapter, it is immediately due. If the person is unable to pay at the time the penalty is imposed, the court may grant an extension of the period in which the penalty may be paid.

(5) The court may waive, reduce or suspend the monetary penalty prescribed herein, and may impose such conditions on any waiver, reduction, or suspension as it deems just. If the court determines that a person has insufficient funds to pay the monetary penalty, the court may order performance of a number of hours of community service in lieu of a monetary penalty at the then state minimum wage per hour.

(6) The first time a person has been issued a notice of infraction for violation of this chapter, if such person appears in person before the court and supplies the court with proof that between the date of the notice of infraction and the appearance date in court that the person purchased a helmet meeting the requirements of BMC 8.37.050(1), the court shall dismiss the notice of infraction without costs. [Ord. 393 § 1, 2003]


Chapter 8.40 CONSUMER PROTECTION – REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

8.40.100    Consumer protection for purchases of real property – Adopted by reference.


8.40.100 Consumer protection for purchases of real property – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of Chapter 8.60 KCC, as now in effect, and as may be subsequently amended, are adopted by reference:

KCC

8.60.010    Vendor – Disclosure form required.

8.60.020    Vendor – Disclosure form – Contents.

8.60.030    Vendor – Disclosure and alternative waiver forms – Filing.

[Ord. 22 § 16, 1993]


Chapter 8.45 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.45.010    Purpose.

8.45.015    Declaration of nuisance.

8.45.020    Definitions.

8.45.030    Repealed.

8.45.035    Repealed.

8.45.040    Repealed.

8.45.050    Repealed.

8.45.060    Repealed.

8.45.070    Enforcement procedures.

8.45.080    Repealed.


8.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system to enforce the development, land use, and public health regulations of the city, to provide an opportunity for a prompt hearing and decision on alleged violations of these regulations, and to establish penalties for violations, including abatement of any affected properties. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.015 Declaration of nuisance.

All violations of city of Burien ordinances are found and declared to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and are further found and declared to be nuisances. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter, whether by act or omission, to cause, create, maintain, suffer, or allow a nuisance to occur, exist, or remain. Each day any person allows or fails to abate such nuisance after notice shall constitute a separate violation. Nuisances create public harm. Prevention and correction of nuisances are necessary to prevent public harm. For purposes of this chapter, “public nuisances” and “private nuisances” shall have the same meaning. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

(1) “Act” means doing or performing something.

(2) “Applicable department director” means the city manager or his designee, including any department director or other designee, empowered by ordinance or by the city manager to enforce a city ordinance or regulation.

(3) “Development” means the erection, alteration, enlargement, demolition, maintenance or use of any structure or the alteration or use of any land above, at or below ground or water level, and all acts authorized by a city regulation.

(4) “Emergency” means a situation which in the opinion of the applicable department director requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the health or safety of persons or property.

(5) “Nuisance” (also referred to herein as “violation” or “nuisance violation”) means:

(a) A violation of any city of Burien ordinance;

(b) Doing an act, omitting to perform any act or duty, or permitting or allowing any act or omission, which annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, is unreasonably offensive to the senses, or which obstructs or interferes with the free use of property so as to interfere with or disrupt the free use of that property by any lawful owner or occupant; or

(c) The existence, without limitation, of any of the following conditions:

(i) Trash Covered Premises. Any premises containing trash or abandoned materials, except that kept in garbage cans or containers maintained for regular collection;

(ii) Dangerous Structures. Any dangerous, decaying, unkempt, falling or damaged dwelling, fence, or other structure;

(iii) Potential Vermin Habitat or Fire Hazard. Any accumulation of material on a property including, but not limited to, animal matter, ashes, bottles, boxes, broken stone, building materials which are not properly stored or neatly piled, cans, cement, crates, empty barrels, dead animals or animal waste, glass, litter, mattresses or bedding, old appliances or equipment or any parts thereof, furniture, iron or other scrap metal, packing cases, packing material, plaster, plastic, rags, wire, yard waste or debris or other objects which endanger property or public safety, or constitute a fire hazard or vermin habitat; provided, that nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved, covered receptacles;

(iv) Junk Vehicles. Any wrecked, inoperable, abandoned or disassembled trailer, house trailer, boat, tractor, automobile or other vehicle, or any parts thereof. A junk vehicle includes apparently inoperable, immobile, disassembled or extensively damaged vehicles. Evidence of inoperability and damage includes, but is not limited to, a buildup of debris that obstructs use, a broken window or windshield, a missing wheel, a flat tire, a nonfunctional motor or transmission, missing bumpers, or missing license plates; provided nothing herein shall prevent the keeping or storage of any vehicle on private property which is screened from view;

(v) Attractive Nuisances. Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in or on a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot, which is left in any place exposed or accessible to children. This includes unused or abandoned refrigerators, freezers, or other large appliances or equipment or any parts thereof; abandoned motor vehicles; any structurally unsound or unsafe fence or edifice; any unsecured or abandoned excavation, pit, well, cistern, storage tank or shaft; and any lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for minors;

(vi) Obstructions to the Public Right-of-Way. Use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk or use of a public street or sidewalk which causes any obstruction to traffic or to open access to the streets or sidewalks; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to events, parades, or the use of the streets or public rights-of-way when authorized by the city. This section includes the existence of drainage onto or over any sidewalk, street or public right-of-way, and the existence of any debris or plant growth on sidewalks adjacent to any property;

(vii) Vegetation. Any noxious or toxic weed or uncultivated plant, weeds or tall grass which may be a fire hazard, or any tree which is in danger of falling and creates a substantial risk of damage or injury;

(viii) Illegal Dumping. Dumping of any type by any person on public or private property not registered as a legal dump site; and

(ix) Dumping in Waterways. Dumping, depositing, placing or leaving of any garbage, ashes, debris, gravel, earth, rock, stone or other material upon the banks, channels, beds or bars of any navigable water; or the felling of any tree or trees, so that the same shall in whole or in part project within the high water bank of any navigable watercourse; or the casting, placing, depositing or leaving of any logs, roots, snags, stumps or brush upon the banks or in the bed or channel of any navigable watercourse.

(6) “Omission” means a failure to act. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.030 Voluntary correction.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.035 Administrative notice and order. 

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003]


8.45.040 Filing of nuisance abatement action in district court.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.050 Hearing before the district court.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.060 Abatement by the city.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.070 Enforcement procedures.

This chapter shall be enforced as provided in Chapter 1.15 BMC. The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to other enforcement provisions authorized by the Burien Municipal Code except as precluded by law. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


8.45.080 Conflicts.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 383 § 1, 2003; Ord. 146 § 1, 1995]


Chapter 8.46 JUNK VEHICLE ABATEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. 682)




Chapter 8.50 LAW AGAINST DISCRIMINATION

Sections:

8.50.010    Short title – Application.

8.50.020    Remedies nonexclusive – Limitation on city liability – Statute of limitations unaffected.

8.50.030    State law against discrimination – Adopted by reference – Expansion of protection.

8.50.040    Definitions.

8.50.050    Discrimination in contracts prohibited.

8.50.060    Enforcement.


8.50.010 Short title – Application.

This chapter shall be entitled “the city of Burien law against discrimination.” 

This chapter shall not be applicable to cases wherein a remedy is provided by the state law against discrimination, Chapter 49.04 RCW. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a remedy not already provided at state law for discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in public accommodations, contracts, housing, and employment. Additionally, the state law against discrimination does not currently prohibit discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, families with children, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, age, or the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability or the use of a trained dog guide or service animal by a disabled person in contracts and employment when the employer has fewer than eight employees. Accordingly, this chapter provides remedies for discrimination in contracts and employment when the employer has fewer than eight employees. [Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


8.50.020 Remedies nonexclusive – Limitation on city liability – Statute of limitations unaffected. 

(1) The remedies provided herein are not exclusive; nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to deny persons the right to institute any action or to pursue any civil or criminal remedy for the violation of those persons’ rights. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to deny persons the right to institute any proceedings under Chapter 49.60 RCW, the state law against discrimination. 

(2) Nothing in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the city of Burien, or its officers or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from or by reason of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of Burien by its officers, employees or agents.

(3) Nothing in this chapter shall be presumed to toll the statute of limitations for any claims under federal or state statute. [Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


8.50.030 State law against discrimination – Adopted by reference – Expansion of protection. 

The following sections of the Washington law against discrimination, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as the city of Burien law against discrimination except, that unless the context indicates otherwise, the phrase, “race, creed, color, national origin, families with children, sex, marital status, age, or the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability or the use of a trained dog guide or service animal by a disabled person” shall be revised to read, “race, creed, color, national origin, families with children, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, age, or the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability or the use of a trained dog guide or service animal by a disabled person”:

RCW

49.60.010	Construction of chapter – Election of other remedies. 

49.60.020	Purpose of chapter. 

49.60.030	Freedom from discrimination – Declaration of civil rights.

49.60.172	Unfair practices with respect to HIV or hepatitis C infection.

49.60.174	Evaluation of claim of discrimination – Actual or perceived HIV or hepatitis C infection.

49.60.175 	Unfair practices of financial institutions. 

49.60.176 	Unfair practices with respect to credit transactions. 

49.60.178 	Unfair practices with respect to insurance transactions. 

49.60.180	Unfair practices of employers. 

49.60.190	Unfair practices of labor unions. 

49.60.200	Unfair practices of employment agencies. 

49.60.205	Age discrimination – Limitation. 

49.60.210	Unfair practices – Discrimination against person opposing unfair practice – Retaliation against whistleblower.

49.60.215	Unfair practices of places of public resort, accommodation, assemblage, amusement. 

49.60.220	Unfair practice to aid violation. 

49.60.222	Unfair practices with respect to real estate transactions, facilities, or services. 

49.60.223	Unfair practice to induce sale or rental of real property by representations regarding entry into neighborhood of persons of particular race, disability, etc. 

49.60.2235	Unfair practice to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere regarding secured real estate transaction rights. 

49.60.224	Real property contract provisions restricting conveyance, encumbrance, occupancy, or use to persons of particular race, disability, etc., void – Unfair practice. 

49.60.400	Discrimination, preferential treatment prohibited. 

[Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


8.50.040 Definitions. 

(1) RCW 49.60.040, Definitions, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference except that RCW 49.60.030(3) shall be amended to read as follows:

“Employer” includes any person acting in the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly, who employs one or more persons, and does not include any religious or sectarian organization not organized for private profit;

(2) “Sexual orientation” means male or female heterosexuality, bisexuality, or homosexuality, and includes a person’s attitudes, preferences, beliefs and practices pertaining to sex.

(3) “Contract” means an agreement to perform a service or provide goods that entails a legally binding obligation and that is performed or intended to be wholly or partly performed within the city of Burien or that includes the city of Burien as a party. 

(4) “Gender identity” means a person’s identity, expression, or physical characteristics regarding gender, whether or not traditionally associated with one’s biological sex or one’s sex at birth.

(5) “Business enterprise” means a licensed business organization located in or doing business in the city of Burien or that is required to comply with this chapter by the terms of an agreement with the city of Burien.

(6) “Commercially significant contract” means a contract for the provision of services, including, but not limited to, construction services, consulting services or bonding or other financial services, or the sale of goods that exceeds $5,000.

(7) “Contracting agency” means a person who for compensation engages in recruiting, procuring, referral or placement of contracts with a contractor, and that is doing business in the city of Burien.

(8) “Contractor” means a business enterprise, including, but not limited to, a company, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, excluding real property lessors and lessees, contracting to do business within the city. “Contractor” includes, but is not limited to, a public works contractor, a consultant contractor, a provider of professional services, a service agency, a vendor, and a supplier selling or furnishing materials, equipment, goods or services, but does not include a governmental agency other than the city.

(9) “Trade association” means an association of businesses organizations engaged in similar fields of business that is formed for mutual protection, the interchange of ideas, information and statistics or the maintenance of standards within their industry.

(10) “Discriminate,” “discrimination” and “discriminatory act” mean an action, other than an action taken in accordance with a lawful affirmative action program, or failure to act, whether by itself or as part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals or groups of individuals, by reasons of race, color, age, gender, gender identity, marital status, sexual orientation, religion, ancestry, national origin, disability or use of a service or assistive animal by an individual with a disability, unless based upon a bona fide contractual qualification. [Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


8.50.050 Discrimination in contracts prohibited. 

(1) This chapter applies to the city of Burien when the city is acting as a contractor or is awarding a contract; business enterprises having an agreement with the city; and other contractors, subcontractors, suppliers, materialmen, bonding agencies, trade associations, contract agencies and other business entities and parties doing business in the city.

(2) This section shall be liberally construed for accomplishment of its policies and purposes.

(3) It is an unfair contracting practice for:

(a) The city of Burien, a business enterprise doing business in the city or business enterprise required to comply with this chapter by the terms of an agreement with the city, to discriminate against a person with respect to the bid, award or referral of a contract or with respect to the conditions, terms, price, performance standards or other provisions of a contract;

(b) Contracting agency or trade association to discriminate against a person with respect to membership rights and privileges, admission to or participation in a guidance program or other business or occupational training program; 

(c) Bonding company to discriminate against a person regarding the terms and conditions under which bonding services are offered or performed; 

(d) Contracting agency or trade association to discriminate against a person with respect to a referral of a contract opportunity or assignment of a particular contract; 

(e) Contractor, business enterprise, contracting agency or trade association to retaliate against a person because that person has opposed an act of discrimination or because that person has made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing initiated under this chapter. [Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


8.50.060 Enforcement.

(1) If a person believes that he or she is aggrieved by any of the prohibited discriminatory practices set forth in this chapter, that person may file a discrimination complaint with the city of Burien city clerk. For purposes herein, a discrimination complaint shall be completed on a form provided by the city and shall set forth the following:

(a) A general summary of the alleged unfair practice;

(b) Citation to the applicable section(s) of the city’s law against discrimination alleged to have been violated;

(c) The applicable dates and locations of the alleged violation;

(d) A detailed chronology of the nature of the violation; and

(e) The relief sought by the complainant.

(2) Upon receipt of the discrimination complaint, the city clerk shall assign the complaint to a mediator selected by the city clerk. The mediation shall be administered by a mediator under the American Arbitration Association Rules. All fees and expenses for mediation shall be borne by the parties equally. Each party shall, however, bear the expense of its own counsel, experts, witnesses, and preparation and presentation of evidence. 

If the dispute cannot be resolved through mediation, the parties agree to attempt to settle the dispute by arbitration administered by the American Arbitration Association Rules, and in accordance with the applicable provisions of RCW Title 7. The arbitrator may be selected by agreement of the parties. All fees and expenses for arbitration shall be borne by the parties equally. Each party, however shall bear the expense of its own counsel, experts, witnesses, and preparation and presentation of evidence. However, upon conclusion of the arbitration, the arbitrator shall have the discretion to award to the substantially prevailing party his or her costs incurred directly related to the arbitration, in addition to any other remedies the arbitrator may impose. 

The city shall retain the discretion to appear on behalf of the city in order to enforce the chapter herein. Nothing herein shall operate to compel the city to advocate for either the complainant or the respondent or to compel the attendance of the city at any mediation.

(3) Nothing herein shall operate to prevent a complainant from seeking redress for an alleged violation of this chapter through any other legal or equitable means, including the filing of a complaint in King County Superior Court.

(4) The city council intends with this section to provide remedies for violations of this chapter that are expansive as possible consistent with the powers granted by the constitution and laws of the state of Washington. If any provision of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the section or application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. [Ord. 418 § 1, 2004]


Chapter 8.55 GRAFFITI REMOVAL

Sections:

8.55.010    Definitions.

8.55.020    Graffiti deemed nuisance.

8.55.030    Graffiti prohibited.

8.55.040    Graffiti – Notice of removal.

8.55.050    City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.

8.55.060    Appeal.

8.55.070    Removal by city.


8.55.010 Definitions.

(1) “Graffiti” means the defacing, damaging or destroying by etching, spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, places and properties.

(2) “Graffiti abatement procedure” means the abatement procedure which identifies graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures in absence of response.

(3) “Private contractor” means any person with whom the city shall have duly contracted to remove graffiti. [Ord. 488 § 1, 2008; Ord. 270 § 2, 1999]


8.55.020 Graffiti deemed nuisance.

(1) Graffiti and other defacement of public and private property, including walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences, gates, signage, and other structures, trees, and other real and personal property within the city constitutes a nuisance.

(2) Although it is appropriate, where possible, to request that the courts require people who are convicted of acts of defacement and vandalism involving application of graffiti to public or private property to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, obtaining convictions for such acts is difficult because the offenses involving graffiti can be committed so very quickly and secretively that witnesses to the acts are frequently nonexistent.

(3) Although the public should be encouraged to cooperate in the elimination of graffiti by reporting the same to the proper authorities, it is also important to eliminate the presence of graffiti from the community so that the product of the illegal acts of those involved in application of graffiti is not visible and the property on which the graffiti is located and surrounding properties do not suffer diminution of value. [Ord. 270 § 3, 1999]


8.55.030 Graffiti prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, signage or other structure, tree or other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type which is commonly known and referred to as “graffiti” within the city without permission from the city.

Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 270 § 4, 1999]


8.55.040 Graffiti – Notice of removal.

(1) Whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti exists on any public or private buildings, structures, and places which are visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk or other right-of-way within the city and when weather conditions permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the city manager or designee shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have five business days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or the same will be subject to abatement by the city.

(2) The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner’s name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of King County, Washington. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners:

(a) By personal service on the owner, occupant or manager of the property;

(b) By U.S. first class mail, or registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.

If notice is served by U.S. first class mail, notice shall be deemed to have been received three days after depositing such notice, postage prepaid, in the United States mail in a properly addressed envelope. [Ord. 488 § 2, 2008; Ord. 270 § 5, 1999]


8.55.050 City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.

Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance as provided in this chapter shall be recoverable pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 270 § 6, 1999]


8.55.060 Appeal.

Within 14 calendar days from the mailing or from personal service of the notice of intent to remove graffiti, the owner or person occupying or managing the premises affected may appeal the matter to the hearing examiner serving the city. Appeals will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 312 § 10, 2000; Ord. 270 § 7, 1999]


8.55.070 Removal by city.

Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the city manager or designee approves, then the graffiti may be abated by city forces or by private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes during regular business hours or at times mutually agreeable with the property owner or occupant. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city. If the city provides for the removal of the graffiti, it shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than the area where the graffiti is located. When graffiti is painted over, the city or its private contractor shall attempt to match the paint with the underlying color of the defaced surface.

Property owners in the city of Burien may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. [Ord. 270 § 8, 1999]


Chapter 8.56 RESTRICTING THE USE AND SALE OF SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS

Sections:

8.56.010    Definitions.

8.56.020    Purpose.

8.56.030    Prohibition on plastic carryout bags.

8.56.040    Types of bags permitted at retail establishments.

8.56.050    Recycled content paper bag pass-through charge.

8.56.060    Exemptions.

8.56.070    Extensions.

8.56.080    Violation and penalties.

8.56.090    No conflict with federal or state laws.


8.56.010 Definitions.

Whenever used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) “ASTM Standard” means the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International Standard.

(2) “Carryout bag” means a bag that is provided by a retail establishment for home delivery or at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment.

Carryout bags do not include:

(a) Bags used by consumers inside stores to package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, or grains; contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish regardless of whether they are prepackaged; contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items where dampness may be a problem; contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; contain prescription drugs; or

(b) A bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recycled content paper bag or reusable bag; or

(c) Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage, garbage, pet waste, or yard waste.

(3) “Compostable” means that the product completely breaks down into a stable product due to the microorganisms in a controlled, aerobic commercial process that results in a material safe and desirable as a soil amendment meeting the compost quality standards found under WAC 173-350-220 for metals, physical parameters, pathogens, manufactured inert material, and other testing parameters set by the local health department; has been found to degrade satisfactorily at the composting facility receiving the material; meets standard specification ASTM D6400; and has been certified as compostable by the Biodegradable Products Institute or similar national or international certification authority.

(4) “Pass-through charge” means a charge to be collected by retailers from their customers when providing recycled content paper bags, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge.

(5) “Recyclable” means used or waste materials that can be treated or processed to be made suitable for reuse, whether in their original form or with minimal alterations. For the purposes of this chapter, recyclable materials do not include polystyrene.

(6) “Recycled content paper bag” or “recycled content paper carryout bag” means a paper bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale that meets all of the following requirements: (a) contains no old growth fiber; (b) contains a minimum of 40 percent postconsumer recycled materials; (c) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the city; (d) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the ASTM Standard D6400, as published in Master Environmental Assessment on Single Use and Reusable Bags, March 2010; and (e) displays the minimum percentage of postconsumer content, manufacturer, and the word “recyclable” on the outside of the bag.

(7) “Retail establishment” means any person, corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual that sells or provides merchandise, goods, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a consumer; retail establishment includes, by way of example and not limitation, any grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, catering truck, home delivery, convenience store, and any other retail store or vendor, including temporary ones at farmers markets, street fairs, and festivals.

(8) “Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for at least 125 uses and is capable of carrying 22 pounds 175 feet, and is made of cloth or other machine washable fabric.

(9) “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means any carryout bag made from plastic that is neither intended nor suitable for continuous reuse as a carryout bag unless that bag meets the qualifications for a compostable bag. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, reduce litter, and limit harmful materials entering the environment by the regulation and limiting of the use of singleuse plastic carryout bags; and to encourage the use of environmentally preferred alternatives. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.030 Prohibition on plastic carryout bags.

No retail establishment in the city, or any of its employees, agents, managers or owners, shall provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to any customer. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.040 Types of bags permitted at retail establishments.

(1) All retail establishments within the city of Burien shall provide only the following as carryout bags to customers: reusable bags, recycled content paper bags, or compostable bags.

(2) Nothing in this chapter shall be read to preclude retail establishments from making reusable bags or compostable bags available for sale to customers or from giving them out free of charge. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.050 Recycled content paper bag pass-through charge.

(1) Retail establishments may provide a customer a recycled content paper bag upon request but shall charge the customer a reasonable pass-through charge of not less than $0.10 per bag provided.

(2) Prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, retail establishments may voluntarily implement the restrictions on carryout bags allowed, as described herein, and may concurrently implement a pass-through charge.

(3) Notwithstanding the requirements in subsection (1) of this section, nothing in this chapter shall restrict retail establishments from providing a discount to customers who use reusable bags. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.060 Exemptions.

(1) A retail establishment may not collect a pass-through charge from anyone with a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under programs including, but not limited to, Women, Infants and Children (WIC); Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF); Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as Basic Food; and the Washington State Food Assistance Program (FAP).

(2) Food banks and other food assistance programs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, but are encouraged to explore opportunities to comply. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.070 Extensions.

The city manager, or his or her designee, may extend the deadline for a retail establishment to comply with the requirements of this chapter for a period of up to one year after the operative date of this chapter, upon sufficient showing by the applicant that the provisions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. This request must be submitted in writing to the city manager within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.080 Violation and penalties.

(1) Violations of this chapter may be enforced using the procedures set forth for civil infractions in Chapter 1.15 BMC. Liability for violations of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of the retail establishment.

(2) The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive.

(3) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any retail establishment to penalize, discipline, or discriminate against any employee for performing any duty necessary to comply with this chapter. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


8.56.090 No conflict with federal or state laws.

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any requirement, power, or duty in conflict with any federal or state law. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2019]


Chapter 8.57 RESTRICTING THE USE AND SALE OF NONCOMPOSTABLE FOOD SERVICE PRODUCTS Revised 3/20

Sections:

8.57.010    Definitions. Revised 3/20

8.57.020    Purpose. Revised 3/20

8.57.030    Noncompostable food service product prohibition. Revised 3/20

8.57.040    Waivers. Revised 3/20

8.57.050    Violation and penalties. Revised 3/20


8.57.010 Definitions. Revised 3/20

Whenever used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) “Compostable” means products, including fiber-based products and other products, that are capable of being completely broken down into stable products in a controlled, aerobic commercial process that results in a material safe and desirable as a soil amendment meeting the compost quality standards found under WAC 173-350-220 as presently constituted or hereinafter amended for metals, physical 1 parameters, pathogens, manufactured inert material, and other testing parameters set by the King County health department, have been found to degrade satisfactorily at the composting facility receiving the material, meet standard specification ASTM D6400 or ASTM D6868 as presently constituted or hereafter amended, and have been certified as compostable by the Biodegradable Products Institute or similar national or international certification authority.

(2) “Food service businesses” means businesses selling or providing food or beverage for consumption on or off the premises, including but not limited to full-service restaurants, fast food restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, coffee shops, grocery stores, vending trucks, booths, carts, home delivery services, and business or institutional cafeterias.

(3) “Food service product” means a product designed for single use on or in which any raw, prepared or cooked foods or beverages are placed or packaged or intended to be placed or packaged and are designed for a single use, including but not limited to containers, plates, bowls, cups, trays, cartons, lids, meat trays, deli rounds, knives, forks, spoons, splash sticks, stirrers, utensils, portion cups, cocktail picks, chopsticks, clamshells and other hinged or lidded containers.

(4) “Noncompostable” means not meeting the definition of “compostable.”

(5) “Prepackaged foods” means food service products that have been filled with food and sealed by a separate food service business or food manufacturer prior to receipt by the point of sale food service business.

(6) “Prepared food” means any food or beverage prepared for consumption using any cooking, packaging, or food preparation technique, including but not limited to chopping, slicing, mixing, brewing, freezing, or squeezing. [Ord. 709 § 1, 2020]


8.57.020 Purpose. Revised 3/20

The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, reduce litter, and limit harmful materials entering the environment by the regulation and limiting of the use of noncompostable food service products; and to encourage the use of environmentally preferred alternatives. [Ord. 709 § 1, 2020]


8.57.030 Noncompostable food service product prohibition. Revised 3/20

Effective January 1, 2021, food service businesses in the city of Burien shall be prohibited from selling or providing raw or prepared food in noncompostable food service products.

(1) Exemptions to the application of this chapter shall be as follows:

(a) Prepackaged foods.

(b) Catering trays.

(c) Produce bags.

(d) Clear food wrap and shrink wrap.

(e) Containers for uniquely shaped foods such as deviled eggs and cupcakes.

(f) Flexible plastic packaging used to preserve moisture and freshness such as for cookies.

(g) Hot meat item containers such as those for ribs and rotisserie chicken.

(h) Straws.

(i) Items receiving a one-year waiver as set forth under BMC 8.57.040. [Ord. 709 § 1, 2020]


8.57.040 Waivers. Revised 3/20

(1) The city manager, or his or her designee, may grant renewable one-year waivers for a specific food service product to a food service business upon sufficient proof by the applicant that the provisions of this chapter would create an undue hardship. This request must be submitted in writing to the city manager annually.

(2) The city manager, or his or her designee, shall develop and promulgate waiver guidelines and submission requirements and procedures by the effective date. [Ord. 709 § 1, 2020]


8.57.050 Violation and penalties. Revised 3/20

Issuance and disposition of infractions issued for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance with BMC 1.15.090. [Ord. 709 § 1, 2020]


Chapter 8.60 PUBLIC NUISANCES

(Repealed by Ord. 383)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE1 Revised 5/20

Chapters: 

9.05    Preliminary Article

9.10    Abandoned Refrigeration Equipment

9.15    Alcoholic Beverages Revised 5/20

9.20    Animals, Crimes Relating to Revised 5/20

9.25    Anticipatory Offenses

9.30    Businesses – Consumer Protection

9.35    Controlled Substances and Drugs

9.40    False Alarms

9.45    Fire, Crimes Relating to

9.50    Firearms and Dangerous Weapons

9.55    Gambling

9.60    Governmental Operations, Crimes Relating to

9.65    Littering and Polluting

9.70    Minors, Crimes Relating to

9.75    Nuisances

9.80    Persons, Crimes Relating to Revised 5/20

9.85    Property, Crimes Relating to Revised 5/20

9.90    Prostitution

9.95    Public Morals, Crimes Relating to

9.100    Public Officers, Crimes Relating to

9.105    Public Peace, Crimes Relating to

9.110    Schools, Crimes Relating to

9.115    Miscellaneous Crimes

9.120    Chronic Nuisance Properties

9.125    Repealed

9.150    Public Defender Standards1

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 9.05 PRELIMINARY ARTICLE

Sections:

9.05.005    Adoption of state criminal statutes.

9.05.010    Preliminary statement.

9.05.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

9.05.030    City criminal jurisdiction.

9.05.040    Classes of crimes.

9.05.050    People capable of committing crimes – Capability of children.

9.05.060    Personal jurisdiction.

9.05.070    Limitation of action.

9.05.080    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

9.05.090    General provisions – Adopted by reference.

9.05.100    Definitions – Adopted by reference.

9.05.110    Principles of liability – Adopted by reference.

9.05.120    Defense of insanity – Adopted by reference.

9.05.130    Defenses – Adopted by reference.

9.05.140    Contempt – Adopted by reference.

9.05.150    Violation – Penalty.

9.05.160    Restitution – Adopted by reference.


9.05.005 Adoption of state criminal statutes.

(1) With the exception of the RCW sections set forth in subsection (2) of this section or other RCW sections that are otherwise specifically disavowed in this code, all RCW sections that constitute misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, arrest, prosecution, sentencing, confinement, and enforcement of misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors are hereby adopted by reference, as well any future changes, amendments, recodifications, additions, or deletions to those sections, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. The fact that sections of this code adopt by reference specific sections of the RCW shall not affect this section. Sections of the code that specifically recite that sections of the RCW are not adopted or do not apply shall control over this section.

(2) The following RCW sections are specifically not adopted:

(a) RCW 9A.16.110, Defending against violent crime – Reimbursement.

(3) In adopting the state’s statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses within the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and in those sections adopted which deal with both felonies and misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors, only the language applicable to misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors is to be applied (including to the extent that an anticipatory offense would be a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor). By adopting state statutes, the city intends to assume jurisdiction over and become the jurisdictional authority for the enforcement and prosecution of misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor crimes. Whenever the word “state” shall appear in any statute adopted by reference in this chapter, the word “city” shall be substituted; provided, however, the term “city” shall not be substituted for the term “state” in those circumstances that set forth administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this chapter, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this chapter. When issuing a citation, information, or complaint for the violation of any section of the RCW adopted by this chapter, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to cite to and refer to the RCW section number.

(4) Reference to, or adoption of, a statute, code, or ordinance includes and incorporates the statute, code, or ordinance as it exists or is enacted at the time of the reference or adoption, as well any future changes, amendments, recodifications, additions, or deletions in that statute, code, or ordinance that may thereafter occur unless a contrary intent is clearly expressed, and such statute, code, or ordinance shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth in full. Whenever the word “state” shall appear in any statute adopted by reference in this chapter, the word “city” shall be substituted; provided, however, the term “city” shall not be substituted for the term “state” in those circumstances that set forth administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this chapter, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this chapter. Statutes and codes adopted by reference by this code shall be harmonized with other provisions of this code to the extent practicable, but if they are in direct conflict with other provisions of this code that are explicitly articulated, the articulated provisions control. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012]


9.05.010 Preliminary statement.

(1) This title shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Burien criminal code.”

(2) The provisions of this code shall apply to any offense committed on or after 12:01 a.m. on September 1, 1993.

(3) The provisions of this code do not apply to, or govern, the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to 12:01 a.m. on September 1, 1993, or to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of law existing in the city of Burien at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this code had not been enacted.

(4) If any provision of this code, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the code, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end the provisions of this code are declared to be severable.

(5) Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this code. [Ord. 63 § 1, 1993]


9.05.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.

(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:

(a) To forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individual or public interests;

(b) To safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation as criminal;

(c) To give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense;

(d) To differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses, and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.

(2) The provisions of this title shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms and when the language is susceptible of differing constructions it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in this title.

(3) In adopting the state statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses within the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and, in those sections adopted which deal with both misdemeanors and felonies, only the language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied. [Ord. 63 § 2, 1993]


9.05.030 City criminal jurisdiction.

The following persons are subject to arrest, prosecution, and criminal punishment:

(1) A person who commits within the corporate limits of the city any crime, in whole or in part;

(2) A person who commits out of the city any act which, if committed within it, would be theft and is afterward found in the city with any of the stolen property;

(3) A person who, being out of the city, counsels, causes, procures, aids, or abets another to commit a crime in the city;

(4) A person who commits an act without the city which affects persons or property within the city which, if committed within the city, would be a crime. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 3, 1993]


9.05.040 Classes of crimes.

Any violation of this code for which punishment is authorized for more than 90 days in jail is deemed a gross misdemeanor. Any violation of this code for which punishment is solely authorized for 90 days or less is deemed a misdemeanor. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 4, 1993]


9.05.050 People capable of committing crimes – Capability of children.

Children under the age of eight years are incapable of committing a crime. Children between the ages of eight and 11 are presumed to be incapable of committing a crime, but this presumption may be rebutted and removed by proof that they have sufficient capacity to understand the act or neglect, and to know that it was wrong. Whenever in legal proceedings it becomes necessary to determine the age of a child, he or she may be produced for inspection, to enable the court or jury to determine the age thereby; and the court may also direct his or her examination by one or more physicians, whose opinion shall be competent evidence upon the question of his or her age. [Ord. 63 § 5, 1993]


9.05.060 Personal jurisdiction.

Every person, regardless of whether or not an inhabitant or resident of the city, may be tried and punished under this code for any violation of city ordinance committed by him or her within the criminal jurisdiction of the city. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 6, 1993]


9.05.070 Limitation of action.

(1) Prosecution for a violation of a city ordinance which is classified as a gross misdemeanor may not be commenced more than two years after its commission. Prosecution for a violation of a city ordinance classified as a misdemeanor may not be commenced more than one year after its commission.

(2) The periods of limitation prescribed herein do not run during any time when the person charged is not usually and publicly resident within this state.

(3) If, before the end of a period of limitation prescribed herein, a complaint or an information has been filed, and the complaint or information is set aside, then the period is extended by a period equal to the length of time from the filing to the setting aside. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 7, 1993]


9.05.080 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

(1) Every person charged with a violation of a city ordinance is presumed innocent unless proved guilty. No person may be convicted of such a violation unless each element of such crime is proved by competent evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.

(2) When a violation of city ordinance has been proven against a person, and there exists a reasonable doubt as to which of two or more degrees he or she is guilty, such person shall be convicted only of the lowest degree. [Ord. 63 § 8, 1993]


9.05.090 General provisions – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as the principles of liability of the Burien criminal code:

RCW    

9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer.

9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable.

9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete.

9A.04.060    Common law to supplement statutes.

9A.04.070    Who amenable to criminal statutes.

9A.04.090    Application of general provisions of code.

[Ord. 63 § 9, 1993]


9.05.100 Definitions – Adopted by reference.

RCW 9A.04.110, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference as the definitions section of the Burien criminal code. [Ord. 63 § 10, 1993]


9.05.110 Principles of liability – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as the principles of liability of the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.08.010    General requirements of culpability.

9A.08.020    Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.

9A.08.030    Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting or under a duty to act in their behalf.

[Ord. 63 § 11, 1993]


9.05.120 Defense of insanity – Adopted by reference.

RCW 9A.12.010, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference as the defense of insanity section of the Burien criminal code. [Ord. 63 § 12, 1993]


9.05.130 Defenses – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as defenses to culpability under the Burien criminal code:

    RCW

9A.16.010    Definitions.

9A.16.020    Use of force – When lawful.

9A.16.030    Homicide – When excusable.

9A.16.040    Justifiable homicide or use of deadly force by public officer, peace officer, person aiding.

9A.16.050    Homicide – By other person – When justifiable.

9A.16.060    Duress.

9A.16.070    Entrapment.

9A.16.080    Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” – as defense.

9A.16.090    Intoxication.

9A.16.100    Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable.

[Ord. 63 § 13, 1993]


9.05.140 Contempt – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as the principles of contempt of the Burien criminal code:

    RCW

7.21.010    Definitions.

7.21.020    Sanctions – Who may impose.

7.21.030    Remediation sanctions – Payment for losses.

7.21.040    Punitive sanctions – Fines.

7.21.050    Sanctions – Summary imposition – Fines.

7.21.060    Administrative actions or proceedings – Petition to court for imposition of sanctions.

7.21.070    Appellant review.

[Ord. 63 § 14, 1993]


9.05.150 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Unless otherwise specified, every person convicted of violating a city ordinance classified as a gross misdemeanor, or not otherwise classified, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 364 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(2) Unless otherwise specified, every person convicted of violating a city ordinance classified as a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(3) A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision of Chapter 69.50 RCW adopted by reference shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 24 consecutive hours, and by a fine of not less than $250.00. On a second or subsequent conviction, the fine shall not be less than $500.00. These fines shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty imposed. Unless the court finds that the imposition of the minimum imprisonment will pose a substantial risk to the defendant’s physical or mental well-being or that local jail facilities are in an overcrowded condition, the minimum term of imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred. If the court finds such risk of overcrowding exists, it shall sentence the defendant to a minimum of 40 hours of community service. If a minimum term of imprisonment is suspended or deferred, the court shall state in writing the reason for granting the suspension or deferral and the facts upon which the suspension or deferral is based. Unless the court finds the person to be indigent, the minimum fine shall not be suspended or deferred. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 15, 1993]


9.05.160 Restitution – Adopted by reference.

(1) RCW 9A.20.030, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference to provide for restitution as an alternative to a fine under the Burien criminal code.

(2) Restitution may be imposed as part of a sentence and shall be ordered by the court whenever a person is convicted of a crime which results in injury to any person or damage to or loss of property, unless extraordinary circumstances exist that make restitution inappropriate in the court’s judgment and the court sets forth such circumstances in the record. In addition, restitution shall be ordered to pay for an injury, loss, or damage if the defendant pleads guilty to a lesser offense or fewer offenses and agrees with the prosecutor’s recommendation that the defendant be required to pay restitution to a victim of an offense or offenses that are not prosecuted pursuant to a plea agreement. The court shall identify in the judgment and sentence the victim or victims entitled to restitution and what amount is due each victim.

(a) Restitution shall be ordered by the court whenever a person is convicted of any charge of hit and run, whether involving persons, property, or attended vehicles. This restitution shall include:

(i) Damages for injury, property loss and/or lost wages attributable to leaving the scene of the accident or collision in all cases; and

(ii) Damages for injury, property loss and/or lost wages where there is a preponderance of evidence that the convicted person was at fault in the underlying accident or collision.

(b) When restitution is ordered, the court shall determine the amount of restitution due at the sentencing hearing or within 180 days thereof. The court may continue the hearing beyond the 180 days for good cause. Restitution ordered by a court pursuant to a criminal conviction shall be based on easily ascertainable damages for injury to or loss of property, actual expenses incurred for treatment for injury to persons, and lost wages resulting from injury. Restitution shall not include reimbursement for damages for mental anguish, pain and suffering, or other intangible losses, but may include the costs of counseling reasonably related to the offense. The amount of restitution shall not exceed double the amount of the offender’s gain or the victim’s loss from the commission of the crime, whichever is greater.

(c) The city or victim may enforce the court-ordered restitution in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action. This section does not limit civil remedies or defenses available to the victim, survivors of the victim, or defendant. Restitution collected through civil enforcement must be paid through the registry of the court and must be distributed proportionately according to each victim’s loss when there is more than one victim. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 16, 1993]


Chapter 9.10 ABANDONED REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT

Sections:

9.10.100    Abandoned refrigeration equipment – Adopted by reference.


9.10.100 Abandoned refrigeration equipment – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to abandoned refrigeration equipment under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment.

9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises.

9.03.030    Violation of either 9.03.010 or 9.03.020.

9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale.

[Ord. 63 § 53, 1993]


Chapter 9.15 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Revised 5/20

Sections:

9.15.100    Alcoholic beverage control – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

9.15.200    Liquor in public place.


9.15.100 Alcoholic beverage control – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

The following chapters and sections of RCW Title 66, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish regulations and crimes regarding alcoholic beverages under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

66.04.010    Definitions.

66.20.160    “Card of identification,” “licensee,” “store employee” defined for certain purposes.

66.20.170    Card of identification may be accepted as identification card and evidence of legal age.

66.20.180    Card of identification to be presented on request of licensee.

66.20.190    Identification card holder may be required to sign certification card – Contents – Procedure – Statement.

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card – Penalty.

66.20.210    Licensee’s immunity to prosecution or suit – Certification card as evidence of good faith.

66.28.090    Licensed premises or banquet permit premises open to inspection – Failure to allow, violation.

66.32    Search and Seizure.

66.44.010    Enforcement – Penalties.

66.44.090    Acting without license.

66.44.120    Unlawful use of seal.

66.44.180    General penalties – Jurisdiction for violations.

66.44.270    Furnishing liquor to minors – Possession, use – Penalties – Exhibition of effects – Exceptions.

66.44.370    Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title.

[Ord. 732 § 1, 2020; Ord. 63 § 88, 1993]


9.15.200 Liquor in public place.

(1) Except as permitted by RCW Title 66, no person shall open a package containing liquor, or possess an open container of liquor, or consume liquor in a public place; provided, this provision shall not apply to containers kept in the trunk of a vehicle or in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers if the vehicle does not have a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment is deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and passengers.

(2) This section shall not prohibit the offering of alcohol for sale and consumption in a public place as part of a community event; provided, that the organization seeking to offer alcohol must request in writing authorization from the city manager and identify the particular community event or events at which the sponsor wishes to offer alcohol for sale and consumption. The written request must be made no later than 30 days prior to the first community event for which authorization is sought. Those applying for the city manager’s authorization to offer alcohol for sale and consumption must meet the requirements of state law with respect to liquor permits and this chapter. During the course of the community event, the state liquor permit must be displayed within the area. For purposes of this subsection, “community event” shall mean fairs, markets, and festivals held on public property where the public at large is invited to attend, including but not limited to the Farmers Market, the Strawberry Festival, Octoberfest, and the Fourth of July Festival. As appropriate, the city manager may specify special conditions of use and note the conditions on the authorization.

(3) Violation of this section is a class 3 civil infraction under Chapter 7.80 RCW. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 546 § 1, 2010; Ord. 412 § 1, 2004; Ord. 96 § 2, 1994; Ord. 63 § 89, 1993]


Chapter 9.20 ANIMALS, CRIMES RELATING TO Revised 5/20

Sections:

9.20.100    Crimes relating to animals – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

9.20.200    Injury to animals.

9.20.300    Wounding or trapping of an animal.


9.20.100 Crimes relating to animals – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

The following sections of RCW Titles 9 and 16, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to animals under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.08.020    Diseased animals.

9.08.030    False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed.

9.08.070    Dogs – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty.

16.52.011    Definitions – Principles of liability.

16.52.207    Animal cruelty in the second degree – Penalty.

[Ord. 733 § 1, 2020; Ord. 63 § 54, 1993]


9.20.200 Injury to animals.

Any person who willfully and without authority in law kills, maims or disfigures an animal belonging to another, or exposes any poisons or noxious substance with intent that it should be taken by such animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 83, 1993]


9.20.300 Wounding or trapping of an animal.

Any person who wilfully and without authority in law kills, wounds or traps an animal or bird, or removes or destroys the young of any such animal or the egg of any such bird is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 84, 1993]


Chapter 9.25 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

Sections:

9.25.100    Anticipatory offenses – Adopted by reference.


9.25.100 Anticipatory offenses – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference as anticipatory offenses under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.28.020    Criminal attempt.

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation.

9A.28.040    Criminal conspiracy.

[Ord. 63 § 17, 1993]


Chapter 9.30 BUSINESSES – CONSUMER PROTECTION

Sections:

9.30.100    Fraud – Adopted by reference.

9.30.200    False representations – Adopted by reference.

9.30.300    Defrauding a public utility – Adopted by reference.

9.30.400    Trademarks and other marks – Adopted by reference.

9.30.500    Competitive bidding – Adopted by reference.

9.30.600    Crimes relating to corporations – Adopted by reference.

9.30.700    Telephone credit cards – Adopted by reference.


9.30.100 Fraud – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of fraud under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.60.010    Definitions.

9A.60.040    Criminal impersonation in the first degree.

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation in the second degree.

9A.60.050    False certification.

(2) The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the following crimes of fraud under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction.

9.45.062    Failure to deliver leased personal property – Requisites for prosecution – Construction.

9.45.070    Mock auctions.

9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property.

9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance.

9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors.

9.45.180    Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle.

9.45.190    Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin.

9.45.240    Fraud in obtaining telephone or telegraph service.

[Ord. 410 § 2, 2004; Ord. 63 § 28, 1993]


9.30.200 False representations – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to false representations under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.38.010    False representation concerning credit.

9.38.020    False representation concerning title.

[Ord. 63 §§ 29, 60, 1993]


9.30.300 Defrauding a public utility – Adopted by reference.

Chapter 9A.61 RCW adopted by Chapter 109, Laws of 1989, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted to establish the crime of defrauding a public utility under the Burien criminal code, as follows:

(1) The definitions set forth herein apply to the crime of defrauding a public utility.

(a) “Customer” means the person in whose name a utility service is provided.

(b) “Divert” means to change the intended course or path of electricity, gas, or water without the authorization or consent of the utility.

(c) “Person” means an individual, partnership, firm, association, or corporation or government agency.

(d) “Reconnection” means the commencement of utility service to a customer or other person after service has been lawfully disconnected by the utility.

(e) “Tamper” means to rearrange, injure, alter, interfere with, or otherwise prevent from performing the normal or customary function.

(f) “Utility” means an electrical company, gas company, or water company as those terms are defined in RCW 80.04.010, and includes an electrical, gas, or water system operated by a public agency.

(g) “Utility service” means the provision of electricity, gas, water, or any other service or commodity furnished by the utility for compensation.

(2) “Defrauding a public utility” means to commit, authorize, solicit, aid, abet, or attempt to:

(a) Divert, or cause to be diverted, utility services by any means whatsoever;

(b) Make, or cause to be made, a connection or reconnection with property owned or used by the utility to provide utility service without the authorization or consent of the utility;

(c) Prevent a utility meter or other device used in determining the charge for utility services from accurately performing its measuring function by tampering or by any other means;

(d) Tamper with property owned or used by the utility to provide utility services; or

(e) Use or receive the direct benefit of all or a portion of the utility services; or knowledge of, or reason to believe that, the diversion, tampering, or unauthorized connection existed at the time of the use and that the use or receipt was without the authorization or consent of the utility.

(3) A person is guilty of defrauding a public utility in the third degree if the utility service diverted or used is $500.00 or less in value or a connection or reconnection has occurred without authorization or consent of the utility. Defrauding a public utility in the third degree is a gross misdemeanor.

(4) In any prosecution for defrauding a public utility, the court may require restitution from the defendant as provided in this title, plus court costs plus the costs incurred by the utility on account of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized reconnection, including, but not limited to costs and expenses for investigation, disconnection, reconnection, service calls, and expert witnesses.

(5) Restitution ordered or fines imposed under this title do not preclude a utility from collecting damages under RCW 80.28.240 to which it may be entitled. [Ord. 63 § 30, 1993]


9.30.400 Trademarks and other marks – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to trademarks and other marks under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.16.010    Removing lawful brands.

9.16.020    Imitating lawful brand.

9.16.030    Counterfeiting trademark, brand, etc.

9.16.040    Displaying goods with false trademark.

9.16.050    When deemed affixed.

9.16.070    Form and similitude defined.

9.16.080    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade.

9.16.090    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade – Penalty for violations.

9.16.100    Use of words “sterling silver,” etc.

9.16.110    Use of words “coin silver,” etc.

9.16.120    Use of word “sterling” on mounting.

9.16.130    Use of the words “coin silver” on mounting.

9.16.140    Unlawfully marking articles made of gold.

9.16.150    “Marked, stamped or branded,” defined.

[Ord. 63 § 55, 1993]


9.30.500 Competitive bidding – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to competitive bidding under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.18.120    Suppression of competitive bidding.

9.18.130    Collusion to prevent competitive bidding.

9.18.140    Penalty.

[Ord. 63 § 56, 1993]


9.30.600 Crimes relating to corporations – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to corporations under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.24.010    Fraud in stock subscription.

9.24.040    Corporation doing business without license.

[Ord. 63 § 58, 1993]


9.30.700 Telephone credit cards – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to telephone credit cards under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.26A.090    Telephone company credit cards – Publishing numbers or code – “Publishes” defined.

[Ord. 63 § 59, 1993]


Chapter 9.35 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND DRUGS

Sections:

9.35.100    Inhaling toxic fumes – Adopted by reference.

9.35.200    Controlled substances – Adopted by reference.

9.35.300    Repealed.

9.35.310    Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.

9.35.320    Minors – Permitting presence.

9.35.330    Minors – Excluded.

9.35.340    Sale and display rooms.

9.35.350    Sale restriction.

9.35.360    Nuisance.

9.35.370    Violation – Penalty.


9.35.100 Inhaling toxic fumes – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to the inhaling of toxic fumes under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.47A.010    Definition.

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation – Exception.

9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.050    Penalty.

[Ord. 63 § 70, 1993]


9.35.200 Controlled substances – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 69, as now in effect and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish regulations and crimes regarding controlled substances under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

69.50.101    Definitions.

    69.50.204

    (c)(14)	Schedule I – Marijuana.

69.50.309    Containers.

69.50.4014    Possession of forty grams of marihuana – Penalty.

69.50.407    Conspiracy.

69.50.408    Second or subsequent offenses.

69.50.412    Prohibited acts: E – Penalties.

69.50.425    Misdemeanor violations – Minimum imprisonment.

69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture.

69.50.506    Burden of proof.

69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances.

[Ord. 410 § 1, 2004; Ord. 230 § 1, 1998; Ord. 63 § 90, 1993]


9.35.300 Drug paraphernalia – Possession prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 230. [Ord. 63 § 91, 1993]


9.35.310 Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.

(1) As used in this chapter, “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, smoking, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is not limited to:

(a) Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(b) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

(c) Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(d) Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

(e) Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(f) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

(g) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;

(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

(i) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(j) Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(k) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.

(l) A device “designed primarily for” such smoking or ingestion set forth in subsection (1) of this section is a device which has been fabricated, constructed, altered, adjusted or marked especially for use in the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marihuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine or any other “controlled substance,” and is peculiarly adapted to such purposes by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features associated with drug paraphernalia, notwithstanding the fact that it might also be possible to use such device for some other purpose. Paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, the following items or devices:

(i) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;

(ii) Water pipes;

(iii) Carburetion tubes and devices;

(iv) Smoking and carburetion masks;

(v) Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

(vi) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

(vii) Chamber pipes;

(viii) Carburetor pipes;

(ix) A smokable pipe which contains a heating unit, whether the device is known as an “electric pipe” or otherwise;

(x) Air-driven pipes;

(xi) Chillums;

(xii) A device constructed so as to prevent the escape of smoke into the air and to channel smoke into a chamber where it may be accumulated to permit inhalation or ingestion of larger quantities of smoke than would otherwise be possible, whether the device is known as a “bong” or otherwise;

(xiii) A device constructed so as to permit the simultaneous mixing and ingestion of smoke and nitrous oxide or other compressed gas, whether the device is known as a “buzz bomb” or otherwise;

(xiv) A canister, container or other device with a tube, nozzle or other similar arrangement attached thereto so constructed as to permit the forcing of smoke accumulated therein into the user’s lungs under pressure, whether the device is known as a “power hitter” or otherwise;

(xv) A device for holding a marijuana cigarette, whether the device is known as a “roach clip” or otherwise;

(xvi) A spoon for ingestion of a controlled substance through the nose;

(xvii) A straw or tube for ingestion of a controlled substance through the nose or mouth;

(xviii) A smokable pipe constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of begin inhaled or ingested;

(xix) Ice pipes or chillers.

(2) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia under this section, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

(a) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

(b) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;

(c) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this article;

(d) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(e) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

(f) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonable know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this article; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

(g) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

(h) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(i) National and local advertising concerning its use;

(j) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(k) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(l) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(m) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

(n) Expert testimony concerning its use. [Ord. 63 § 92, 1993]


9.35.320 Minors – Permitting presence.

No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business where any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia which is primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is sold, or displayed for the purpose of sale, may allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be in, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his parents or his legal guardian. [Ord. 63 § 93, 1993]


9.35.330 Minors – Excluded.

No person under the age of 18 years may be in, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale or displaying for sale of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs unless such person is accompanied by one of his parents or his legal guardian. [Ord. 63 § 94, 1993]


9.35.340 Sale and display rooms.

No person may maintain, in any place of business to which the public is invited, the display for sale or the offering to sell of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room or enclosure shall be posted with a sign in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that items which are defined as drug paraphernalia under this chapter are being offered for sale in such a room and that minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. [Ord. 63 § 95, 1993]


9.35.350 Sale restriction.

No person shall sell or give, or permit to be sold or given to any person under the age of 18 years any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia which is primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs. [Ord. 63 § 96, 1993]


9.35.360 Nuisance.

The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display, in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this chapter of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city. This remedy shall be addition to any other remedy provided by the law including the penalty provision applicable for the violation of the terms and provision of this chapter. [Ord. 63 § 97, 1993]


9.35.370 Violation – Penalty.

Any person convicted of having violated BMC 9.35.340, 9.35.350 or 9.35.360 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, a second or subsequent conviction of BMC 9.35.340, 9.35.350 or 9.35.360 may result in revocation of the business license of the place of business where the violations occurred. [Ord. 63 § 98, 1993]


Chapter 9.40 FALSE ALARMS1

Sections:

9.40.010    Short title/purpose.

9.40.020    Definitions.

9.40.030    Verified response required.

9.40.040    Fees.

9.40.050    Certain devices, systems, uses prohibited.

9.40.060    Penalty for failure to pay.

9.40.070    Appeals and contested fees.

9.40.080    Mailing of notices.

9.40.090    No duties.


9.40.010 Short title/purpose.

This chapter shall be known as the false alarm chapter and may be cited as such.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

(1) Protect public safety by curtailing or eliminating the extraordinary number of false alarms, which prevent, hinder, or delay public safety personnel from responding to legitimate calls for public service; 

(2) Shift the response to alarms that are not verified to the alarm monitoring companies;

(3) Recover the costs associated with responses to false alarms as the expenditure of such public funds constitutes an unlawful gifting of public monies;

(4) Stop the current subsidization of private business with public tax dollars. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.020 Definitions.

Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, terms defined herein shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

(1) “Alarm system” or “alarm device” means any system, device, or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message to an alarm system monitoring company, or some other number, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the premises in some other fashion, except any system, device, or mechanism primarily protecting a motor vehicle or a medical alert alarm. An alarm system or alarm device may consist of one or more components (e.g., motion detector, window breach detector, or similar components) all reporting to a central unit/system panel which, in turn, is connected to or reports to an alarm system monitoring company via telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message. Nonmonitored alarm systems are also included in this definition. 

(2) “Alarm system monitoring company” or “alarm system operator” means any person, individual, partnership, corporation, or other form of association that engages in the business of monitoring intrusion, property, burglary, robbery, panic alarms, or other “alarm systems” located in the city of Burien. This includes alarm system monitoring companies and alarm system operators that are located outside the city limits of Burien and which monitor alarms installed within the city limits of Burien. 

(3) “Alarm system user” means the person having or maintaining a property, intrusion, burglary, robbery, panic, or other alarm system. It means only a subscriber when the system is connected to an alarm system monitoring company.

(4) “Burglary alarm” has the same meaning as “property alarm” below.

(5) “Chief of police” means the chief of the Burien police department, or his or her designee.

(6) “Department” shall mean the finance and administrative services department of the city of Burien.

(7) “Director” shall mean the director of finance and administrative services, or his or her designee.

(8) “False alarm” means the reporting of the activation of any monitored or nonmonitored alarm system where police arrive at the premises and determine that there is no evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that would warrant a call for police assistance or investigation. An alarm shall be presumed to be false if the responding police do not locate evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that might have caused the alarm to sound. When responding police find unsecured doors or windows where there is no evidence of forced entry or other evidence of criminal intent, the alarm is presumed to be false. If earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, or other acts of God set off a large number of alarms, a police supervisor may determine that no responses will be made to such alarms during the pendency of such event. No false alarm fees will be assessed during the time period for which no response is made as determined by the police supervisor. 

(9) “Fire alarm” means a signal initiated by a device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch, smoke detector, or other device which, when activated, is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature. Fire alarms shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter except for fire alarms called in erroneously as an intrusion, burglary, robbery, property, or other alarm. In these situations, the alarm monitoring company or the property owner of the premises where the nonmonitored alarm is located shall be assessed a false alarm response fee or call cancellation fee.

(10) “Monitored alarm system” means any system, device, or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message or communication to a private monitoring company, other number, or person who can then notify police that an alarm has been activated. This includes all systems, which transmit telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message from an alarm installed within the city limits of Burien to any location outside of Burien (e.g., an alarm monitoring center located in a state other than Washington). All alarms that are monitored, except fire alarms, are included within the definition of “monitored alarm system”; e.g., any monitored burglary, intrusion, panic, premises, property, robbery, or other type of alarm device.

(11) “Panic alarm” has the same meaning as “robbery alarm” below.

(12) “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated entity, or other entity or group of persons, but excludes the United States, the state of Washington, and any political subdivision or municipal corporation thereof.

(13) “Police department” or “police” means the Burien police department, and includes other law enforcement agencies assisting the Burien police department.

(14) “Premises” means any area and any portion of any area protected by an alarm system.

(15) “Property alarm,” “intrusion alarm,” and “burglary alarm” mean any system, device, or mechanism for detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon real property protected by the system which may be activated by sensors or other techniques and, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the protected premises. For purposes of this chapter, alarms on automatic teller machines (ATMs) are included in this definition.

(16) “Responder” means a private guard, alarm company guard, private entity, or person contacted by an alarm system monitoring company, or any other person, who verifies that there is evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that would warrant a call for police assistance or investigation for a property, intrusion, or burglary alarm. Responders for alarm system monitoring companies requesting police response will notify the police dispatcher what alarm system monitoring company requested them to respond. Responders will meet police at the premises.

(17) “Robbery alarm” and “panic alarm” (robbery/panic) mean any system, device, or mechanism, activated by an individual on or near the premises, to alert others that a robbery or any other crime is in progress, or that the user is in need of immediate assistance or aid in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm, which meets the following criteria:

(a) The system is installed on real property (the “protected premises”);

(b) It is designed to be activated by an individual for the purpose of summoning assistance to the premises;

(c) It transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message or emits an audible, visible, or electronic signal that can be heard, seen, or received by persons outside the protected premises; and

(d) It is intended to summon police assistance to the premises.

(18) “Valid alarm” means a property/intrusion/burglary or robbery/panic alarm where responding police determine that there is evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that might have caused the alarm to sound.

(19) “Verified response” means on-site verification by a responder to verify the need for police response to a property/intrusion/burglar alarm due to a crime, attempted crime, or other emergency occurring at the premises protected by the alarm. Verification of a crime or emergency may also be done through the use of video or an audio with video combination system monitored by the alarm system monitoring company or a property owner where a nonmonitored alarm system is located. [Ord. 635 § 1, 2016; Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.030 Verified response required.

(1) Police response to property alarms, intrusion alarms and burglary alarms shall occur after a verified response as defined by this chapter.

(2) Police response to robbery alarms and panic alarms do not require a prior verified response. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.040 Fees.

(1) False Alarm Response Fee. An alarm system monitoring company shall be assessed a false alarm fee of $150.00 for each false alarm. In the case of nonmonitored alarm systems, the property owner of the premises where the false alarm is located shall be assessed the false alarm response fee. 

(2) Call Cancellation Fee. An alarm system monitoring company shall be assessed a call cancellation fee of $100.00 if the alarm system monitoring company contacts police dispatch and requests police response to an alarm and subsequently cancels the police response prior to police arrival at the alarmed premises. In the case of nonmonitored alarm systems, the property owner of the premises where the alarm is located shall be assessed the call cancellation fee. 

(3) Prohibited Call Fee. An alarm system monitoring company shall be assessed a prohibited call fee of $100.00 for a call to police dispatch by an alarm system monitoring company or a property owner of the premises where a nonmonitored alarm system is located, requesting police response to an alarm that is not verified.

The prohibited call fees, false alarm response fees, and call cancellation fees are cumulative and not exclusive.

The fees described above are summarized as follows:

	False Alarm Response Fee	$150.00 per occurrence

	Call Cancellation Fee	$100.00 per cancellation

	Prohibited Call Fee 	$100.00 per occurrence

[Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.050 Certain devices, systems, uses prohibited.

(1) No person shall operate or use an alarm system that emits an audible sound where such emission does not automatically cease within 10 minutes.

(2) No person shall operate or use an alarm system, which automatically dials the Burien police department directly and delivers a prerecorded message.

(3) No person shall operate or use an alarm system or device that emits or produces real or simulated smoke, fog, vapor or any like substance that obscures vision. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.060 Penalty for failure to pay. 

(1) Payment of any fee(s) due under this chapter are due within 30 days from the invoice date or within an extension of time granted by the director. If payment is received between one and 30 days after the date it became due, there shall be added to the amount a penalty of 10 percent of the fees owing. If payment is later than 30 days after the original date due, a penalty of 20 percent of the fees shall be assessed. If payment is not received within 60 days of the original date due, then interest shall accrue on the fees and penalties at one percent per month.

(2) The licensee shall be notified by mail of the amount of any penalties so added or assessed, and the same shall become due and shall be paid within 10 days from the date of such notice. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.070 Appeals and contested fees.

An alarm system monitoring company or a property owner with a nonmonitored alarm system contesting the imposition of any fee, above, shall file a written notice of appeal as that term is defined pursuant to BMC 2.20.060 except “hearing examiner” shall mean “chief of police.” The notice of appeal shall be delivered to the chief of police within 30 days after the date of the billing notice. Appeals shall be governed by BMC 2.20.070. The police chief shall have the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings under BMC 2.20.070, to administer oaths, and to preserve order. The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall issue a written ruling including factual findings and the chief of police’s conclusion with supporting reasons, affirming or reversing the notice. The decision of the chief of police shall be the final administrative decision, with appeals to superior court. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.080 Mailing of notices.

Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address as reflected in the records of the director. Failure to receive such notice shall not relieve the obligation to pay any fee, interest, or penalty, nor shall such failure extend any time limit. It is the responsibility of the alarm monitoring company to inform the director in writing about a change in address. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]


9.40.090 No duties.

Nothing in this chapter imposes or creates any specific or implied duties or obligations on the part of the city or any of its departments, including its contracted law enforcement agency. [Ord. 399 § 1, 2004]1

Prior legislation: Ord. 63. 


Chapter 9.45 FIRE, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.45.100    Reckless burning and malicious mischief – Adopted by reference.

9.45.200    Crimes relating to fire alarms – Adopted by reference.


9.45.100 Reckless burning and malicious mischief – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of reckless burning and malicious mischief under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.48.010    Definitions.

9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree.

9A.48.060    Reckless burning – Defense.

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief in the third degree.

9A.48.100    Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined.

9.61.170    Throwing glass, tacks, rubbish, etc. in roadway.

[Ord. 63 § 23, 1993]


9.45.200 Crimes relating to fire alarms – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of false fire alarms and miscellaneous crimes under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester.

9.40.100    Injuring or tampering with fire alarm apparatus or equipment – Sounding false alarm or fire.

[Ord. 63 §§ 24, 61, 1993]


Chapter 9.50 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS

Sections:

9.50.100    Firearms and dangerous weapons – Adopted by reference.

9.50.200    Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

9.50.210    Repealed.

9.50.220    Firearms prohibited in certain places – Exceptions – Penalty.

9.50.230    Discharge of firearms prohibited.

9.50.300    Pistol sales.


9.50.100 Firearms and dangerous weapons – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to firearms and dangerous weapons under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.41.010    Terms defined.

9.41.030    Being armed prima facie evidence of intent.

9.41.050    Carrying pistol.

9.41.060    Exception to restriction on carrying pistol.

9.41.070    Issue of licenses to carry – Fee – Revocation – Renewal.

9.41.080    Delivery to minors and others forbidden.

9.41.090    Commercial sales regulated – Requirements for delivery – Hold on delivery.

9.41.093    Exemptions.

9.41.095    Denial of application – Appeal.

9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms, order by courts – Return to owner – Confiscation by law enforcement officer.

9.41.100    Dealers to be licensed.

9.41.110    Dealer’s licenses, by whom granted and conditions thereof – Wholesale sales excepted – Permits prohibited.

9.41.120    Certain transfers forbidden.

9.41.130    False information forbidden.

9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions.

9.41.150    Exemptions.

9.41.160    Penalty.

9.41.170    Alien’s license to carry firearms – Exceptions.

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms.

9.41.240    Use of firearms by minor.

9.41.250    Dangerous weapons – Evidence.

9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions.

9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm, carrying, exhibiting, displaying or drawing unlawful – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.280    Students carrying dangerous weapons on school premises – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.300    Firearms prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty.

[Ord. 63 § 63, 1993]


9.50.200 Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to point or shoot an air gun at any person or property of another, or to aim or discharge such weapon in the direction of the person or residence of another, while within such range as to cause or inflict injury to the person or damage the property of another.

(2) As used in this section, “air gun” means and includes the following: air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun and toy or other guns of any kind or nature when so designed, contrived, modified and used to propel, by compressed air or spring-loaded plunger, any pellet, dart, hard-tipped arrow, bean, pea, BB, rock or other hard substances a distance of more than 25 feet with sufficient force to break windows or inflict injury upon persons or animals.

(3) Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any other punishment imposed by the court, the court shall direct that the weapon so used in violation of the provisions hereof be confiscated, and shall thereafter be disposed of in accordance with statutes or ordinances governing the disposal of confiscated or found weapons. [Ord. 63 § 64, 1993]


9.50.210 Weapons prohibited on liquor sale premises.

Repealed by Ord. 514. [Ord. 63 § 65, 1993]


9.50.220 Firearms prohibited in certain places – Exceptions – Penalty.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to enter the following places when he or she knowingly possesses or knowingly has under his or her control a firearm:

(a) The restricted access areas of a jail, or of a law enforcement facility, or any place used for the confinement of a person:

(i) Arrested for, charged with, or convicted of an offense;

(ii) Charged with being or adjudicated to be a juvenile offender as defined in RCW 13.40.020;

(iii) Held for extradition or as a material witness; or

(iv) Otherwise confined pursuant to an order of a court, except an order under Chapter 13.32A or 13.34 RCW.

Restricted access areas do not include common areas of egress or ingress open to the general public.

Exception. This subsection does not apply to a person licensed pursuant to RCW 9.41.070 who, upon entering the place or facility, directly and promptly proceeds to the administrator of the facility or the administrator’s designee and obtains written permission to possess the firearm while on the premises or checks his or her firearm. The person may reclaim the firearms upon leaving but must immediately and directly depart from the place or facility.

(b) A courtroom or judge’s chamber, while either is being used for any judicial proceeding. This does not include common areas of egress and ingress of the courthouse.

Exception. This subsection does not apply to a judge or court employee or to any person licensed under RCW 9.41.070 who, before entering the restricted area, directly and promptly proceeds to the court administrator or the administrator’s designee and obtains written permission to possess the firearm.

(c) The restricted access areas of a public mental health facility certified by the department of social and health services for inpatient hospital care and state institutions for the care of the mentally ill, excluding those facilities solely for evaluation and treatment. Restricted areas do not include common areas of egress and ingress open to the general public.

Exception. This subsection does not apply to any administrator or employee of the facility or to any person who, upon entering the place or facility, directly and promptly proceeds to the administrator of the facility or the administrator’s designee and obtains written permission to possess the firearm while on the premises.

(d) That portion of an establishment classified by the state liquor control board as off-limits to persons under 21 years of age.

Exception. This subsection does not apply to the proprietor of the premises or his or her employee while engaged in their employment.

(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to:

(a) A person engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments while engaged in official duties;

(b) Law enforcement personnel, except that this subsection (2)(b) does apply to a law enforcement officer who is present at a courthouse building as a party to an action under Chapter 10.14, 10.99 or 26.50 RCW, or an action under RCW Title 26 where any party has alleged the existence of domestic violence as defined in RCW 26.50.010; or

(c) Security personnel while engaged in official duties.

(3) Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 514 § 2, 2009; Ord. 63 § 66, 1993]


9.50.230 Discharge of firearms prohibited.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly discharge a firearm within the city.

(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to:

(a) A person engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments, while engaged in official duties;

(b) Law enforcement personnel; or

(c) Security personnel while engaged in official duties;

(d) A person utilizing a properly licensed instructional, membership and/or commercial shooting range. [Ord. 63 § 67, 1993]


9.50.300 Pistol sales.

The following sections of the King County Code now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended are adopted by reference to establish regulations and crimes relating to pistol sales, except that reference to the sheriff shall also refer to the city police, whether contracted or employed, under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.48.010    Definitions.

12.48.020    Sale and registration.

12.48.030    Delivery following sheriff’s report.

12.48.040    Purchase of unlawful for certain persons.

12.48.050    Violations.

[Ord. 63 § 77, 1993]


Chapter 9.55 GAMBLING

Sections:

9.55.100    Gambling offenses – Adopted by reference.


9.55.100 Gambling offenses – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to gambling under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.46.193    Cities and towns – Ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter – Jurisdiction of courts.

9.46.195    Obstruction of public servant in administration or enforcement as violation – Penalty.

9.46.196    Defrauding or cheating other participant or operator as violation – Causing another to do so as violation – Penalty.

9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

9.46.210    Enforcement – Commission as law enforcement agency.

9.46.230    Seizure and disposition of gambling devises – Owning, buying, selling, etc. gambling devises or records – Penalty.

9.46.235    Slot machines, antique – Defenses concerning – Presumption created.

9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving as violation – Penalty.

9.46.250    Gambling property or premises – Common nuisances, abatement – Termination of mortgage, contract or leasehold interests, licenses – Enforcement.

9.46.260    Proof of possession as evidence of knowledge of its character.

[Ord. 63 § 69, 1993]


Chapter 9.60 GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.60.100    False swearing and tampering – Adopted by reference.

9.60.200    Obstructing governmental operation – Adopted by reference.

9.60.300    Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

9.60.400    Interference of court – Adopted by reference.

9.60.500    Misconduct in signing a petition – Adopted by reference.

9.60.600    Violation of court ordered probation – Adopted by reference.


9.60.100 False swearing and tampering – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes of withholding knowledge of felony involving violence, false swearing and tampering under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.69.100    Withholding knowledge of felony involving violence – Penalty.

9A.72.010    Definitions.

9A.72.040    False swearing.

9A.72.050    Perjury and false swearing – inconsistent statements – Degree of crime.

9A.72.060    Perjury and false swearing – Retraction.

9A.72.070    Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense.

9A.72.080    Statement of what one does not know to be true.

9A.72.085    Matters in official proceeding required to be supported, etc., by sworn statement, etc., may be supported, etc., by unsworn statement, etc., may be supported etc., by unsworn written statement, etc., – Requirements of unsworn statement, form.

9A.72.140    Jury tampering.

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence.

[Ord. 63 § 31, 1993]


9.60.200 Obstructing governmental operation – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes relating to obstructing governmental operation under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.76.010    Definitions.

9A.76.020    Obstructing a law enforcement officer.

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest.

9A.76.050    Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of term.

9A.76.060    Relative defined.

9A.76.070    Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree.

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree.

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree.

9A.76.100    Compounding.

9A.76.130    Escape in the third degree.

9A.76.160    Introducing contraband in the third degree.

9A.76.170    Bail jumping.

9A.76.200    Harming a police dog.

(2) The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish additional crimes relating to obstructing governmental operation under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.31.090    Escaped prisoner recaptured.

9.62.010    Malicious prosecution.

9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another.

[Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 32, 1993]


9.60.300 Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city which is painted and contains decals, numbers, name or insignia so as to simulate a city or county police or fire department vehicle, or city vehicle, without prior authorization from the police chief, fire chief, city manager, or their designees. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 37, 1993]


9.60.400 Interference of court – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes relating to contempt and interference with courts under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building, or residence – Violations.

[Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 57, 1993]


9.60.500 Misconduct in signing a petition – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of misconduct in signing a petition under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.44.080    Misconduct in signing a petition.

[Ord. 63 § 68, 1993]


9.60.600 Violation of court ordered probation – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to provide for arrest upon violation of court ordered probation under the Burien criminal code and the provisions thereof shall also apply to suspensions or deferrals of sentence by the Municipal Court of the city:



KCC

12.150.010    Definitions.

12.150.020    Arrest without warrant.

[Ord. 63 § 87, 1993]


Chapter 9.65 LITTERING AND POLLUTING

Sections:

9.65.100    Dumping of trash in waterways – Adopted by reference.

9.65.200    Littering and pollution – Adopted by reference.


9.65.100 Dumping of trash in waterways – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended are adopted by reference to establish the crime of dumping trash in waterways under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.36.010    Dumping trash in waterways prohibited. 

[Ord. 63 § 76, 1993]


9.65.200 Littering and pollution – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Revised Code of Washington, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish regulations and crimes regarding littering and pollution, under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

70.93.060    Littering.

[Ord. 63 § 82, 1993]


Chapter 9.70 MINORS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.70.100    Sexually explicit material – Adopted by reference.

9.70.200    Special offenses relative to minors – Adopted by reference.

9.70.300    Applying tattoo to a minor – Penalty.


9.70.100 Sexually explicit material – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of displaying sexually explicit material under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.68.130    “Sexually explicit material” – Defined – Unlawful display.

[Ord. 63 § 72, 1993]


9.70.200 Special offenses relative to minors – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish special crimes involving minors under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.68A.011    Definition.

9.68A.080    Processors of depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Report required.

9.68A.090    Communication with a minor for immoral purposes.

9.68A.120    Seizure and forfeiture of property.

9.68A.140    Definitions.

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance.

9.68A.160    Penalty.

9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty.

(2) The following sections of the King County Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to further establish special crimes involving minors under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.78.030    Written consent required to supply airgun or slingshot to minor.

12.78.040    Written consent to be kept as evidence.

12.78.050    Violation – Misdemeanor.

12.81.010    Responsibility of persons in charge of sale or display rooms containing paraphernalia evincing intent to violate Chapter 69.50 RCW.

12.81.020    Minors prohibited unless with guardian in places selling or displaying for sale certain paraphernalia.

12.81.030    Sale and display rooms requirements.

12.81.040    Violation – penalty.

12.84.010    Definitions.

12.84.020    Dissemination of indecent materials to minors unlawful.

12.84.030    Dissemination of indecent materials to minors defined.

12.84.040    Presumptions.

12.84.050    Defenses.

12.84.070    Violation a misdemeanor.

[Ord. 63 § 73, 1993]


9.70.300 Applying tattoo to a minor – Penalty.

Every person who applies a tattoo to any minor under the age of 18 is guilty of a misdemeanor. It is not a defense to a violation of this section that the person applying the tattoo did not know the minor’s age unless the person applying the tattoo establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a reasonable, bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring production of a driver’s license or other picture identification card or paper and did not rely solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor.

For the purposes of this section, “tattoo” includes any permanent marking or coloring of the skin with any pigment, ink, or dye, or any procedure that leaves a visible scar on the skin. Medical procedures performed by a licensed physician are exempted from this section. [Ord. 327 § 1, 2001]


Chapter 9.75 NUISANCES

Sections:

9.75.100    Public nuisances – Adopted by reference.

9.75.200    Penalties for maintenance of public nuisance.


9.75.100 Public nuisances – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to public nuisances under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.66.010    Public nuisance.

9.66.020    Unequal damage.

9.66.030    Maintaining or permitting nuisance.

9.66.040    Abatement of nuisance.

9.66.050    Deposit of unwholesome substance.

[Ord. 63 § 71, 1993]


9.75.200 Penalties for maintenance of public nuisance.

Maintenance of a public nuisance as declared herein, in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties, shall result in a civil penalty not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000 for a first conviction of maintaining a public nuisance and by abatement by closure of such business or commercial enterprise for the period of 30 days for each subsequent conviction of maintaining a public nuisance. [Ord. 63 § 52, 1993]


Chapter 9.80 PERSONS, CRIMES RELATING TO Revised 5/20

Sections:

9.80.100    Assault and other crimes relating to persons – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

9.80.200    Custodial interference – Adopted by reference.

9.80.300    Harassment – Adopted by reference.

9.80.400    Aggressive begging.


9.80.100 Assault and other crimes relating to persons – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

(1) The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes of assault and other crimes involving physical harm under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.36.041    Assault in the fourth degree.

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment in the second degree.

9A.36.070    Coercion.

(2) The following sections of the Revised Code of Washington, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are hereby adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.36.150    Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence.

9.94A.030    Definitions.

9.94A.835    Special allegation – Sexual motivation – Procedures.

10.99.020    Definitions.

10.99.030    Law enforcement officers – Training, powers, duties.

10.99.040    Restrictions upon and duties of court.

10.99.045    Appearances by defendant – Orders prohibiting contact.

10.99.050    Restriction or prohibition of contact with victim – Procedures.

10.99.055    Enforcement of orders against defendants.

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.

26.50.010    Definitions.

26.50.020    Commencement of action – Jurisdiction – Venue.

26.50.030    Petition for an order for protection – Availability of forms and instructional brochures – Filing fee – Bond not required.

26.50.040    Application for leave to proceed in forma pauperis.

26.50.050    Hearing – Service – Time.

26.50.060    Relief.

26.50.070    Ex parte temporary order for protection.

26.50.080    Issuance of order – Assistance of peace officer – Designation of appropriate law enforcement agency.

26.50.090    Order – Service.

26.50.100    Order – Transmittal to law enforcement agency – Record in law enforcement information system – Enforceability.

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties.

26.50.120    Violation of order – Prosecuting attorney or attorney for municipality may be requested to assist – Cost and attorney’s fees.

26.50.130    Order – Modification – Transmittal.

26.50.140    Peace officer – Immunity.

26.50.200    Title to real estate – Effect.

26.50.210    Proceedings additional.

[Ord. 731 § 1, 2020; Ord. 184 § 2, 1996; Ord. 96 § 1, 1994; Ord. 63 § 18, 1993]


9.80.200 Custodial interference – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of custodial interference under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.40.010    Definitions.

9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree.

9A.40.080    Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defenses, restricted.

[Ord. 63 § 19, 1993]


9.80.300 Harassment – Adopted by reference.

(1) The following sections of the Revised Code of Washington as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are hereby adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.46.010    Legislative finding.

9A.46.020    Definition – Penalties.

9A.46.030    Place where committed.

9A.46.040    Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation.

9A.46.050    Arraignment – No-contact order.

9A.46.060    Crimes included in harassment.

9A.46.070    Enforcement of orders restricting contact.

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation.

9A.46.090    Nonliability of peace officer.

9A.46.100    “Convicted,” time when.

9A.46.110    Stalking.

(2) The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish additional crimes of harassment under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.61.230    Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment, embarrass.

9.61.240    Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment, or embarrass – Permitting telephone to be used.

9.61.250    Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment, or embarrass – Offense, where deemed committed.

9.61.260    Cyberstalking.

(3) The following sections of RCW Title 10, as now in effect and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish additional crimes of harassment under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

10.14.120    Disobedience of order – Penalties.

10.14.170    Criminal penalty.

[Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 184 § 1, 1996; Ord. 63 § 21, 1993]


9.80.400 Aggressive begging.

(1) It is a crime for any person to engage in aggressive begging in any public place in the city as those terms are defined by this section.

(2) As used in this section:

(a) “Aggressive begging” means to beg with intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods.

(b) “Beg” means to ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means.

(c) “Intimidate” means to coerce or frighten into submission or obedience.

(d) “Public place” means any road, alley, lane, parking area, sidewalk or any place, private or otherwise, adopted to and fitted for vehicular or pedestrian travel, that is in common use by the public with the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner or owners, and further, any public playground, school grounds, recreation grounds, parks, parkways, park drives, park paths and rights-of-way open to the use of the public.

(3) Aggressive begging shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 22, 1993]


Chapter 9.85 PROPERTY, CRIMES RELATING TO Revised 5/20

Sections:

9.85.010    Theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property.

9.85.100    Trespass and prowling – Adopted by reference.

9.85.105    Vehicle trespass prohibited – Penalty.

9.85.200    Theft and possession of stolen property – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

9.85.300    Roadside stands – Adopted by reference.

9.85.400    Political signs and posters – Adopted by reference.

9.85.500    Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

9.85.600    Attempted forgery.

9.85.610    Definitions – Fraud. 


9.85.010 Theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property.

(1) A person who, with intent to deprive the owner or owner’s agent, wrongfully obtains, or exerts unauthorized control over, or by color or aid of deception gains control of personal property that is rented, leased, or loaned by written agreement to the person, is guilty of theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property.

(2) The finder of fact may presume intent to deprive if the finder of fact finds either of the following:

(a) That the person who rented or leased the property failed to return or make arrangements acceptable to the owner of the property or the owner’s agent to return the property to the owner or the owner’s agent within 72 hours after receipt of proper notice following the due date of the rental, lease, lease-purchase, or loan agreement; or

(b) That the renter, lessee, or borrower presented identification to the owner or the owner’s agent that was materially false, fictitious, or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other appropriate items.

(3) As used in subsection (2) of this section, “proper notice” consists of a written demand by the owner or the owner’s agent made after the due date of the rental, lease, lease-purchase, or loan period, mailed by certified or registered mail to the renter, lessee, or borrower at: (a) the address the renter, lessee, or borrower gave when the contract was made; or (b) the renter, lessee, or borrower’s last known address if later furnished in writing by the renter, lessee, borrower, or the agent of the renter, lessee, or borrower.

(4) Theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property is a gross misdemeanor.

(5) The crime of theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property may be deemed to have been committed either at the physical location where the written agreement for the rental, lease, lease-purchase, or loan of the property was executed under subsection (1) of this section, or at the address where proper notice may be mailed to the renter, lessee, or borrower under subsection (3) of this section.

(6) This section applies to rental agreements that provide that the renter may return the property any time within the rental period and pay only for the time the renter actually retained the property, in addition to any minimum rental fee, to lease agreements, to lease-purchase agreements as defined under RCW 63.19.010, and to vehicles loaned to prospective purchasers borrowing a vehicle by written agreement from a motor vehicle dealer licensed under Chapter 46.70 RCW. This section does not apply to rental or leasing of real property under the residential landlord-tenant act, Chapter 59.18 RCW. [Ord. 611 § 1, 2014]


9.85.100 Trespass and prowling – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes of trespass and prowling under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.52.010    Definitions.

9A.52.060    Making or having burglar tools.

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree.

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.090    Criminal trespass – Defenses.

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling in the second degree.

9A.52.120    Computer trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.130    Computer trespass – Commission of other crime.

[Ord. 63 § 25, 1993]


9.85.105 Vehicle trespass prohibited – Penalty.

(1) A person is guilty of vehicle trespass if he or she knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a vehicle belonging to another.

(2) As used in this section:

(a) The word “enter” shall include the entrance of the person, or the insertion of any part of his or her body, or any instrument or weapon held in his or her hand.

(b) A person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon a vehicle when he or she is not licensed, invited, or otherwise privileged to so enter or remain.

(3) Vehicle trespass is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 562 § 3, 2012] 


9.85.200 Theft and possession of stolen property – Adopted by reference. Revised 5/20

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crimes of theft and stolen property under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.56.010    Definitions.

9A.56.020    Theft – Definition, defense.

9A.56.050    Theft in the third degree.

9A.56.060    Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts.

9A.56.063    Making or possessing motor vehicle theft tools.

9A.56.100    Theft and larceny equated.

9A.56.140    Possessing stolen property – Definition – Access, devices, presumption.

9A.56.170    Possessing stolen property in the third degree.

9A.56.180    Obscuring identity of a machine.

9A.56.220    Theft of cable television services.

9A.56.230    Unlawful sale of cable television services.

9A.56.240    Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation.

9A.56.260    Connection of channel converter.

9A.56.270    Shopping cart theft.

9A.56.330    Possession of another’s identification.

[Ord. 737 § 1, 2020; Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 27, 1993]


9.85.300 Roadside stands – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to roadside stands, except that references therein to the county shall also refer to the city under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.28.010    Unlawful to erect structures along roads.

12.28.020    Required distance from right-of-way.

12.28.030    Nuisance declared – Authority of engineer.

12.28.040    Violation – Misdemeanor.

[Ord. 63 § 75, 1993]


9.85.400 Political signs and posters – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish regulations and crimes regarding political signs and posters, under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.74.010    Political signs allowed on private property.

12.74.020    Removal of signs following election.

12.74.030    Political signs not allowed on public property.

12.74.040    Public notices unaffected by chapter. 

12.74.050    Penalty for violations.

[Ord. 63 § 80, 1993]


9.85.500 Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

Any person who throws, pushes, rolls, drops, swings or otherwise propels or projects any object, thing or substance in such a manner as to strike or be likely to strike any moving vehicle on the public highways or streets is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 85, 1993]


9.85.600 Attempted forgery. 

(1) A person is guilty of the crime of attempted forgery if with the intent to commit the crime of forgery does intend to injure or defraud by:

(a) Falsely making, completing, or altering a written instrument; or

(b) Possessing, uttering, offering, disposing of or putting off as true, a written instrument which the person knows to be forged; and

(c) Does an act which is a substantial step toward the commission of that crime. [Ord. 562 § 1, 2012]


9.85.610 Definitions – Fraud.

The following section of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference as definitions of fraud under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.60.010    Definitions.

[Ord. 562 § 1, 2012]


Chapter 9.90 PROSTITUTION

Sections:

9.90.010    Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering – Adopted by reference.

9.90.020    Unlawful prostitution loitering – Adopted by reference.

9.90.030    Patronizing a prostitute – Adopted by reference.

9.90.040    Known prostitute or panderer defined.

9.90.050    Sex of parties immaterial.

9.90.060    Unlawful permitting of prostitution or pandering.

9.90.070    Penalties upon prostitution conviction.

9.90.080    Subsequent violation for prostitution activity as separate crime.

9.90.090    Violation of conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral as separate crime.

9.90.100    Places of prostitution activity declared public nuisances.

9.90.110    Evidence of use for prostitution purposes.

9.90.120    Conviction as prima facie evidence.


9.90.010 Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering – Adopted by reference.

KCC 12.63.010(A) through (F) are adopted by reference and it is unlawful for any person to engage or agree or offer to engage in sexual conduct, which includes “sexual intercourse” or “sexual contact,” as those terms are defined in RCW 9A.44.010, or to commit any of the following acts:

(1) To secure or offer to secure another for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution; or

(2) To knowingly transport a person into or within the city with purpose to promote that person’s engaging in prostitution, or procuring or paying for transportation with that purpose; or

(3) To knowingly receive, offer or agree to receive another into any place or building for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution, or to knowingly permit another to remain there for any such purpose; or

(4) To direct another to any place for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution; or

(5) To knowingly in any way aid, abet or participate in an act of prostitution. [Ord. 63 § 40, 1993]


9.90.020 Unlawful prostitution loitering – Adopted by reference.

KCC 12.63.010(G) is adopted by reference and it is unlawful for any person to remain in or near any street, sidewalk, alleyway or other place open to the public with the intent of committing, or inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit, an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intends such prohibited conduct are:

(1) That the actor is a known prostitute or panderer; or

(2) The actor repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or

(3) The actor circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians; or

(4) The actor inquires whether a potential patron, procurer or prostitute is a police officer, searches for articles that would identify a policy officer, or requests the touching or exposing of genitals or female breasts to prove that the person is not a police officer. [Ord. 63 § 41, 1993]


9.90.030 Patronizing a prostitute – Adopted by reference.

(1) RCW 9A.88.110 is adopted by reference and a person is guilty of patronizing a prostitute if:

(a) Pursuant to a prior understanding, he or she pays a fee to another person as compensation for such person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or her; or

(b) He or she pays or agrees to pay a fee to another person pursuant to an understanding that in return therefor such person will engage in sexual conduct with him or her; or

(c) He or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or her in return for a fee.

(2) For purposes hereof, sexual conduct means “sexual intercourse” or “sexual contact” as those terms are defined in RCW 9A.44.010. [Ord. 63 § 42, 1993]


9.90.040 Known prostitute or panderer defined.

For the purpose of this chapter, a “known prostitute or panderer” is a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of any provision of this chapter, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, or as shown by the records of any court, been convicted of violating any ordinance or law of any jurisdiction within the state of Washington defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing, or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution. [Ord. 63 § 43, 1993]


9.90.050 Sex of parties immaterial.

In any prosecution for prostitution, prostitution loitering, or any other prosecution related to prostitution activity, the sex of the two parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated, or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:

(1) Such persons were of the same sex; or

(2) The person who received, agreed to receive, or solicited a fee was a male and the person who paid or agreed or offered to pay such fee was a female. [Ord. 63 § 44, 1993]


9.90.060 Unlawful permitting of prostitution or pandering.

A person is guilty of permitting prostitution or pandering if, having possession or control of premises which such person knows are being used for prostitution or pandering purposes, he or she fails without lawful excuse to make reasonable effort to halt or abate such use. [Ord. 63 § 45, 1993]


9.90.070 Penalties upon prostitution conviction.

Any single violation of this chapter relating to an unlawful act of prostitution or pandering, an unlawful act of prostitution loitering, an unlawful act of permitting prosecution or pandering, or an unlawful act of patronizing a prostitute, within any period of 12 months, shall be a violation of city ordinance constituting a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. The court may suspend or defer a portion of the term of imprisonment or fine on condition that the convicted person never enter into, or be present in, any anti-prostitution emphasis area during the term of any such suspension or deferral. The court may further require AIDS testing as a condition of suspension or deferral, pursuant to RCW 70.24.350, at the defendant’s expense; provided, however, that King County, as agent for the city pursuant to interlocal agreement, may require such testing and counseling as provided in RCW 70.24.360 upon imprisonment in jail of any such convicted person. [Ord. 63 § 46, 1993]


9.90.080 Subsequent violation for prostitution activity as separate crime.

It is a gross misdemeanor and a separate crime for any person to commit any violation of this chapter relating to unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering, unlawful acts of prostitution loitering, unlawful acts of permitting prostitution or pandering, or unlawful acts of patronizing a prostitute, when the person has previously violated a provision of this chapter relating to unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering, unlawful acts of prostitution loitering, unlawful acts of permitting prostitution or pandering, or unlawful acts of patronizing a prostitute, and the conviction date of the previous violation is within 12 months of the incident date of the new violation. The court may suspend all or a portion of the term of imprisonment or fine on condition that the convicted person never enter into, or be present in, any anti-prostitution emphasis area during the term of any such suspension or deferral. The court may further require AIDS testing and counseling, as a condition of suspension or deferral, pursuant to RCW 70.24.350, at the defendant’s expenses; provided, however, that King County, as agent for the city pursuant to interlocal agreement, may require such testing and counseling as provided in RCW 70.24.360 upon imprisonment in jail of any such convicted person. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 47, 1993]


9.90.090 Violation of conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral as separate crime.

The presence of any person within a designated area in violation of court-imposed conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral of any sentence shall constitute a separate crime designated a gross misdemeanor and any such person may be apprehended and arrested without the necessity for any warrant or additional court order. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 48, 1993]


9.90.100 Places of prostitution activity declared public nuisances.

Any building, structure or place within the city used for the purpose of prostitution or pandering as defined in this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. [Ord. 63 § 49, 1993]


9.90.110 Evidence of use for prostitution purposes.

(1) Two or more criminal convictions of persons for acts of prostitution in a building, structure or place, within the one-year period preceding the commencement of an action under this chapter shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the building, structure or place has been used for the purposes of prostitution and is a public nuisance. In any action under this chapter, evidence of the common fame and general reputation of the building or place, of the inmates or occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto, shall be admissible as evidence to prove the existence of the public nuisance but must be supported by additional evidence. Evidence of the general reputation of the building or place, or of the inmates or occupants thereof that is sufficient to establish the existence of the public nuisance, shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and responsibility for the nuisance by persons or legal entities having an interest in the property. Responsibility for the nuisance shall extend to the owners, lessors, lessees and all those in interest in any form in the property, real or persons, used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance.

(2) Evidence of cooperation, by owners, agents or managers of a building or place, with police investigations or operations to control prostitution, may be used to rebut the presumptions created in this chapter. [Ord. 63 § 50, 1993]


9.90.120 Conviction as prima facie evidence.

Any conviction of any owner, manager, operator, agent or employee for promoting prostitution, for prostitution or pandering, for prostitution loitering, or for permitting prostitution, when such offense was related to any business or commercial enterprise, shall be prima facie evidence that the building, structure or place upon or in which business or commercial enterprise is or was conducted, was used for prostitution. [Ord. 63 § 51, 1993]


Chapter 9.95 PUBLIC MORALS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.95.100    Sexual offenses – Adopted by reference.

9.95.200    Indecent exposure – Adopted by reference.

9.95.300    Urinating in public.

9.95.400    Body studios – Adopted by reference.

9.95.500    Repealed.


9.95.100 Sexual offenses – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish sexual offenses under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.44.010    Definitions.

9A.44.030    Defenses to prosecution under this chapter.

9A.44.096    Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree.

[Ord. 63 § 20, 1993]


9.95.200 Indecent exposure – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of indecent exposure under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure. 

[Ord. 63 § 38, 1993]


9.95.300 Urinating in public.

(1) A person is guilty of urinating in public if he or she intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, or at a place and under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public.

(2) Urinating in public is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 39, 1993]


9.95.400 Body studios – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended are adopted by reference to prohibit and establish crimes relating to body studios, under the Burien criminal code:

KCC

12.56.010    Defined.

12.56.020    Operation prohibited.

12.56.030    Penalty.

[Ord. 63 § 78, 1993]


9.95.500 Adult entertainment.

Repealed by Ord. 282. [Ord. 63 § 79, 1993]


Chapter 9.100 PUBLIC OFFICERS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.100.100    Impersonating members of public safety department – Adopted by reference.

9.100.200    Obstructing city officers.

9.100.300    Official misconduct – Adopted by reference.

9.100.400    Making a false or misleading statement to a law enforcement officer or to a 911 dispatcher.


9.100.100 Impersonating members of public safety department – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the King County Code and the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of fraud by impersonating members of the public safety department, except that the reference thereto shall also refer to members of the city police department, whether contracted or employed:

KCC    

12.08.010    Impersonating members of public safety department.

12.08.020    Selling or disposing of police badges prohibited.

12.08.030    Possessing badge with intent to impersonate officer.

12.08.040    Intent to impersonate presumed.

12.08.050    Penalty for violation.

RCW

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation in the second degree.

[Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 29, 1993]


9.100.200 Obstructing city officers.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to make any false or misleading material statement to, or to willfully hinder, delay or obstruct any city officer in the discharge of his or her official powers or duties. Obstructing city officers is a misdemeanor.

(2) “City officer,” as used in this section, comprises the public works director and his or her designees, city clerk and his or her designees, code enforcement personnel, and other city personnel authorized for enforcement of city ordinances, statutes and codes. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 63 § 33, 1993]


9.100.300 Official misconduct – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish the crime of official misconduct under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9A.80.010    Official misconduct.

[Ord. 63 § 34, 1993]


9.100.400 Making a false or misleading statement to a law enforcement officer or to a 911 dispatcher.

(1) A person is guilty of making a false or misleading statement to a law enforcement officer or to a 911 dispatcher, if he or she:

(a) Knowingly makes a false or misleading material statement to a law enforcement officer; or

(b) Calls the telephone number 9-1-1 and knowingly makes a false alarm or complaint or reports other false information that could result in the dispatch of emergency or law enforcement services.

(2) As used in this section:

(a) “Material statement” means a written or oral statement reasonably likely to be relied upon by a law enforcement officer in the discharge of his or her official powers or duties;

(b) “Law enforcement officer” means any general authority, limited authority, or specially commissioned Washington peace officer or federal peace officer, as those terms are defined in RCW 10.93.020, and other public officers who are responsible for enforcement of fire, building, zoning, and life and safety codes;

(c) “911 dispatcher” means any person who answers calls to the telephone number 9-1-1 for the purpose of dispatching emergency or law enforcement services.

(3) Making a false or misleading statement to a law enforcement officer or to a 911 dispatcher is a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 563 § 1, 2012]


Chapter 9.105 PUBLIC PEACE, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.105.100    Public disturbance – Adopted by reference.

9.105.200    Disorderly conduct.

9.105.300    Violating right of privacy – Adopted by reference.

9.105.410    Public disturbance noise prohibited.

9.105.420    Exclusions.

9.105.430    Penalties.

9.105.440    Downtown area defined.


9.105.100 Public disturbance – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of the Washington Criminal Code, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to public disturbance under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building or residence – Violations.

9A.84.010    Riot.

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse.

9A.84.040    False reporting.

[Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 63 § 35, 1993]


9.105.200 Disorderly conduct.

(1) A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:

(a) Uses abusive language and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault;

(b) Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without authority;

(c) Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority; or

(d) Fights by agreement, except as part of an organized athletic event.

(2) Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 63 § 36, 1993]


9.105.300 Violating right of privacy – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, are adopted by reference to establish crimes relating to violation of the right of privacy under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.73.010    Divulging telegram.

9.73.020    Opening sealed letter.

9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions.

9.73.070    Same – Persons and activities excepted.

9.73.090    Police and fire personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 – 9.73.080 – Standards.

9.73.100    Recordings available to defense counsel.

[Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 63 § 74, 1993]


9.105.410 Public disturbance noise prohibited.

(1) General Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance noise.

(2) Illustrative Enumeration. The following sounds are public disturbance noises in violation of this chapter:

(a) The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law.

(b) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property.

(c) Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time and place as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property.

(d) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment or condominium, which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from musical instruments, audio sound systems, band sessions or social gatherings.

(e) Sound from motor vehicle audio sound systems, such as tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the vehicle itself.

(f) Sound from portable audio equipment, such as tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source, and if not operated upon the property of the operator.

(g) The squealing, screeching or other such sounds from motor vehicle tires in contact with the ground or other roadway surface because of rapid acceleration, braking or excessive speed around corners or because of such other reason; provided, that sounds which result from actions which are necessary to avoid danger shall be exempt from this section.

(h) Sounds originating from construction sites, including but not limited to sounds from construction equipment, power tools and hammering, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends; provided, however, the city manager shall have the discretion to issue variances for city of Burien public works projects if the city manager determines, after considering the relative interests of the applicant, other owners or possessors of property likely to be affected by the noise, and the general public, that the noise occurring or proposed to occur does not endanger health and safety of a substantial number of persons.

(i) Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances, including but not limited to sounds from lawnmowers, powered hand tools, snow removal equipment and composters between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. [Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


9.105.420 Exclusions.

(1) City of Burien permitted special events and parks events located in the “Downtown” –as defined by city zoning codes and as described in BMC 9.105.440 – between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Fridays and Saturdays.

(2) Regularly scheduled events at parks, not including parks in the Downtown, such as public address systems for baseball games or park concerts between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. [Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


9.105.430 Penalties.

Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for a first offense. For second and subsequent offenses, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


9.105.440 Downtown area defined.

“Downtown” refers to the areas located within the Downtown Commercial and Special Planning Area 1 zones as defined by city zoning codes and are illustrated below.
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 707 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


Chapter 9.110 SCHOOLS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.110.100    Disruption of school activities.


9.110.100 Disruption of school activities.

(1) A person is guilty of disruption of school activities if he or she comes into or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any school ground, or street, sidewalk or public way adjacent thereto, and intentionally causes disruption of the activities of the school.

(2) As used in this section, “school” has its ordinary meaning and also includes universities, colleges, community colleges and institutions of higher education.

(3) Disruption of school activity shall constitute a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 63 § 26, 1993]


Chapter 9.115 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES

Sections:

9.115.100    Miscellaneous crimes – Adopted by reference.

9.115.110    Tobacco purchases by minors.


9.115.100 Miscellaneous crimes – Adopted by reference.

The following sections of RCW Title 9, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended are adopted by reference to establish the following miscellaneous crimes under the Burien criminal code:

RCW

9.91.010    Denial of civil rights – Terms defined.

9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct.

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile.

9.91.090    Fraudulent destruction of insured property.

9.91.110    Metal buyers – Records of purchases – Penalty.

9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle.

[Ord. 63 § 86, 1993]


9.115.110 Tobacco purchases by minors.

The following section of the Revised Code of Washington as now in effect, and as subsequently may be amended, is hereby adopted by reference and reads as follows:

RCW 70.155.080 

(1) A person under the age of eighteen who purchases or attempts to purchase, possesses, or obtains or attempts to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products commits a class 3 civil infraction in chapter 7.80 RCW and is subject to a fine as set out in chapter 7.80 RCW or participation in up to four hours of community service, or both. The court may also require participation in a smoking cessation program. This provision does not apply if a person under the age of eighteen, with parental authorization, is participating in a controlled purchase as part of a liquor control board, law enforcement, or local health department activity.

(2) Municipal and district courts within the state have jurisdiction for enforcement of this section.

[Ord. 246 § 1, 1999]


Chapter 9.120 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES

Sections:

9.120.010    Purpose.

9.120.020    Definitions.

9.120.030    Violation.

9.120.040    Procedure.

9.120.050    Commencement of action – Enforcement.

9.120.060    Summary closure.


9.120.010 Purpose.

(1) Chronic nuisance properties present significant health, safety and welfare concerns, where the persons responsible for such properties fail to take corrective action to abate the nuisance condition. Chronic nuisance properties can have a tremendous negative impact upon the quality of life, safety and health of the neighborhoods where they are located. This chapter is enacted to provide a remedy for nuisance activities that are particularly disruptive to quality of life and repeatedly occur or exist at properties. This remedy is not the exclusive remedy available under state or local laws and may be used in conjunction with such other laws.

(2) Also, chronic nuisance properties can be a financial burden to the city due to repeated calls for service necessitated by nuisance activities that repeatedly occur or exist on such properties. This chapter provides a practical process for ameliorating such activities and for holding accountable the persons ultimately responsible for such properties. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


9.120.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning prescribed below:

(1) “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department director or designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

(2) “Control” means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property or conduct that occurs on a property. 

(3) “Chronic nuisance property” means property on which any combination of three or more nuisance activities occur or exist during any 60-day period. 

(4) “Drug-related activity” means any unlawful activity at a property, which consists of the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving away of any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substances as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW or which is established as a crime under Chapter 9.35 BMC.

(5) “Nuisance activity” means and includes:

(a) Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring on, around or near a property, including, but not limited to, violations of the following laws and regulations:

(i) BMC Title 8, Health and Safety; 

(ii) BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction; and

(iii) BMC 9.75.100, Public nuisances.

(b) Any criminal conduct as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring on, around or near a property, including, but not limited to, the following activities or behaviors: 

(i) Stalking, BMC 9.80.300;

(ii) Harassment, BMC 9.80.300;

(iii) Public disturbance, BMC 9.105.100;

(iv) Disorderly conduct, BMC 9.105.200;

(v) Assault, BMC 9.80.100;

(vi) Domestic violence crimes, BMC 9.80.100;

(vii) Reckless endangerment, BMC 9.80.100;

(viii) Prostitution, BMC 9.90.010 and 9.90.020;

(ix) Patronizing a prostitute, BMC 9.90.030;

(x) Public disturbance noises, BMC 9.105.400;

(xi) Crimes relating to public morals, Chapter 9.95 BMC;

(xii) Crimes relating to firearms and dangerous weapons violation, Chapter 9.50 BMC;

(xiii) Dangerous animal or cruelty to animal violations, BMC 6.05.300; and 

(xiv) Drug-related activity.

(c) For purposes of this chapter, “nuisance activity” shall not include conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no control over the criminal act.

(6) “Person responsible for property” or “person responsible” means, unless otherwise defined, any of the following: any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to this chapter; an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject to this chapter; a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to this chapter; a mortgagee that has filed an action in foreclosure on the property that is subject to the regulation, based on breach or default of the mortgage agreement, until title to the property is transferred to a third party; a mortgagee of property that is subject to the regulation and has not been occupied by the owner, the owner’s tenant, or a person having the owner’s permission to occupy the premises for a period of at least 90 days; and/or any person who has control over the property and created, caused, participated in, or has allowed a violation to occur. 

(7) “Person” means natural person, joint venture, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, officer or employee of any of them.

(8) “Premises and property” may be used by this chapter interchangeably and means any public or private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate or land or portion thereof including property used as residential or commercial property.

(9) “Rental unit” means any structure or that part of a structure, including but not limited to single-family home, room or apartment, which is rented to another and used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


9.120.030 Violation.

(1) Any property within the city of Burien which is a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies; and 

(2) Any person responsible for property who permits property to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


9.120.040 Procedure.

(1) When the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), receives documentation confirming the occurrence of three or more nuisance activities within a 60-day period on any property, the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), may review such documentation to determine whether it describes the nuisance activities enumerated in BMC 9.120.020. Upon such a finding, the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), shall warn the person responsible for such property, in writing, that the property is in danger of being declared a chronic nuisance property. 

(2) The warning shall contain: 

(a) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property; 

(b) A concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred on the property; 

(c) A demand that the person responsible for such property respond to the chief of police or his/her designee(s) within 10 days of service of the notice to discuss the nuisance activities and create a plan to abate the chronic nuisance;

(d) Offer the person responsible an opportunity to abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation; and 

(e) A statement describing that if legal action is sought, the property could be subject to closure and civil penalties and/or costs assessed up to $100.00 per day if the property is declared a chronic nuisance property.

(3) The chief of police or his/her designee(s) shall serve or cause to be served such warning upon the person responsible in accordance with the procedures set forth in BMC 1.15.070.

(4) If the person responsible fails to respond to the warning within the time prescribed, the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), shall issue a notice declaring the property to be a chronic nuisance property and post such notice at the property and issue the person responsible a civil infraction, punishable by a maximum penalty of $1,000. If the person responsible fails to respond to the issued infraction and/or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the matter shall be referred to the office of the city attorney for further action.

(5) If the person responsible responds as required by the notice and agrees to abate the nuisance activity, the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), and the person responsible may work out an agreed upon course of action which would abate the nuisance activity. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached, the matter shall be forwarded to the office of the city attorney for enforcement action. Provided, that in the event the chief of police or his/her designee(s) or the city attorney determines that the person responsible has taken reasonable steps to abate the nuisance activity, the city attorney shall not commence an enforcement action under this chapter, notwithstanding the continuance of the nuisance activity.

(6) It is a defense to an action for chronic nuisance property that the person responsible, at all material times, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is chronic nuisance property. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


9.120.050 Commencement of action – Enforcement.

(1) Once the matter is referred to the city attorney, the city attorney shall immediately review and make a determination to initiate legal action authorized under this chapter or state statute, or may seek alternative forms of abatement of the nuisance activity. The city attorney may initiate legal action on the chronic nuisance property and seek civil penalties and costs in King County superior court for the abatement of the nuisance. 

(2) In determining whether a property shall be deemed a chronic nuisance property and subject to the court’s jurisdiction, the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The city may submit official police reports and other affidavits outlining the information that led to arrest(s), and other chronic nuisance activity occurring or existing at the property. The failure to prosecute an individual or the fact no one has been convicted of a crime is not a defense to a chronic nuisance action. 

(3) Once the superior court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance under this chapter the court may impose a civil penalty against any or all of the persons responsible for the property, and may order any other relief deemed appropriate. A civil penalty may be assessed for up to $100.00 per day for each day the nuisance activity continues to occur following the date of the original warning by the chief of police, or his/her designee(s), as described in BMC 9.120.040. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the following factors, citing to those found applicable:

(a) The actions taken by the person responsible to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity;

(b) The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;

(c) The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance activity; and

(d) Any other factor deemed relevant by the court. 

(4) The superior court which determined the property to be a chronic nuisance property shall also assess costs against the person responsible in the amount it costs the city to abate, or attempt to abate, the nuisance activity. 

(5) If the superior court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance property, the superior court shall order the property closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period up to one year, and may impose a civil penalty and costs. 

(6) Once a determination has been made by the superior court that the chronic nuisance property shall be subject to closure the court may authorize the city to physically secure the premises and initiate such closure. Costs for such closure shall be submitted to the court for review. Any civil penalty and/or costs awarded to the city may be filed with the city treasurer who shall cause the same to be filed as a lien on the property with the county treasurer. The city shall file a formal lis pendens notice when an action for abatement is filed in the superior court. 

(7) The superior court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure or abatement of the property. 

(8) King County district court is to have jurisdiction of all civil infractions issued pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


9.120.060 Summary closure.

Nothing in this chapter prohibits the city from taking any emergency action for the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. The city may take summary action to close the property without complying with the notification provisions of BMC 9.120.040, but shall provide such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. [Ord. 572 § 1, 2012]


Chapter 9.125 TRESPASS WARNINGS ON CITY AND OTHER PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY

(Repealed by Ord. 681)




Chapter 9.150 PUBLIC DEFENDER STANDARDS

Sections:

9.150.010    Adoption of public defender standards.


9.150.010 Adoption of public defender standards. 

The city hereby adopts the following standards for public defenders: 

(1) Purpose and Intent. These public defender standards are intended to ensure that indigent criminal defendants receive high-quality legal representation through a public defense system that efficiently and effectively protects the constitutional requirement of effective assistance of counsel.

(2) Contract. All indigent defense services shall be paid pursuant to a written contract between the indigent defense attorney(s) and the city, with input from judicial officers.

(3) Compensation. All indigent defense attorneys shall be reasonably compensated, taking into consideration the experience and training of the attorney. Attorneys who have a conflict of interest shall be required to select or compensate conflict counsel.

(4) Duties and Responsibilities of Counsel. All indigent defense contracts shall require that services be provided to all clients in a professional, skilled manner consistent with minimum standards set forth by the American Bar Association, applicable Washington State Bar Association standards, the Rules of Professional Conduct (RPC), case law and applicable court rules defining the duties of counsel and the rights of defendants. Counsel’s primary and most fundamental responsibility is to promote and protect the best interests of the client.

(5) Malpractice Insurance. Indigent defense attorneys shall maintain malpractice insurance with agreed-upon policy limits.

(6) Caseload Limits and Types of Cases. Caseloads shall be limited to ensure effective representation. An attorney shall not allow his or her private law practice to interfere with the competent representation of indigent defendants.

The caseload standards adopted by the Washington Supreme Court shall be considered mandatory requirements that shall be complied with. A “case” is defined as the filing of a document wherein a person is designated a defendant or respondent and an attorney is appointed by the court. Adjustments may be made wherein a full case is not attributed in the following nonexclusive circumstances:

(a) A bench warrant is issued before a case is resolved;

(b) Probation violation, extradition, restitution hearings, etc., that do not require a full-blown hearing;

(c) Diversions, continuances for dismissal, misdemeanor compromises or similar dispositions;

(d) Deferred prosecution or other similar procedure;

(e) Early dismissal by a prosecutor based on lack of evidence or standard plea offers, based on the prosecutor’s charging and plea bargaining practices or other reasons that dispose of a case without extensive litigation; or

(f) Withdrawal of counsel at an early stage of the case, due to conflict of interest or other reasons.

Attorneys providing indigent defense services, judicial officers and city administration shall monitor caseloads to assure adequate representation and progress in moving cases to final adjudication. The above-mentioned parties should not hesitate to confer and craft a remedy for dealing with caseload issues that materially affect representation of an indigent client. Excessive continuances, missed court dates, client complaints, etc., shall be addressed as soon as practicable.

(7) Services Other Than Counsel. Reasonable compensation for expert witnesses, investigators and other services necessary for an adequate preparation and presentation of the defense case shall be provided pursuant to Criminal Rule 3.1(f).

(8) Administrative Expenses. Attorneys shall be responsible for paying all administrative expenses of their office or firm not otherwise provided for in these standards or in a contract. Such costs may include law libraries, financial accounting, case management systems and other costs incurred in the day-to-day management of the contract. Attorneys shall maintain an office to maintain confidential meetings with clients.

(9) Reports of Attorney Activity and Vouchers. Attorneys on contract shall maintain a case reporting and management information system, which includes the number and type of cases. Any such system shall be maintained independently from client files so as to disclose no privileged information. At least quarterly reports shall be submitted by the contract firm to the court and to the city administration. If the city needs to obtain information regarding the disposition of cases, such information may be obtained from the district court.

A standardized voucher form shall be used by attorneys seeking payment for services rendered. Payment should be made at times agreed to by the parties, without regard to the number of cases closed in the period.

(10) Training. Attorneys shall participate in regular training programs in areas relating to their indigent defense practice.

Attorneys providing counsel to indigent accused should take the opportunity to attend courses that foster trial advocacy skills and to review professional publications and tapes.

(11) Supervision. Each attorney or firm providing indigent defense services should provide adequate supervision of attorneys providing indigent defense services.

(12) Substitution of Attorneys or Assignment of Contracts. The attorney or firm engaged by the respective city to provide indigent defense services shall not subcontract with another firm or attorney to provide representation without prior written approval and shall remain directly involved in the provision of representation. If the contract is with a firm or office, the respective city or judicial officer may request the names and experience levels of those attorneys who will actually be providing the services, to ensure they meet minimum qualifications. Any indigent defense contract shall address the procedures for new counsel taking over upon the conclusion of the contract to ensure a smooth transition upon nonrenewal or termination, with the minimal possible detriment to the indigent client.

(13) Limitations on Private Practice for Contract Attorneys. New contracts for indigent defense attorneys with private attorneys or firms may set limits on the number of private or special appointment cases. These limits shall be based on the percentage of a full-time caseload which the public defense cases represent. An attorney or firm rendering indigent defense services shall not allow his or her private practice or accept special appointments to diminish his or her ability to represent indigent clients he or she is obligated to serve by any contract.

(14) Disposition of Client Complaints. Indigent defense firms or individual attorneys shall have a method to respond promptly to client complaints. Complaints should first be directed to the attorney, firm or agency which provided representation. If the attorney and client cannot resolve the complaint amicably, the attorney or client may ask the court to allow the attorney to withdraw and substitute new counsel. If this does not resolve the complaint, the client may contact the city to review the complaint. The complaining client should be informed as to the disposition of his or her complaint within a week or other reasonable period of time. If the client feels dissatisfied with the evaluation and response received, he or she should be advised of the right to complain to the Washington State Bar Association.

(15) Cause for Termination or Removal of Attorney. Contracts for indigent defense services should include the grounds for termination of the contract by the parties. Termination of an attorney’s contract should only be for good cause or as provided within the terms of the agreement between the city and firm or attorney. Good cause shall include the failure of the attorney to render adequate representation to clients; the willful disregard of the rights and best interests of the client; the willful disregard of the standards herein addressed; or violations of the RPCs.

The representation in an individual case establishes an inviolable attorney-client relationship. Removal of counsel from representation, therefore, should not occur over the objections of both the attorney and the client.

(16) Nondiscrimination. Neither the city, in its selection of an attorney, firm, or agency to provide indigent defense representation, nor the attorneys selected, in their hiring practices or in their representation of clients, shall discriminate on the grounds of race, color, religion, national origin, age, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, or handicap. Both the city and the contractor shall comply with all federal, state, and local nondiscrimination requirements.

(17) Guidelines for Awarding Defense Contracts. The city shall award contracts for indigent defense services only after determining that the attorney or firm chosen can meet appropriate professional standards and qualifications. Under no circumstances will a contract be awarded on the basis of cost alone. Attorneys or firms seeking contracts for indigent defense services must demonstrate their ability to meet these standards.

Prosecutor and law enforcement officers shall not select the attorneys who will provide indigent defense services. [Ord. 609 § 1, 2014; Ord. 562 § 4, 2012]


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC1

Chapters: 

Division I. General Provisions

10.05    Traffic and Vehicle Code

10.10    Abandoned Vehicles

10.11    Parking on Residential Property

10.12    Vehicle Impoundment

10.15    Parking, Standing and Stopping

Division II. Special Driving and Operating Regulations

10.20    Size, Weight and Load Regulations

10.25    Motorized Foot Scooters

10.30    Special Permits and Permit Procedures (Drivers and Vehicles)

10.40    Regulating the Kinds and Classes of Traffic on Certain Streets

10.45    Engine Compression Brakes

10.50    Penalties

Division III. Commute Trip Reduction

10.60    Commute Trip Reduction1

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 10.05 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE CODE

Sections:

10.05.010    Preliminary statement.

10.05.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

10.05.030    Avoidance of intersection.

10.05.040    Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.

10.05.050    Sections not adopted.

10.05.060    Maximum speed limits.

10.05.070    Automated traffic safety systems.

10.05.080    Inattentive driving.


10.05.010 Preliminary statement.

(1) This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Burien traffic and vehicle code.”

(2) The provisions of this code shall apply to any offense committed on or after 12:01 a.m. on September 1, 1993.

(3) The provisions of this code do not apply to, or govern, the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to 12:01 a.m. on September 1, 1993, or to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of law existing in the city of Burien at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this code had not been enacted.

(4) If any provision of this code, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the code, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end the provisions of this code are declared to be severable.

(5) Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this code. [Ord. 64 § 1, 1993]


10.05.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.

(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:

(a) To forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individual or public interests;

(b) To safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation as criminal;

(c) To give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense;

(d) To differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses, and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.

(2) The provisions of this chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms and when the language is susceptible of differing constructions it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in this chapter.

(3) In adopting the state statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses within the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and, in those sections adopted which deal with both misdemeanors and felonies, only the language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied. [Ord. 64 § 2, 1993]


10.05.030 Avoidance of intersection.

(1) It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of the city to turn such vehicle either to the right or to the left upon approaching or leaving intersections and to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority.

(2) Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction for which the monetary penalty shall be $47.00. [Ord. 64 § 3, 1993]


10.05.040 Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.

 The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” Chapter 308-330 WAC, except as identified in BMC 10.05.050, is adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the city of Burien as if set forth in full. Also adopted by reference are Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994 and RCW 46.20.730 as amended by Section 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994. [Ord. 95 § 1, 1994]


10.05.050 Sections not adopted.

The following sections of the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted:

WAC

308-330-250    Police department to administer bicycle licenses.

308-330-275    Traffic safety commission – Powers and duties.

308-330-500    Bicycle license required.

308-330-505    Bicycle license application.

308-330-510    Issuance of bicycle license.

308-330-515    Attachment of bicycle license plate or decal.

308-330-520    Inspection of bicycles.

308-330-525    Renewal of bicycle licenses.

308-330-530    Bicycle transfer of ownership.

308-330-535    Bicycle rental agencies.

308-330-540    Bicycle dealers.

308-330-560    Bicycle penalties.

[Ord. 95 § 2, 1994]


10.05.060 Maximum speed limits.

(1) Forty Miles per Hour. The following street shall be posted with a speed limit of 40 miles per hour:

(a) Temporary 509 between 1st Avenue South and SR 509.

(2) Thirty-Five Miles per Hour. The following streets shall be posted with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour:

(a) 1st Avenue South between S/SW 116th Street and S/SW 162nd Street (city limit);

(b) Ambaum Boulevard SW between SW 116th Street and SW 156th Street;

(c) S/SW 128th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and Des Moines Memorial Drive South;

(d) S/SW 136th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and Des Moines Memorial Drive South;

(e) SW 148th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and 1st Avenue South;

(f) S/SW 156th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and Des Moines Memorial Drive South;

(g) South 160th Street between 1st Avenue South and Des Moines Memorial Drive South;

(h) Ambaum Boulevard South between South 160th Street and Temporary 509;

(i) Des Moines Memorial Drive South between SR 509 and Temporary 509;

(j) 8th Avenue South between South 112th Street and South 152nd Street;

(k) 16th Avenue SW between SW 116th Street and SW 112th Street;

(l) Des Moines Memorial Drive South between South 128th Street and South 108th Street;

(m) 24th Avenue South between South 128th Street and South 120th Street;

(n) Military Road South between South 128th Street and South 112th Street.

(3) Thirty Miles per Hour. The following streets shall be posted with a speed limit of 30 miles per hour:

(a) S/SW 116th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and 5th Avenue South;

(b) 12th Avenue SW between SW 116th Street and Ambaum Boulevard SW;

(c) SW 146th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and 1st Avenue South;

(d) SW 152nd Street between 18th Avenue SW and 10th Avenue SW;

(e) 10th Avenue SW between SW 152nd Street and SW 160th Street;

(f) SW 160th Street between 19th Avenue SW and 1st Avenue South;

(g) Sylvester Road SW between SW 160th Street and 8th Place SW (city limit);

(h) South 176th Street between Des Moines Memorial Drive South and SR 509;

(i) 26th Avenue SW between SW 116th Street and SW 112th Street;

(j) 5th Avenue South between South 116th Street and South 126th Street;

(k) South 112th Street/Glendale Way South/South 120th Street between 8th Avenue South and 24th Avenue South. [Ord. 597 § 1, 2014; Ord. 362 § 1, 2002; Ord. 352 § 1, 2002]


10.05.070 Automated traffic safety systems.

(1) Authorized Use of Automated Traffic Safety Cameras. Law enforcement officers of the city of Burien and persons commissioned by the chief of police for the city of Burien are authorized to use automated traffic cameras and related automated systems to detect one or more of the following: (a) stoplight violations and (b) school speed zone violations.

(2) Restrictions Upon Use. The use of automated traffic safety cameras is subject to the following restrictions:

(a) Use of traffic safety cameras is restricted to two arterial intersections and school speed zones only;

(b) Automated traffic safety cameras may only take pictures of the vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while an infraction is occurring. Pictures taken by automated traffic safety cameras may not reveal the face of the driver or of the passengers in the vehicle.

(3) Locations to Be Marked. The city shall clearly mark all locations where automated traffic safety cameras are in use by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera.

(4) Notice of Infraction.

(a) Whenever any vehicle is photographed by an automatic traffic safety camera, a notice of infraction shall be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within 14 days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within 14 days of establishing the renter’s name and address under this section.

(b) If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the law enforcement agency shall, before a notice of infraction is issued, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within 18 days of receiving the written notice, provide to the issuing agency by return mail:

(i) A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or

(ii) A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the infraction. A statement provided under this subsection must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police report regarding the vehicle theft; or

(iii) In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty. Timely mailing of this statement to the issuing law enforcement agency relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter for the notice of infraction.

(c) The law enforcement officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotos, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation under this chapter.

(5) Request for Hearing. A person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by an automated traffic safety camera may respond to the notice by mail. The person receiving the infraction may also request a hearing.

(6) Presumption of Committed Infraction/Presumption Overcome.

(a) In a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of any such provision of this section, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.

(b) This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner.

(7) Infractions Processed. Infractions detected through the use of automated traffic safety cameras are not part of the registered owner’s driving record under RCW 46.52.101 and 46.52.120. Additionally, infractions generated by the use of automated traffic safety cameras under this section shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions, including RCW 3.46.120, 3.50.100, 35.20.220, 46.16.216 and 46.20.270(3).

(8) Nonexclusive Enforcement. Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a notice of traffic infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at the time a violation occurs under RCW 46.63.030(1)(a),(b), or (c).

(9) Fines. The fine for infractions committed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be a base monetary penalty of $101.00.

(10) Use of Electronic Signatures. In connection with the automated traffic safety cameras authorized for use herein, the police chief or the police chief’s designee is authorized to utilize electronic signatures in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.24 RCW.

(11) Definition. For the purposes of this section, “automated traffic safety camera” means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or exceeds a speed limit in a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device. [Ord. 472 § 1, 2007]


10.05.080 Inattentive driving.

(1) Definition. For the purpose of this section, “inattentive” means with a negligent lack of attentiveness to conditions, circumstances, and one’s duties required to safely operate the vehicle. Conditions include but are not limited to the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence of pedestrians, and weather conditions.

(2) Inattentive Driving Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner.

(3) Violation – Penalty. The offense of inattentive driving shall be considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner.

Any person convicted of inattentive driving shall be guilty of an infraction, and shall be subject to a fine of $250.00. 

(4) No citation for a violation of this section shall be issued unless the officer issuing such citation has cause to stop or arrest the driver of such motor vehicle for the violation of some other provision of this code relating to the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a motor vehicle or any criminal statute. [Ord. 562 § 2, 2012]


Chapter 10.10 ABANDONED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.10.010    Regulation of vehicle impoundment and redemption – Adopted by reference.

10.10.020    Ratification of prior acts.


10.10.010 Regulation of vehicle impoundment and redemption – Adopted by reference.

(1) Chapter 46.08 KCC, Impoundment and Redemption of Certain Vehicles, as now in effect and as may subsequently be amended is adopted in its entirety, except that unless the context indicates otherwise, the words “county” or “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violation of the county code or of a county ordinance shall be deemed to be references to violation of a city ordinance, which shall constitute a gross misdemeanor.

(2) To the extent necessary or convenient to implement this chapter, the administrative hearing officers appointed pursuant to KCC 46.08.100 or otherwise are appointed as agents for the city of Burien to conduct any applicable hearings on Burien’s behalf. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 43 § 1, 1993]


10.10.020 Ratification of prior acts.

Any act taken prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and consistent with the authority granted in this chapter is ratified and affirmed. [Ord. 43 § 3, 1993]


Chapter 10.11 PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY

Sections:

10.11.010    Purpose.

10.11.020    Definitions.

10.11.030    Parking restrictions.

10.11.040    Exemptions.

10.11.050    Repealed.


10.11.010 Purpose.

The primary purpose of yards on residential property is to provide access to light and air and to provide circulation, recreation, and landscaping around the primary dwelling building(s). The presence of such yards on residential property is beneficial to the general health and welfare of the community. The purpose of this chapter is to restrict the number of motor vehicles that may be parked on residential property by declaring the parking of motor vehicles in violation of this chapter to be a public nuisance. This chapter does not address parking requirements under the city’s zoning code. These requirements can be found in Chapter 19.20 BMC. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2008]


10.11.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(1) “Licensed driver” means a person who has obtained a valid Washington State driver’s license. The only exceptions are those expressly allowed by RCW 46.20.025, as now or hereinafter enacted, or a new resident to Washington as defined by RCW 46.20.021, as now or hereinafter enacted. 

(2) “Operable vehicle” is a motor vehicle which is capable of being operated legally on a public highway, as defined by RCW 46.04.197, and has, in fact, been operated on a public highway in the previous 30 days.

(3) “Residential” means those areas of Burien that are zoned RS-A, RS-12,000, RS-7,200, RM-12, RM-18, and RM-24, as defined by BMC Title 19.

(4) “Residential lot” means a parcel of land that can be identified by a parcel number and/or an address.

(5) “Motor vehicle” has the meaning defined by state law. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2008]


10.11.030 Parking restrictions.

No more than four motor vehicles shall be parked on a residential lot. Each motor vehicle must be currently licensed and operable. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2008]


10.11.040 Exemptions.

(1) If more than four licensed drivers reside at the same address, an additional motor vehicle for each licensed driver over four may be parked at that particular address; however, each licensed driver must have that particular address on his or her license.

(2) This chapter does not apply to:

(a) Motor vehicles parked inside of a lawfully permitted and constructed building;

(b) Temporary parking for a duration not to exceed 72 hours within a 30-day period on an approved impervious surface or in a garage or carport pursuant to BMC 19.20.100(10)(B);

(c) Apartment or other complex with an approved building and parking plan;

(d) Permitted construction areas; or

(e) Motorcycles or mopeds. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2008]


10.11.050 Enforcement procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 562. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 492 § 1, 2008]


Chapter 10.12 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT*

Sections:

10.12.010    Appointment of King County as agent for the city.

10.12.020    Impoundment authorized without prior notice.

10.12.030    Impoundment after notice.

10.12.040    Impound procedure.

10.12.050    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

10.12.060    Administrative fee.

10.12.070    Redemption of impounded vehicles.

10.12.080    Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

10.12.090    Sale of unclaimed vehicles.

10.12.100    Contracts for towing and storage.

10.12.110    Additional towing contractor duties and records.

*Code reviser’s note: Section 2 of Ordinance 288 provides: 

The city council hereby adopts the findings of the 1998 Washington State Legislature regarding driving while license suspended, found in Section 1 of Chapter 203, Laws of 1998.


10.12.010 Appointment of King County as agent for the city.

King County and the King County sheriff’s office and/or its designees are appointed and authorized to act as agent of the city in regard to all impoundments and actions permitted by this chapter. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 288 § 3, 2000]


10.12.020 Impoundment authorized without prior notice.

(1) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of driving while license suspended (“DWLS”) in the third degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, as now or hereafter amended, or if the driver is arrested for driving with a license suspended in another state, the vehicle may be impounded.

(2) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, as now or hereafter amended, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.

(3) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of DWLS first degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342, as now or hereafter amended, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.

(4) If a driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.61.502, driving under the influence, or RCW 46.61.504, physical control of vehicle under the influence, the vehicle shall be impounded in accordance with the provisions of RCW 46.55.360.

(5) A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation under the following circumstances:

(a) The vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

(b) The vehicle is illegally parked in a posted restricted zone where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles, or is prohibited during certain hours, or on designated days, or at any time when the vehicle is interfering, or likely to interfere with, the intended use of such a restricted zone;

(c) The vehicle is obstructing a designated fire lane;

(d) The vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety;

(e) A police officer has information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that the vehicle is stolen;

(f) A police officer has information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence;

(g) Whenever a police officer finds an unattended vehicle at the scene of an accident or when the driver of a vehicle involved in an accident is physically or mentally incapable, or too intoxicated, to rationally decide upon steps to be taken to protect his or her property;

(h) Whenever a vehicle without a special license plate, card, or decal indicating that the vehicle is being used to transport a disabled person pursuant to RCW 46.16.381 is parked in a stall or space properly marked, as required by RCW 46.61.581, which space is provided on private property without charge or is on public property;

(i) Whenever a mobile home is subject to removal from a mobile home park pursuant to a writ of restitution, provided such writ is attached to a King County sheriff’s office impound report;

(j) When a vehicle with an expired registration of more than 45 days is parked on a public street. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 392 § 1, 2003; Ord. 288 § 4, 2000] 


10.12.030 Impoundment after notice.

A vehicle not subject to impoundment under BMC 10.12.020 may be impounded after notice of such proposed impoundment has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of 24 hours prior to such impoundment if such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation; provided, that if the vehicle has current vehicle license and tabs, an officer or authorized agent of the King County sheriff’s office shall check the computer records to ascertain the identity of the last owner of record of the vehicle and shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner in person or by telephone in order to notify the owner of the proposed impoundment. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014]


10.12.040 Impound procedure.

When impoundment is authorized by this chapter, a vehicle may be impounded by a towing contractor acting at the request of a police officer. Such officer shall provide to the towing contractor a signed authorization for the tow and the impound before the towing contractor may proceed with the impound. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014]


10.12.050 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

(1) Not more than 24 hours after impoundment of any vehicle pursuant to BMC 10.12.020, the tow truck operator shall mail a notice by first class mail to the last known address of the legal and registered owner(s) of the vehicle, as may be disclosed by the vehicle identification number, and as provided by the Washington State Department of Licensing. The notice shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number. The notice shall include the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice also shall include written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing and storage charges pursuant to this chapter, as set forth on a form provided by the King County sheriff’s office. The notice shall state the mandatory length of the impound. The notice shall state that a person who desires to redeem an impounded vehicle at the end of the mandatory period, must within seven days of the impound including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, at the request of the tow truck operator, pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than one-half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound to ensure payment of the costs of the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(b). The notification shall state that if the security deposit is not posted within seven days of the impound including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, the vehicle will be processed and sold at auction as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130. The notice shall set forth the requirements of BMC 10.12.070 regarding the payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage as well as providing proof of payment of the administrative fee and proof of satisfaction of any penalties, fines, or forfeitures before redemption. The notice must also state that the registered owner is ineligible to purchase the vehicle at the abandoned vehicle auction, if held.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rented vehicle it owns by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for impound. The officer directing the impound shall notify the rental car business as soon as practicable of the impound.

(3) If the date on which a notice required by subsection (1) of this section is to be mailed falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or postal holiday, the notice may be mailed on the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor a postal holiday.

(4) Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed. The tow truck operator shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person’s signature that the notification was provided. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 392 § 2, 2003; Ord. 288 § 6, 2000. Formerly 10.12.040] 


10.12.060 Administrative fee.

If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the city of Burien, prior to redemption of the vehicle as provided by this chapter. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practicable, the cost to the city of implementing, enforcing and administering this chapter and must be deposited in an appropriate account. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 288 § 5, 2000. Formerly 10.12.030]


10.12.070 Redemption of impounded vehicles.

Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances, and pursuant to agreement between the city and the King County sheriff’s office:

(1) Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and insurance.

(2) Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall pay the tow truck operator for costs of impoundment (removal, towing, and storage) and the administrative fee prior to redeeming such vehicle. The tow truck operator shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(e), as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to this chapter and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter can be released only pursuant to written order from the King County sheriff’s office or a court.

(3) The King County sheriff’s office shall assign an administrative hearings officer(s) to conduct post-impoundment hearings pursuant to this chapter. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter has a right to a hearing before an administrative hearings officer to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing and storage charges or administrative fee. Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing, on a form provided by the King County sheriff’s office and signed by such person, and received by the King County sheriff’s office within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the latter of the date the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for hearing was mailed to the person or the date the notice was given to the person by the tow truck operator. Such hearing shall be provided as follows:

(a) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under BMC 10.12.020, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing. 

(b) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under BMC 10.12.020, have not been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing which shall be held within two business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the written request for hearing.

(c) Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in this section may petition the King County sheriff’s office for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purpose of this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.

(d) If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and neither the city nor county shall be liable for removal, towing and storage charges arising from the impoundment.

(4) The Burien police chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse or domestic partner of the registered owner of the vehicle, based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse or domestic partner resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from the release of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of payment of the penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the driver, and with the exception of the administrative fee.

(5) The Burien police chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon the petition of the registered owner of the vehicle based upon economic or personal hardship or equity, provided the registered owner was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the impound. If such release is authorized, the registered owner must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of the administrative fee, in order to redeem the vehicle. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 288 § 7, 2000. Formerly 10.12.050] 


10.12.080 Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

Hearings requested pursuant to BMC 10.12.070 shall be held by an administrative hearings officer who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated towing and storage and administrative fees charged were proper.

(1) At the hearing, the King County sheriff’s office may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees, or both, were proper. An abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.

(2) At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees or both were not proper.

(3) If the impoundment is found to be proper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment (removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees) have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of BMC 10.12.070(1) and (2) satisfied, or any period of impoundment has not expired, the administrative hearings officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic violations.

(4) If the impoundment is found to be improper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter judgment against the county and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment, which are removal, towing, storage and administrative fees, plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date that person paid the costs, and the county shall comply with the order. If the costs of impoundment, which are removal, towing and storage, have not been paid, the hearings officer shall enter an order directing the county to pay the costs to the tow truck operator, and the county shall comply with the order. The county and city are not liable for damages if the police officer who ordered the impound relied, in good faith and without gross negligence, on the records of the department of licensing in ascertaining whether the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license.

(5) In the event that the administrative hearings officer finds that the impound was proper, but that the removal, towing or storage fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the administrative hearings officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter a judgment against the county and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year on the overpayment from the date that person paid the costs, and the county shall comply with the order. The tow truck operator is liable to the county for the amount of the overpayment and interest at the rate of 12 percent per year. The tow truck operator shall make the payment to the county no later than 60 days after the tow truck operator receives notice of the requirement to pay. The county may bring an action in the King County district court against the tow truck operator to recover the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year.

(6) No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.

(7) An appeal of the administrative hearings officer’s decision shall be conducted according to and is subject to the procedures of this section. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by an administrative hearings officer may be appealed to the King County district court for final judgment. The hearing on the appeal under this subsection shall be de novo. A person appealing such a decision must file a request for an appeal in district court within 15 days after the decision of the administrative hearings officer and must pay a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in district court. If a person fails to file a request for an appeal within the time specified by this section or does not pay the filing fee, the right to an appeal is waived and the administrative hearings officer’s decision is final. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 288 § 8, 2000. Formerly 10.12.060] 


10.12.090 Sale of unclaimed vehicles.

(1) Any impounded vehicle not redeemed within 15 days of mailing of the notice required by BMC 10.12.050, and not listed as a stolen vehicle, shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be sold at a public auction in accordance with the provisions and subject to all conditions of RCW 46.55.130; provided, that in the case of a vehicle impounded and held pursuant to order of a police officer as authorized by BMC 10.12.020(5)(d) or (e), the 15 days shall not begin until 48 hours after the King County sheriff’s office shall have notified both the owner and towing contractor that it has authorized the release of the vehicle; provided further, that when a timely request for a post-impound hearing has been made pursuant to BMC 10.12.080, the sale of the vehicle at public auction shall not take place until after the hearing has been conducted and the hearing officer has entered an order. Prior to sale at public auction, the towing contractor shall confirm with the King County sheriff’s office that no hearing is pending.

(2) When an unclaimed vehicle is sold at public auction pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the towing contractor may recover its towing and storage charges from the proceeds of sale. Such towing and storage charges shall be limited to the contract rates established pursuant to BMC 10.12.100. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014]


10.12.100 Contracts for towing and storage.

The King County sheriff’s office and the city manager and/or designees are authorized and directed to enter into appropriate agreements and to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any contract(s) awarded to registered tow truck operators pursuant to this chapter. Such contracts shall be at no cost to the county and the city and shall provide that the tow truck operator may recover the costs of towing and storage only from the person seeking to redeem the impounded vehicle, or from the proceeds of sale of an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130, and that the county and city shall not be responsible for payment of such costs except upon order of the administrative hearing officer pursuant to BMC 10.12.080. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014; Ord. 288 § 9, 2000. Formerly 10.12.070]


10.12.110 Additional towing contractor duties and records.

Each towing contractor, in addition to fully complying with the standards set by the King County sheriff’s office, must:

(1) File its towing and storage rates with the King County sheriff’s office; and

(2) Maintain all vehicle transaction files for three years. [Ord. 607 § 2 (Exh. B), 2014]


Chapter 10.15 PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING

Sections:

10.15.010    Purpose.

10.15.020    Policy.

10.15.030    City manager – Authority.

10.15.040    Parking restriction adoption process.

10.15.045    Parking, standing, or stopping prohibited in specified places.

10.15.050    Parking, standing, or stopping vehicle in freight curb loading zone.

10.15.060    Parking trucks on street or in right-of-way prohibited.

10.15.070    Obstructing traffic/pedestrians.

10.15.075    Obstructing fire lanes prohibited.

10.15.080    Parking over 24 hours prohibited.

10.15.085    Additional parking regulations.

10.15.090    Parking in alleys.

10.15.100    Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

10.15.110    Presumption of ownership.

10.15.120    Authority to issue notices.

10.15.130    Chalk mark identifications.

10.15.135    Special parking privileges for persons with disabilities.

10.15.140    Penalties.


10.15.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter regulate parking, standing and stopping of vehicles upon streets and ways open to the public within the city of Burien. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 1, 1999] 


10.15.020 Policy.

The city of Burien wishes to preserve and protect both residential and commercial areas within the community. To accomplish this goal, the city has the authority to adopt regulations needed to ensure that the physical character is maintained and that unsafe or incompatible uses, activities and nuisances are prohibited.

To achieve this objective, the city may establish parking restrictions on portions of certain specified streets, including establishing residential parking zones which restrict parking of vehicles on certain streets at certain times except by permit. The decision whether or not to establish parking restrictions on a specific street or location shall be made by the city manager or his/her designee following a determination that a specific condition warrants such a parking restriction.

Primary public safety decisions, such as the promulgation of restrictions to prevent view obstructions, are the responsibility of the city manager’s designated traffic engineer. Such regulations will be instituted and notice given through proper signage being erected and/or street painting.

Some parking restrictions may be considered where the purpose is not primarily a public safety concern. For example, a regulation to ensure the proper flow of traffic, the encouragement of commerce, or to allow residents the use of abutting streets for parking. The imposition of such parking restrictions shall occur following notification to abutting property and business owners and after consideration of public input. The abutting property and business owners will be notified in writing of the city manager’s decision whether or not to impose the parking restriction. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 2, 1999]


10.15.030 City manager – Authority.

(1) The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to exercise the powers and duties of traffic engineer as authorized pursuant to WAC 308-330-265 and 308-330-270, as now or hereafter amended. The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to establish regulations governing the parking of vehicles on city streets and other public ways, including, but not limited to, regulations:

(a) Designating either or both sides of any street or public way, or any portion thereof, as a “no parking zone”;

(b) Prescribing limits on the length of time any vehicle may be parked on any street or public way, or any portion thereof;

(c) Determining upon which streets or portions thereof vehicles shall be angle parked, as distinguished from parallel parked, and the direction in which vehicles shall be so angle parked; and

(d) Establishing the issuance of permits for residential parking.

(2) Whenever the city manager or his/her designee shall exercise any authority under subsection (1) of this section, the city manager or his/her designee shall erect signs, place markings upon the pavement or curb, or in other appropriate manner give notice that the area has been designated a no-parking, time-limited parking, or angle-parking-only zone.

(3) Any regulations promulgated by the city manager or his/her designee pursuant to this chapter shall be made consistent with the policy established in BMC 10.15.020. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 3, 1999] 


10.15.040 Parking restriction adoption process.

When a parking restriction to address a problem not primarily a public safety concern is being considered, the following procedure and appeals process will be followed:

(1) Complaint or suggestion is received by city;

(2) Review by public works and police;

(3) Recommendation is made to the city manager;

(4) City manager decides whether or not the proposed restriction will go forward;

(5) If it is decided the proposed parking restriction will go forward, a public meeting will be held by the city manager. Notice of the public meeting will be sent to city council, abutting property and business owners;

(6) Taking into account the public input, the city manager decides whether the proposed parking restriction will (a) go forward with no modifications, (b) go forward with modifications, or (c) not go forward;

(7) If it is decided to go forward, the proposed parking restriction will be put into final form, and sent to the abutting property and business owners. The city manager’s decision may be appealed to the hearing examiner within 30 days;

(8) If there is no appeal within 30 days, the proposed parking restriction goes into effect. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 4, 1999]


10.15.045 Parking, standing, or stopping prohibited in specified places.

(1) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:

(a) Park, stand, or stop a vehicle:

(i) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street except while angle parking;

(ii) On a sidewalk or street planting strip;

(iii) Within an intersection;

(iv) On a crosswalk;

(v) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a highway tunnel;

(vi) In front of, adjacent to, or in such proximity to any mailbox, postal drop box, or other similar postal receptacle so as to interfere with delivery of mail by the United States Postal Service;

(vii) At any place for longer than the designated time limit; or

(vii) At any time or place where official signs prohibit stopping.

(b) Park or stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:

(i) In front of a public or private driveway or within five feet of the end of the curb radius leading thereto;

(ii) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;

(iii) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;

(iv) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;

(v) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted;

(vi) In a bus stop, except authorized buses in a zone established for such specific use and taxicabs in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed;

(vii) Directly adjacent to a curbside, next to clearly visible residential mailboxes between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day of scheduled mail delivery by the United States Postal Service; or

(viii) At any time or place where official signs prohibit parking, standing, or stopping a vehicle.

(2) Parking or standing shall be permitted in the manner provided by law at all other places except as otherwise restricted by city ordinance.

(3) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.

(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to reserve or attempt to reserve any portion of a street for the purpose of parking, standing, or stopping to the exclusion of any other like person, nor shall any person be granted such right. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014]


10.15.050 Parking, standing, or stopping vehicle in freight curb loading zone.

(1) No person shall park, stand, or stop a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.

(2) The operator of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone, for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter, or about to enter, such a zone. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 5, 1999] 


10.15.060 Parking trucks on street or in right-of-way prohibited.

No truck, motor truck, truck tractor, tractor trailer or tractor exceeding 6,000 pounds empty scale weight may be parked on a public street or in the public right-of-way. This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 6, 1999]


10.15.070 Obstructing traffic/pedestrians.

No person shall park, stand, or stop any vehicle upon any street or sidewalk in a manner which obstructs or otherwise interferes with traffic upon the traveled portion of the roadway, or obstructs or interferes with the movement of pedestrians on sidewalks. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 7, 1999]


10.15.075 Obstructing fire lanes prohibited.

(1) The obstruction of a designated fire lane by a parked vehicle or any other object is prohibited and shall be considered a traffic hazard as defined in state law and an immediate hazard to life and property.

(2) Violation. Any person who owns, manages, or is in control of commercial property and fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this chapter, or who parks a vehicle in, allows the parking of a vehicle in, obstructs, or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane commits a civil infraction to which BMC 1.15.090 shall apply. The penalty for failing to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane shall be $150.00. The penalty for parking a vehicle in, allowing the parking of a vehicle in, obstructing, or allowing the obstruction of, a designated fire lane shall be $50.00. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014]


10.15.080 Parking over 24 hours prohibited.

No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon any street or public right-of-way for a period exceeding 24 hours, regardless of any other regulation then in effect. When any vehicle is parked or stands for a period exceeding 24 hours, the vehicle shall be deemed to constitute a hazard or obstruction to traffic or an abandoned vehicle and may be impounded. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 8, 1999]


10.15.085 Additional parking regulations.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by city ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.

(2) Except when otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014]


10.15.090 Parking in alleys.

No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than eight feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 9, 1999]


10.15.100 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

No persons shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of:

(1) Displaying the vehicle for sale or for advertising services for vehicles; or

(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 10, 1999] 


10.15.110 Presumption of ownership.

In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was stopping, standing, or parking in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such violation the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 11, 1999]


10.15.120 Authority to issue notices.

All city of Burien employees appointed as parking control officers, or any employee of the city assigned by the city manager or his/her designee to perform the duties of a parking control officer, are authorized to issue notices of traffic infraction for violations of city parking ordinances. Such notices also may be issued by any police officer. All such notices shall be issued in accordance with procedures established by RCW Title 46, Supreme Court and local court rules, and applicable city ordinances. For the purpose of issuing notices of traffic infraction for violations of city parking ordinances, and for this purpose only, parking control officers are designated law enforcement officers, in order to conform to the requirements of RCW 46.63.030 and Supreme Court rules adopted pursuant to Chapter 46.63 RCW; provided, that the authority conferred upon parking control officers by this section shall not vest any such officer with any police civil service or police pension rights. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 12, 1999]


10.15.130 Chalk mark identifications.

In checking for overtime parking, police officers, community service inspectors, and parking enforcement officers are authorized to use chalk marks on the tires of parked vehicles, or any other identifying mark that does not deface the vehicle, and it is unlawful for any person to erase, obliterate, or otherwise change such mark for the purpose of interfering with such checking for overtime parking. It shall be a citable civil infraction, with the same monetary penalty as the parking violation substantiated by the chalk mark, to so erase, obliterate, or otherwise change such mark. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 13, 1999] 


10.15.135 Special parking privileges for persons with disabilities.

(1) Unauthorized Use. Any unauthorized use of the special placard, special license plate, or identification card issued under Chapter 46.19 RCW is a parking infraction with a monetary penalty of $250.00. In addition to any penalty or fine imposed under this subsection, $200.00 must be assessed.

(2) Inaccessible Access. It is a parking infraction, with a monetary penalty of $250.00, for a person to park in, block, or otherwise make inaccessible the access aisle located next to a space reserved for persons with physical disabilities. In addition to any penalty or fine imposed under this subsection, $200.00 must be assessed. The clerk of the court shall report all violations related to this subsection to the Washington State Department of Licensing.

(3) Parking without Placard/Plate. It is a parking infraction, with a monetary penalty of $250.00, for any person to park a vehicle in a parking place provided on private property without charge or on public property reserved for persons with physical disabilities without a placard or special license plate issued under Chapter 46.19 RCW. In addition to any penalty or fine imposed under this subsection, $200.00 must be assessed. If a person is charged with a violation, the person will not be determined to have committed an infraction if the person produces in court or before the court appearance the placard or special license plate issued under Chapter 46.19 RCW.

(4) A parking space or stall for a person with a disability shall be indicated by a vertical sign with the international symbol of access. The symbol shall be white on a blue background, as set forth in RCW 70.92.120. The sign may include additional language such as, but not limited to, an indication of the amount of the monetary penalty for parking in the space without a valid permit.

(5) Failure to Erect or Maintain Disabled Parking Space. Failure of the person owning or controlling the property where required parking spaces are located to erect and maintain the sign is a class 2 civil infraction under BMC 1.15.090 for each parking space that should be so designated. The person owning or controlling the property where the required parking spaces are located shall ensure that the parking spaces are not blocked or made inaccessible, and failure to do so is a class 2 civil infraction. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014] 


10.15.140 Penalties.

Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, failure to comply with any parking restriction adopted pursuant to this chapter is an infraction and shall be cited under the applicable section of this chapter.

(1) Violators are required to respond within 15 days of the date of the issuance of the notice of infraction by:

(a) Paying a penalty of $50.00, or other amount as provided in this chapter, for each infraction cited on the notice of infraction; or

(b) Requesting a hearing in the manner described in the notice of infraction.

(2) If no response or payment is made within 15 calendar days of the date of the issuance of the notice of infraction, the court shall mail a delinquency notice to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the notice was affixed, informing him/her of the violation.

If no response or payment is made within 10 calendar days of the date of mailing of the delinquency notice, the court may attach additional penalties to the infraction including a notice to the Washington State Department of Licensing, and the city may pursue such other remedies as provided by ordinance. [Ord. 607 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 262 § 14, 1999]


Chapter 10.20 SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.20.005    Definitions.

10.20.010    Limit on noise impacts on residential neighborhoods.

10.20.015    Requirement for noise mitigation plan.

10.20.020    Liability of owner, others, for violations.

10.20.040    Outside width limit.

10.20.060    Outside maximum height – Impaired clearance signs.

10.20.070    Hitting structure with impaired clearance.

10.20.080    Maximum length – Single vehicle.

10.20.100    Maximum length – Combination permanent structure.

10.20.120    Maximum length – Combination nonstinger-steered.

10.20.140    Maximum length – Combination.

10.20.160    Maximum length – Exceptions.

10.20.180    Maximum length – Front protrusions.

10.20.200    Maximum length – Rear protrusions.

10.20.220    Combination of units limitation.

10.20.240    Combination of units – Lawful operations – Special permits.

10.20.260    Maximum gross weight – Truck axle factor.

10.20.280    Maximum gross weight – One-axle semi-trailer.

10.20.300    Maximum gross weight – Two-axle truck.

10.20.320    Maximum gross weight – Two-axle semi-trailer.

10.20.340    Maximum gross weight – Two-axle trailer.

10.20.360    Maximum gross weight – Three or more axle vehicles.

10.20.380    Maximum gross weight – Brake restriction.

10.20.400    Multiple-axle oscillation.

10.20.420    Maximum gross weight – Tire factor.

10.20.440    Maximum gross weight – Wheel base factor.

10.20.480    Excess weight – Discretion of arresting officer.

10.20.520    Excess weight – Logging trucks – Discretion of arresting officer.

10.20.540    Minimum length of wheel base.

10.20.560    Enforcement – Weighing.

10.20.580    Enforcement – Lightening.

10.20.583    Maximum gross weight – Penalties for violations.

10.20.586    Maximum gross weight – Additional penalties for violation.

10.20.589    Street gross weight limitation – Penalty.

10.20.592    Maximum gross weight – Penalty period.

10.20.620    Liability for damage to streets, bridges, etc.

10.20.640    Overloading licensed capacity.

10.20.660    Overloading licensed capacity – Additional license.

10.20.665    Overloading licensed capacity – Penalties.

10.20.670    Special permits – Misrepresentation penalty.

10.20.675    Special permit – Violation of terms penalty.

10.20.680    Overweight permit – Penalty.

10.20.685    Oversize permit – Penalty.

10.20.690    Transportation of liquefied petroleum gas.


10.20.005 Definitions.

(1) The term “nonroutine commercial traffic” means any commercial delivery vehicle traveling on residential streets that is not delivering goods or providing services to residences of the adjacent neighborhood or to the businesses that directly service that neighborhood.

(2) Residential Neighborhoods. The city’s residential neighborhoods are those defined by the zoning code as single-family or multifamily zones, and shall be protected by the provisions of this division. [Ord. 134 §§ 1, 2, 1995]


10.20.010 Limit on noise impacts on residential neighborhoods.

Residential neighborhoods shall not be subject to adverse land uses, activities or traffic which generate exterior noise exposure levels exceeding 55 dBA Ldn. [Ord. 134 § 3, 1995]


10.20.015 Requirement for noise mitigation plan.

Proponents of projects which will increase exterior noise levels to which residential areas are exposed above an Ldn of 55 dBA, must submit a noise mitigation plan to the city of Burien department of community development for review and approval before required permits are issued to allow the project to proceed. The city manager, with the assistance of the director of the department of community development, is authorized and directed to develop criteria for such review and approval. Such criteria shall be available in writing to applicants and shall, at a minimum, require that the best available technology be employed to achieve no more than the maximum available noise standard set forth in this section. [Ord. 134 § 4, 1995]


10.20.020 Liability of owner, others, for violations.

Whenever an act or omission is declared to be unlawful in Chapter 10.20 BMC, the owner of any motor vehicle involved in such act or omission shall be responsible therefor. Any person operating such vehicle, and any persons knowingly and intentionally participating in creating an unlawful condition of use, shall also be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 10.30 BMC for such unlawful act or omission. (RCW 46.44.120) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.040  Outside width limit.

(1) The total outside width of any vehicle or load thereon shall not exceed eight feet, with the following exceptions: 

(a) Where it is necessary to extend a rear vision mirror beyond the extreme left or right of the body, but in no event shall such rear vision mirror extend more than five inches beyond the extreme limits of the body;

(b) Where it is necessary to install fenders on the rear wheels of vehicles to reduce wheel spray; provided such fenders are made of rubber and do not extend more than two inches beyond either side of the body;

(c) A tolerance of two inches in width will be allowed on the tires of all vehicles where such over-width is due entirely to expansion of the tires; and

(d) Safety appliances such as clearance lights, rub rails, binder chains, and appurtenances such as door handles, door hinges, and turning signal brackets, may extend beyond the extreme left or right of the body despite the fact that this results in a width in excess of eight feet, but no appliances or appurtenances can extend more than two inches beyond the extreme limits of the body. 

 (2) A special and continuing permit is hereby granted to Metro Transit to operate passenger vehicles not to exceed 102 inches in width and 40 feet in length on the streets and alleys within the city in accordance with an application to the board of public works therefor, pursuant to RCW 46.44.090; any provisions of this division or any other ordinance inconsistent herewith is hereby superseded. (RCW 46.44.010) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.060 Outside maximum height – Impaired clearance signs.

(1) No person shall operate any vehicle unladen or with load exceeding a height of 13 feet 6 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands except as follows: 

(a) Automobile transporters and boat transporters shall not exceed 14 feet; and

(b) Height limitations shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or repair equipment of a public utility engaged in reasonably necessary operation. 

(2) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the owner or operator of a vehicle or combination of vehicles from the exercise of due care in determining that sufficient vertical clearance is provided upon the streets or alleys where such vehicle or combination of vehicles is being operated. No liability shall attach to the city by reason of any damage or injury to persons or property by reason of the existence of any structure over or across any street or alley where the vertical clearance above the roadway is 13 feet 6 inches or more or, where such vertical clearance is less than 13 feet 6 inches, if impaired clearance signs are erected and maintained on the side of any such street or alley in a conspicuous location at a distance of not less than 200 feet and not more than 300 feet. If any structure over or across any street or alley is not owned by the city, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof when billed therefor to reimburse the city for the actual cost of erecting and maintaining such impaired clearance signs. (RCW 46.44.020) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.070 Hitting structure with impaired clearance. 

No person shall operate a vehicle in a manner that allows the vehicle to strike any structure over or across any street or alley where impaired clearance signs are erected and maintained. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.080 Maximum length – Single vehicle.

No person shall operate upon a street or alley any vehicle having an overall length, with or without load, in excess of 35 feet, except that a stage shall not exceed an overall length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, of 40 feet, but the operation of any such stage upon a street or alley shall be limited as determined by the board of public works. (RCW 46.44.030) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.100 Maximum length – Combination permanent structure.

No person shall operate on a street or alley any combination of vehicles which contains a vehicle of which the permanent structure is in excess of 45 feet. (RCW 46.44.030) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.120  Maximum length – Combination nonstinger-steered.

No person shall operate on a street or alley any combination consisting of a nonstinger-steered tractor and semi-trailer which has an overall length in excess of 65 feet. “Stinger-steered” as used in this section shall mean a tractor and semi-trailer combination which has the coupling connecting the semi-trailer to the tractor located to the rear of the center line of the rear axle of the tractor. (RCW 46.44.030) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.140 Maximum length – Combination.

No person shall operate on a street or alley any combination consisting of a truck and trailer, or any lawful combination of three vehicles, with an overall length, with or without load, in excess of 65 feet, or a combination consisting of a tractor and a stinger-steered semi-trailer combination which has the coupling connecting the semi-trailer to the tractor located to the rear of the center line of the rear axle of the tractor. (RCW 46.44.030) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.160 Maximum length – Exceptions. 

The length limitations set forth in BMC 10.20.080 through 10.20.140 shall not apply to vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of a structural nature which cannot be dismembered and operated by a public utility when required for emergency repair of public service facilities or properties but in respect to night transportation every such vehicle and load thereon shall be equipped with a sufficient number of clearance lamps on both sides and marker lamps upon the extreme ends of any projecting load to clearly mark the dimensions of such load. (RCW 46.44.034) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.180 Maximum length – Front protrusions.

The load or any portion of any vehicle operated alone upon a street or alley, or the load or any portion of the front vehicle of a combination of vehicles, shall not extend more than three feet beyond the front wheels of such vehicle, or the front bumper, if equipped with front bumper. (RCW 46.44.034) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.200 Maximum length – Rear protrusions. 

No person shall operate a vehicle upon a street or alley with any part of the permanent structure of lead extending in excess of 15 feet beyond the center of the last axle of such vehicle. (RCW 46.44.034) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.220 Combination of units limitation.

Except as provided in BMC 10.20.240, no person shall operate upon a street or alley any combination of vehicles consisting of more than two vehicles. For the purposes of this section, a truck-tractor semi-trailer and/or pole trailer combination will be considered as two vehicles but the addition of another axle to the tractor of a truck-tractor semi-trailer and/or pole trailer combination in such a way that it supports a proportional share of the load of the semi-trailer and/or pole trailer shall not be deemed a separate vehicle but for all purposes shall be considered a part of the truck-tractor. For the purposes of this section, a converter gear used in converting a semi-trailer to a full trailer shall not be deemed a separate vehicle but for all purposes shall be considered part of the trailer. (RCW 46.44.036) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.240 Combination of units – Lawful operations – Special permits.

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of BMC 10.20.220 and subject to such rules and regulations governing their operation as may be adopted by the board of public works, operation of the following combinations shall be lawful:

(a) A combination consisting of a truck-tractor, a semi-trailer, and a full trailer. In this connection a converted gear used to convert a semi-trailer into a full trailer shall be considered to be a part of the full trailer and not a separate vehicle. A converter gear being pulled without load and not used to convert a semi-trailer into a full trailer may be substituted in lieu of a full trailer or a semi-trailer in any lawful combination. 

(b) A combination consisting of three trucks or truck-tractors used in driveway service where two of the vehicles are towed by the third in double saddlemount position.

(2) A combination consisting of a truck-tractor, a semi-trailer, and a full trailer when licensed for a total gross weight of 72,000 pounds may be granted either an annual or temporary special permit authorizing the combination to carry not more than 4,000 pounds of gross weight in excess of the maximum allowed in BMC 10.20.440 upon the payment of the fees as specified in BMC 10.30.120 and on such streets or alleys and subject to such terms and conditions as the city engineer, under the direction of the director of engineering shall prescribe pursuant to the provisions of BMC 10.30.280 and 10.30.120; provided, that any peace officer who shall find any person operating a vehicle in violation of the conditions of a special permit issued under this section may confiscate such permit and forward it to the city engineer, who may return it to the permittee or recommend that it be revoked, canceled, or suspended. (RCW 46.44.037) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.260 Maximum gross weight – Truck axle factor. 

Except as provided for in BMC 10.30.200 and 10.30.300, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or alley with a gross weight including load upon any one axle thereof in excess of 18,000 pounds; provided, that a tolerance of 2,000 pounds may be allowed on the rear axle of a two-axle garbage truck, and an additional 2,000 pounds may be allowed by permit obtained in accordance with the provisions of BMC 10.30.300 for a fee as specified in BMC 10.30.120. (RCW 46.44.040 (1)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.280 Maximum gross weight – One-axle semi-trailer.

No person shall operate any one-axle semi-trailer upon a street or alley with a gross weight including load upon such one axle in excess of 18,000 pounds. (RCW 46.44.040 (1)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.300 Maximum gross weight – Two-axle truck.

Except as provided in BMC 10.30.120, no person shall operate any truck or truck-tractor upon a street or alley supported upon two axles with a gross weight, including load, in excess of 32,000 pounds. (RCW 46.44.040(1)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.320 Maximum gross weight – Two-axle semi-trailer.

No person shall operate any semi-trailer or pole trailer upon a street or alley supported upon two axles with a gross weight, including load, in excess of 32,000 pounds unless such axles are not less than 102 inches apart, in which case, notwithstanding the provisions of BMC 10.20.260, the allowable gross weight, including load, shall be 36,000 pounds. (RCW 46.44.040(1) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.340  Maximum gross weight – Two-axle trailer. 

No person shall operate any two-axle trailer upon a street or alley with a gross weight, including load, in excess of 36,000 pounds. (RCW 46.44.040(1)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.360 Maximum gross weight – Three or more axle vehicles. 

Except as provided in BMC 10.30.260 through 10.30.300, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or alley supported upon three axles or more with a gross weight, including load, in excess of 40,000 pounds. (RCW 46.44.040(1)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.380 Maximum gross weight – Brake restriction. 

The maximum axle and gross weight specified in BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.360 are subject to the braking requirements set up for the service brakes upon any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles as provided by law. (RCW 46.44.040(2) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.400 Multiple-axle oscillation.

No person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or alley equipped with two axles spaced less than seven feet apart, unless the two axles are so constructed and mounted in such a manner to provide oscillation between the two axles and that either one of the two axles will not at any one time carry more than the maximum gross weight allowed for one axle or two axles specified in BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.360. (RCW 46.44.040(3) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.420 Maximum gross weight – Tire factor.

Subject to the maximum gross weights specified in BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.360, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or alley with a gross weight, including load, upon any tire concentrated upon the surface of a street or alley in excess of 550 pounds per inch width of such tire, up to a maximum width of 12 inches, and for a tire having a width of 12 inches or more there shall be allowed a 20 percent tolerance above 550 pounds per inch width of such tire. For the purpose of this section, the width of tire in case of solid rubber or hollow center cushion tire, so long as the use thereof may be permitted by the law, shall be measured between the flanges of the rim. For the purpose of this section, the width of tires in case of pneumatic tires shall be the maximum overall normal inflated width as stipulated by the manufacturer when inflated to the pressure specified and without load thereon. (RCW 46.44.042) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.440 Maximum gross weight – Wheel base factor.

Subject to the maximum axle and gross weights specified in BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.360, no person shall operate any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles unless the same comply with both subdivision (1) and (2) of this section.

(1) The total gross weight, including load, on any group of axles of a vehicle or combination of vehicles, where the distance between the first and last axles of any group of axles is 18 feet or under shall not exceed that set forth in the following table:

	Wheel Base of

	Any Group of Axles 	Allowed Load

	of a Vehicle or	in Pounds on

	Combination of Vehicles	Group of Axles

	3 feet, 6 inches	32,000

	4 feet	32,000

	5 feet	32,000

	6 feet	32,000

	7 feet	32,000

	8 feet	32,610

	9 feet	33,580

	10 feet	34,550

	11 feet	35,550

	12 feet	36,830

	13 feet	38,350

	14 feet	39,870

	15 feet	41,400

	16 feet	42,930

	17 feet	44,459

	18 feet	46,000

(2) Where the wheel base of any vehicle or combination of vehicles is 18 feet or more, the gross weight including load of the vehicle or combination of vehicles must not exceed that given for the respective distances in the following table:

	Wheel Base of

	Any Group of Axles 

	of a Vehicle or	Allowed

	Combination of Vehicles	Load in Pounds

	18 feet	46,000

	19 feet	47,000

	20 feet	48,000

	21 feet	49,000

	22 feet	50,000

	23 feet	51,340

	24 feet	52,670

	25 feet	54,000

	26 feet	55,100

	27 feet	56,200

	28 feet	57,400

	29 feet	58,500

	30 feet	59,500

	31 feet	60,300

	32 feet	61,140

	33 feet	61,710

	34 feet	62,280

	35 feet	62,860

	36 feet	63,430

	37 feet	64,000

	38 feet	64,500

	39 feet	65,000

	40 feet	65,500

	41 feet	66,000

	42 feet	66,500

	43 feet	67,000

	44 feet	67,500

	45 feet	68,000

	46 feet	68,500

	47 feet	69,000

	48 feet	69,500

	49 feet	70,000

	50 feet	70,500

	51 feet	71,000

	52 feet	71,500

	53 feet or over	72,000

When inches are involved: Under six inches, take lower; six inches or over, take higher. (RCW 46.44.044) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.480 Excess weight – Discretion of arresting officer.

In addition to the limitations of BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.440, if the gross axle weight is not more than 500 pounds in excess of the maximum gross axle for one axle, and if the gross weight of two axles spaced less than seven feet apart is not more than 1,000 pounds in excess of the maximum gross weight for two axles spaced less than seven feet apart, and if the gross weight of any group of axles is not more than 1,500 pounds in excess of the maximum gross weight for any group of axles according to the wheel base spacing of the groups of axles as shown in the maximum gross load table of BMC 10.20.440 and if the gross weight of a two-axle vehicle is not more than 1,000 pounds in excess of the legal gross weight for such two-axle vehicle, and if the gross weight of a three-axle vehicle is not more than 1,500 pounds in excess of the maximum legal gross weight for such three-axle vehicle, and if the maximum gross weight of the combination of vehicles is not more than 2,000 pounds in excess of the maximum legal gross weight of the combination of vehicles, the arresting officer may, within his discretion, permit the operator to proceed with his vehicle or vehicles in combination without penalty. For the purposes of determining gross weights, the actual scale weight taken by the arresting officer shall be prima facie evidence of such total gross weight. (RCW 46.44.046) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.520 Excess weight – Logging trucks – Discretion of arresting officer. 

Any person, firm or corporation using any city street or alley to reach or leave a state highway route for the purpose of transporting logs with weights authorized by state highway log tolerance permits, without first obtaining a city permit when required by the city, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by BMC 10.20.060 through 10.20.120. For the purpose of determining gross weight, the actual scale weight taken by the officer shall be prima facie evidence of such total gross weight. In the event the gross weight is in excess of the weight permitted by law, the officer may, within his discretion, permit the operator to proceed with his vehicles in combination. (RCW 46.44.047) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.540 Minimum length of wheel base. 

No person shall operate any vehicle with a wheel base between any two axles thereof of less than three feet six inches. For the purposes of this section, wheel base shall be measured upon a straight line from center to center of the vehicle axles designated. (RCW 46.44.050) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.560 Enforcement – Weighing.

Any peace officer may require the operator of a vehicle or combination of vehicles to stop and submit to a weighing of the same by means of a portable or stationary scale and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scale. (RCW 46.44.100) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.580 Enforcement – Lightening. 

Whenever a peace officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful, such peace officer may, in addition to any other penalty provided, require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of such vehicle to such permitted limit; provided, that in the event such vehicle is loaded with grain or other perishable commodities, the driver shall be permitted to proceed without removing any of such load, unless the gross weight of the vehicle and load exceeds by more than 10 percent the limit permitted by Chapters 10.20. and 10.30 BMC. All materials unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. (RCW 46.44.100) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.583  Maximum gross weight – Penalties for violations. 

Any person violating any of the provision of BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.440 shall, upon first conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00; upon second conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00; and upon a third or subsequent conviction shall be fined not less than $100.00. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.586  Maximum gross weight – Additional penalties for violation. 

In addition to, but not in lieu of, the basic fines set forth in BMC 10.20.583, such person shall be fined $0.02 per pound for each pound of excess weight up to 5,000 pounds; if such excess weight is 5,000 pounds, and not in excess of 10,000 pounds, the additional fine shall be $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess weight; and if the excess weight is 10,000 pounds over, the additional fine shall be $0.04 per pound for each pound of excess weight; provided, that upon first conviction, the court in its discretion may suspend the additional fine for excess weight up to 5,000 pounds and for excess weight over 5,000 pounds may apply the schedule of additional fines as if the excess weight over 5,000 pounds were the only excess weight, but in no case shall the basic fine be suspended. (RCW 46.44.045(2)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.589 Street gross weight limitation – Penalty. 

Any person convicted of violating any posted weight limitations of a street or alley shall be fined not less than $100.00 and the court shall, in addition thereto, suspend the driver’s license for not less than 30 days in accordance with RCW 46.44.045(4). (RCW 46.44.045(4)) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.592 Maximum gross weight – Penalty period. 

For the purpose of computing the basic fines and additional fines to be imposed under the provisions of BMC 10.20.583 and 10.20.586 the convictions shall be on the same vehicle or combination of vehicles within a 12-month period under the same ownership. (RCW 46.44.045(7) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.620 Liability for damage to streets, bridges, etc.

Any person operating any vehicle or moving any object or conveyance upon a street or alley upon or under a bridge or elevated structure which is part of any such street or alley shall be liable for all damages which said street, alley, bridge, or elevated structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation of such vehicle or the moving of any such object or conveyance or as a result of the operation or moving of any vehicle, object, or conveyance weighing in excess of the legal weight limits allowed by law. This section shall apply to any person operating any vehicle or moving any object or contrivance in any illegal or negligent manner or without a special permit as by law provided for vehicles, objects, or contrivances of overweight, overwidth, overheight, or overlength. Any person operating any vehicle shall be liable for any damage to any street, alley, bridge, or elevated structure sustained as the result of any negligent operation thereof. When such operator is not the owner of such vehicle, object or contrivance but is so operating or moving the same with the express or implied permission of the owner thereof, then said owner and the operator shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage. Such damage to any street, alley, bridge or elevated structure may be recovered in a civil action instituted in the name of the city. Any measure of damage to any street or alley by reason of this section shall be prima facie the amount of damage caused thereby and shall be presumed to be the amount recoverable in any civil action therefor. (RCW 46.44.110) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.640 Overloading licensed capacity.

No person shall operate, cause, permit, or suffer to be operated upon a street or alley any stage, motor truck, trailer, pole trailer, or semi-trailer, with passengers, or with a maximum gross weight, in excess of that for which the vehicle is licensed. (RCW 46.16.140) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.660 Overloading licensed capacity – Additional license.

Any person who operates or causes to be operated upon a street or alley any motor truck, trailer, pole trailer, or semi-trailer with a maximum gross weight in excess of the maximum gross weight for which the vehicle is licensed shall be deemed to have set a new maximum gross weight, and shall, in addition to any penalties otherwise provided, be required to purchase a new license covering the new maximum gross weight; provided, that this section shall not apply to for-hire vehicles or stages; provided, further, that no such person may be permitted or required to purchase the new license upon a gross weight which would exceed the maximum gross weight allowed by BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.440 and 10.30.260 through 10.30.300. (RCW 46.16.140) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.665 Overloading licensed capacity – Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of BMC 10.20.640 or 10.20.660 shall, upon a first conviction, pay a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00; upon a second conviction pay a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00, and upon a third and subsequent conviction pay a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. (RCW 46.16.145) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.670  Special permits – Misrepresentation penalty. 

Any person who misrepresents the size or weight of any load in obtaining a special permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $100.00. (RCW 46.44.097) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.675 Special permit – Violation of terms penalty. 

Any person who does not follow the requirements and conditions of a special permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $100.00. (RCW 46.44.097) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.680 Overweight permit – Penalty. 

Any person who operates any vehicle, the gross weight of which is in excess of the maximum for which such vehicle may be eligible for license without first obtaining a special permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100.00. (RCW 46.44.097) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.685 Oversize permit – Penalty.

Any person who operates any vehicle in excess of legal size limitations without first obtaining a special permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100.00. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.20.690 Transportation of liquefied petroleum gas. 

The bulk transportation of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is prohibited in or through Fire Zone No. 1 as defined in the city of Seattle Building Code (see Fire Zone One map). [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


Chapter 10.25 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS1

Sections:

10.25.010    Definitions.

10.25.020    Areas of operation.

10.25.030    Time of operation.

10.25.035    Rules of operation.

10.25.040    Noise.

10.25.050    Responsibility – Penalty.

10.25.060    Penalties – Motor scooter safety school.


10.25.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

“Motorized foot scooter” means a device with wheels and handlebars that is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion, and is not regulated at state law. Motor-driven cycles (RCW 46.04.332), mopeds (RCW 46.04.304), electric-assisted bicycles (RCW 46.04.169), motorcycles (RCW 46.04.330), electric personal mobility devices (RCW 46.04.1695), power wheelchairs (RCW 46.04.415) and all terrain vehicles (ATVs) (RCW 46.09.020) are regulated at state law and are therefore not motorized foot scooters. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.020 Areas of operation.

It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motorized foot scooter upon any city of Burien park, upon any recreational or pedestrian trail within the city, upon city sidewalks, upon any arterial, and on any street within the Downtown Commercial (DC) or Special Planning Area 1 (SPA-1) zones. This section does not apply to an electric motorized device when that device is operated by a person with a mobility impairment caused by a physical disability who uses that device to enhance that person’s mobility. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.030 Time of operation.

No motorized foot scooter shall be operated from the half-hour following sunset until the half-hour before sunrise. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.035 Rules of operation.

(1) No motorized foot scooter shall be operated on streets or other public areas not otherwise prohibited by this chapter to motorized foot scooters unless the operator is at least 14 years of age. No operator’s license is required from the Department of Licensing to operate a motorized foot scooter.

(2) Any person operating a motorized foot scooter shall obey all rules of the road applicable to vehicle traffic, as well as the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or flagger.

(3) It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized foot scooter other than as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway.

(4) When preparing for a left turn, the operator shall stop and dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway and complete the turn by crossing the roadway on foot, subject to the restrictions placed on pedestrians in Chapter 46.61 RCW.

(5) No motorized foot scooter shall be ridden or operated in a negligent or unsafe manner but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and other persons. For the purposes hereof, to operate in a negligent manner means the operation of a motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. Examples of operating in a negligent manner include, but are not limited to, failure to obey traffic-control devices and failure to yield right-of-way to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic.

(6) No motorized foot scooter shall be operated with any passengers in addition to the operator.

(7) Every motorized foot scooter shall be equipped with a red reflector on the front and rear of a type approved by the State Patrol, which shall be visible from all distances up to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 

(8) No motorized foot scooter shall be operated without the operator wearing a “motorcycle helmet” as that term is defined in RCW 46.37.530, or an approved bicycle helmet certified by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation, and shall have the chin strap fastened securely while the motorized foot scooter is in motion.

(9) No motorized foot scooter shall be operated without a muffler. 

(10) Handlebars must not exceed the shoulders of the rider.

(11) Motorized foot scooters must have a working brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.

(12) A motorized foot scooter must have all other equipment required by state or local law.

(13) At all times, operators of motorized foot scooters devices shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and human-powered devices and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian or human-powered device. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.040 Noise.

No motorized foot scooter shall be operated in a manner that violates the city’s noise ordinance in BMC 9.105.400 or any other state or local law. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.050 Responsibility – Penalty.

No person shall do any act forbidden by this chapter or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child and/or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, penalty for knowingly permitting a child to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by the imposition of a monetary civil penalty not to exceed $250.00, exclusive of statutory assessments. Jurisdiction for such civil penalty shall be in King County District Court, Division South. [Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]


10.25.060 Penalties – Motor scooter safety school.

(1) Penalty – Ages 17 and Younger.

(a) First Offense. Upon a person’s first violation of any provision of this chapter, a Burien police officer may take custody of the motorized foot scooter. If the officer takes custody of the device, the officer shall provide the violator a written notice setting forth the procedure for reclaiming the motorized foot scooter. The notice shall state that the impounded motorized foot scooter may be reclaimed only by the parent or legal guardian of the violator from the Burien police department during business hours.

(b) Second and Subsequent Offenses. Upon a person’s second and subsequent violations of any provision of this chapter, a Burien police officer may take custody of the motorized foot scooter. The officer shall provide the violator a written notice setting forth the procedure for reclaiming the device. The notice shall state that the impounded motorized foot scooter may be reclaimed only by the parent or legal guardian of the violator from the Burien police department during business hours. A $100.00 administrative fine shall be paid by the parent or legal guardian prior to the release of the motorized foot scooter.

(c) Unclaimed Devices. Any unclaimed devices may be disposed of in accordance with state law.

(2) Penalty – Ages 18 and Older. Violations of this chapter by persons aged 18 years or older shall be punishable by a civil infraction in the amount of $100.00. [Ord. 447 § 1, 2006; Ord. 430 § 1, 2005]1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 430 adds the provisions of this chapter as Chapter 10.20. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 10.30 SPECIAL PERMITS AND PERMIT PROCEDURES (DRIVERS AND VEHICLES)

Sections:

10.30.020    Application.

10.30.040    Over legal trucking operation.

10.30.060    Conditions of trucking permits.

10.30.080    Moving, loading or parking operation.

10.30.100    Conditions of loading or moving permit.

10.30.110    Size, weight and load regulations.

10.30.120    Fee schedules.

10.30.140    Refunds for unused permits.

10.30.200    Excess weight – Logging trucks – Special permits.

10.30.220    Special permits for oversize or overweight movements.

10.30.240    Maximum gross weight – Special permit.

10.30.260    Special permits solo truck – Additional gross load – Fee.

10.30.280    Special permits – Class A additional tonnage permits.

10.30.300    Special permits – Class B additional tonnage permits.

10.30.320    Special permits – Regulations.

10.30.340    Special permit – Display.

10.30.350    Fire department permit – Display.

10.30.360    State or county permits – Validity.


10.30.020 Application.

Application for any permit required by this ordinance works shall be made to the city engineer via submittal of a traffic study. The traffic study shall incorporate the following items:

(1) Haul routes;

(2) Number of trucks;

(3) Impacts to streets and intersections;

(4) Structural integrity of streets along truck route;

(5) Peak period impacts. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.040 Over legal trucking operation. 

If a permit is required by BMC 10.30.220, 10.30.240, 10.30.260, 10.30.280 or 10.30.300, such application shall contain a description of the object to be transported, or the vehicle or vehicles to be driven or used, the route desired to be traversed, the hours within which it is desired to perform the work, the means of locomotion to be used, and such other information as may be required. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.060 Conditions of trucking permits. 

The city engineer shall specify in permits issued pursuant to BMC 10.30.200, 10.30.220, 10.30.240, 10.30.260, 10.30.280 or 10.30.300, the routes to be traversed and the hours during which the operation may be undertaken, in accordance with the provisions of this division. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.080 Moving, loading or parking operation. 

If the application is for a permit to move, load, stand, park or angle park a vehicle contrary to the provisions of this division, such application shall show the location and explain the necessity for the operation, shall explain whether the operation may endanger other traffic or prevent it from using the street and such other information as may be required. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.100 Conditions of loading or moving permit.

The city engineer shall authorize and specify in permits for loading or moving the hours under which the activity will be permitted, the manner in which it shall be performed, and shall outline any special precautions which may be required to protect the public. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.110 Size, weight and load regulations.

Projects requiring continuous operations of vehicles with a gross weight of 18,000 pounds, including load, as specified in BMC 10.20.280, on city of Burien streets and rights-of-way other than those specified in BMC 10.40.060, shall obtain a special permit from the city authorizing and conditioning such continuous operations. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, establishing a portable or stationary scale at a specified location to weigh each truck and its load, restricted hours of continuous operation, restricted days of continuous operation, repair of road damage during continuous operation, reconstruction of streets before their use of continuous operations. Special permit fees shall be required to recover the cost of administration, monitoring, and enforcement of a special permit. (RCW 46.44.093) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.120 Fee schedules. 

The city of Burien shall adopt a schedule of fees for all permits issued pursuant to the trucking and parking regulations of this division. The fees shall be commensurate with the cost of administration, inspection, policing and roadway maintenance involved in the use of the streets and alleys within the city and shall, whenever possible, correspond with the fees specified in RCW 46.44.094, 46.44.095, and 46.44.096. Such schedule, when approved by the city council of the city of Burien by ordinance or resolution, shall govern the amount of the fee for such permit, and said fee shall be collected by the city as a condition to the issuance or continuance of any such permit. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.140 Refunds for unused permits.

Whenever an overweight or overload permit has been issued and a fee paid therefor and either no rights are exercised pursuant thereto and such permit is surrendered or the fee charged is erroneous for any reason and application is made for refund, the city engineer shall certify the facts justifying such refund, the amount thereof, and his approval of such refund, and upon presentation of such certificate, the city manager is authorized to draw and pay a warrant on the general fund in the amount of such refund, and the necessary appropriations are hereby made from any balance in said fund. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.200 Excess weight – Logging trucks – Special permits.

In addition to the limitations of BMC 10.20.260 through 10.20.440, a three-axle truck-tractor and a two-axle pole trailer combination engaged in the operation of hauling logs shall have an allowable variation in wheel base length of six feet for the distance between the first and last axle of the vehicle in combination which has a wheel base overall length of 37 feet or more and, upon special permit, the gross weight of two axles spaced less than seven feet apart may exceed by not more than 1,600 pounds the maximum gross axle weight specified for two axles spaced less than seven feet apart, being 32,000 pounds as provided in BMC 10.20.320, and the gross weight of the combination of vehicles may exceed by not more than 6,800 pounds the legal gross weight of the combination of vehicles, when licensed as permitted by law, for 68,000 pounds. Such additional allowances shall be permitted by a special permit issued in accordance with the provisions of RCW 46.44.047. (RCW 46.44.047) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.220 Special permits for oversize or overweight movements.

A special permit in writing may be obtained from the city engineer upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size, weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in Chapter 10.20 BMC, or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 10.20 BMC upon any street or alley.

No overweight permit shall be issued to any vehicle or combination of vehicles unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles is licensed for the maximum gross weight allowed by law. (RCW 46.44.090) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.240 Maximum gross weight – Special permit. 

No special permit shall be issued for movement on any street or alley where the gross weight, including load, exceeds 22,000 pounds on a single axle or 43,000 pounds on any group of axles having a wheel base between the first and last axle thereof less than 10 feet; provided, that the weight limitations pertaining to single axles may be exceeded to permit the movement of equipment operating upon single pneumatic tires having a rim width of 20 inches or more and a rim diameter of 24 inches or more or dual pneumatic tires having a rim width of 16 inches or more and a rim diameter of 24 inches or more; provided further, that permits may be issued for weights in excess of the preceding limitations on streets or alleys that have been designed and constructed for weights in excess of such limitations; or the gross weight limitations may be waived when certification is made by military officials, or by officials of public or private power facilities that such movement or action is a necessary movement or action, and in the opinion of the city engineer the structures and street or alley surfaces on the routes involved are determined to be capable of sustaining weights in excess of such limitations. Application to waive or exceed gross weight limitations shall be made in writing on special forms provided by the city engineer, and shall be submitted at least 36 hours in advance of the proposed movement. (RCW 46.44.091) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.260 Special permits solo truck – Additional gross load – Fee. 

When fully licensed to the maximum gross weight permitted under BMC 10.20.300 and 10.20.360 a two-axle truck or a three-axle truck operated as a solo unit and not in combination shall be eligible to carry gross weight in excess of that permitted for such a vehicle in BMC 10.20.300 and 10.20.360 upon the payment of a fee to the city engineer, as prescribed by BMC 10.30.120; provided, that the axle loads of such vehicles shall not exceed the limits specified in BMC 10.20.260 and the tire limits specified in BMC 10.20.420 or the wheel base requirements specified in BMC 10.20.440. (RCW 46.44.095) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.280 Special permits – Class A additional tonnage permits. 

When fully licensed to a minimum gross weight of 72,000 pounds, a three or more axle truck-tractor, dromedary truck-tractor, or truck, operating in combination with another vehicle (the licensed gross weight of which, if any, shall be included when computing the minimum gross weights set forth above), shall be eligible, under special permits issued by the city engineer, to carry additional gross loads beyond the limit specified in BMC 10.20.360 upon the payment of a fee as specified in BMC 10.30.120. The axle loads of such vehicles shall not exceed the limits specified in BMC 10.20.260 or the tire limits specified in BMC 10.20.420. The gross weight of a three or more axle truck operated in combination with a two- or three-axle trailer shall not exceed 76,000 pounds, and the gross weight for a three or more axle truck-tractor operated in combination with semi-trailer shall not exceed 73,280 pounds except where the semi-trailer is eligible to carry a gross load of 36,000 pounds pursuant to the provisions of BMC 10.20.320 in which event the maximum gross weight of the combination shall not exceed 76,000 pounds. The minimum additional tonnage to be purchased pursuant to this section for a three or more axle tractor to be operated in combination with a semi-trailer shall be not less than 1,280 pounds. The permits provided for in BMC 10.30.260 and this section shall be known as Class A additional tonnage permits. (RCW 46.44.095) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.300 Special permits – Class B additional tonnage permits.

In addition to the gross weight fees paid pursuant to RCW 46.16.070 and 46.16.115 and the gross weight permits issued pursuant to BMC 10.30.240, 10.30.260, and 10.30.280, and when a permit for the maximum gross weight permitted by law for a combination of vehicles has been purchased, a special permit for additional gross weight may be issued by the city engineer upon the payment of a fee as specified in BMC 10.30.120; provided, that the tire limits specified in BMC 10.20.420 shall apply, and the gross weight on any single axle shall not exceed 20,000 pounds and the gross lad on any group of axles shall not exceed the values shown in Table 1. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.320 Special permits – Regulations. 

The special permit provided for in BMC 10.30.260, 10.30.280 and 10.30.300 shall be used under such rules and regulations, and upon such terms and conditions consistent therewith, as may be prescribed by the city engineer. Such special permits shall entitle the permittee to carry such additional load in such an amount upon such streets or alleys as may be determined by the city engineer to be capable of withstanding such increased load without undue injury to the street or alley. (RCW 46.44.095) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.340 Special permit – Display.

Every special permit issued hereunder shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or authorized agent of any authority granting such permit. (RCW 46.44.097) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.350 Fire department permit – Display.

Every vehicle requiring a fire department permit shall carry a copy of the permit in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or authorized agent of the fire department. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.30.360 State or county permits – Validity. 

Trucks carrying overlegal loads to or from the city under valid state or county permit shall obtain a validation number for that state or county permit from the city engineer which will authorize operation to any destination within the city, by such route and at such time as the city engineer may prescribe. The validation number shall be noted on the back of the state or county permit by the operator and any peace officer checking this permit shall report the time, date, and validation number to the city engineer for determination of the validity of the operation. Violation of the terms of the validation will void the right of the permittee to further use of this privilege, and will require said permittee to obtain a written permit in the manner prescribed in this chapter. (RCW 46.44.096) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


Chapter 10.40 REGULATING THE KINDS AND CLASSES OF TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN STREETS

Sections:

10.40.060    Routes – Trucks carrying overlegal loads and truck-trailer or truck semi-trailer combinations used for intercity or interstate hauling.

10.40.120    Operation on certain streets – Peak hour.

10.40.130    Exceptions – Operation on specified streets without a permit.

10.40.140    Operation on nonarterial streets.


10.40.060 Routes – Trucks carrying overlegal loads and truck-trailer or truck semi-trailer combinations used for intercity or interstate hauling.

All trucks carrying overlegal loads under a state or county permit, traveling to, from or through the city, and all truck and trailer combinations and truck and semi-trailer combinations used in intercity or interstate hauling shall be limited, without special permit, to the following arterial streets:

(1) 1st Avenue South (city limit);

(2) S/SW 128th Street between Ambaum Boulevard South and SR 509;

(3) Ambaum Boulevard SW between SW 128th Street and SW 148th Street;

(4) SW 148th Street between Ambaum Boulevard SW and 1st Avenue South;

(5) South 174th Street/Des Moines Memorial Drive South between 1st Avenue South and SR 509;

(6) Ambaum Boulevard SW between SW 128th Street and SW 116th Street;

(7) 16th Avenue SW between SW 116th Street and SW 112th Street (city limit);

(8) South 128th Street between Des Moines Memorial Drive South and SR 509;

(9) South 160th Street between 1st Avenue South and SR 509;

(10) Des Moines Memorial Drive South between South 128th Street and South 108th Street. [Ord. 633 § 1, 2015; Ord. 598 § 1, 2014; Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.40.120 Operation on certain streets – Peak hour.

No person shall operate a truck or truck-tractor and semi-trailer over eight feet in width, over 30 feet in length, or over 32,000 pounds gross weight, or a motor vehicle with a trailer attached, except authorized buses or stages on any weekday during the 7:00 – 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 – 6:00 p.m. hours without a permit for such operation as provided in BMC 10.30.080, 10.30.100, and 10.30.110 except as provided in BMC 10.40.130. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.40.130 Exceptions – Operation on specified streets without a permit. 

BMC 10.30.080, 10.30.100 and 10.30.120 shall not apply to persons operating motor vehicles engaged in movement to or from an in-street work area when such movement to or from the in-street work area is required to protect life, limb or property. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.40.140 Operation on nonarterial streets.

No person shall operate a vehicle except authorized buses exceeding 10,000 pounds gross weight on any street that is not designated an arterial street; provided, that this section shall not prohibit necessary local operations on such nonarterial streets for the purpose of reaching the vehicle’s destination or for a pick-up or delivery. (UVC-MTO 17-2, 1972 Supp.) [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


Chapter 10.45 ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES

Sections:

10.45.010    Definitions.

10.45.020    Prohibition – Exception.

10.45.030    Violation – Penalty.


10.45.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter:

“Engine compression brake” means a motor vehicle brake which is activated or worked by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle. [Ord. 300 § 2, 2000]


10.45.020 Prohibition – Exception.

Engine compression brakes shall not be used at any time on city streets by trucks or truck tractors except public safety emergency vehicles, or unless the noise created by their use is effectively muffled. [Ord. 300 § 3, 2000]


10.45.030 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of BMC 10.45.020 is an infraction and will be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000 per violation. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 300 § 4, 2000]


Chapter 10.50 PENALTIES

Sections:

10.50.020    General penalties.

10.50.040    Aiding and abetting violation.


10.50.020 General penalties.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section or elsewhere in this division, every violation of this division and all conduct made unlawful by this division shall constitute a civil violation.

(2) Any person convicted of a violation of this division may be punished by a civil fine or forfeiture not to exceed $500.00 or such lesser amount as may be specifically provided for in this division. [Ord. 562 § 5 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


10.50.040 Aiding and abetting violation. 

It is unlawful to counsel, aid, or abet the violation of, or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this division. [Ord. 134 § 5, 1995]


Chapter 10.60 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION

Sections:

10.60.010    Definitions.

10.60.020    Burien CTR plan.

10.60.030    CTR goals.

10.60.040    Responsible agency.

10.60.050    Applicability.

10.60.060    Requirements for employers.

10.60.070    Mandatory program elements.

10.60.080    Additional program elements.

10.60.090    CTR program report and description.

10.60.100    Record keeping.

10.60.110    Schedule and process for CTR reports, program review and implementation.

10.60.120    Enforcement.

10.60.130    Exemptions and goal modifications.

10.60.140    Appeals.


10.60.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

“Affected employee” means a full-time employee who is scheduled to begin his or her regular work day at a single worksite covered by the commute trip reduction plan between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays per week for at least 12 continuous months who is not an independent contractor. 

“Affected employer” means a public or private employer that, for 12 continuous months, employs 100 or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays. The individual employees may vary during the year. Construction worksites, when the expected duration of the construction is less than two years, are excluded from this definition.

“Alternative commute mode” means any type of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including telecommuting and compressed work weeks if they result in reducing commute trips.

“Alternative work schedules” means programs such as compressed work weeks that eliminate work trips for affected employees.

“Base year” means the 12-month period that commences when a major employer is determined by the jurisdiction to be participating within the CTR program. This 12-month period is the basis upon which commute trip reduction goals are developed.

“Base year survey” or “baseline measurement” means the survey, during the base year, of employees at a major employer worksite to determine the drive-alone rate and vehicle miles traveled per employee at the worksite. This measurement is used to develop commute trip reduction goals. The baseline measurement must be implemented in a manner that meets the requirements specified.

“Carpool” means a motor vehicle, including motorcycle, occupied by two to six people of at least 16 years of age traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle commute trip.

“City” means the city of Burien or its designee assigned to administer the city’s CTR program.

“Commute trip vehicle miles traveled per employee” means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles over a set period divided by the number of full-time employees during that period.

“Commute trips” means trips made from a worker’s home to a worksite with a regularly scheduled arrival time of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on weekdays.

“Compressed work week” means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one work day every two weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and bi-weekly arrangements, the most typical being four 10-hour days or 80 hours in nine days, but may also include other arrangements. 

“CTR” is the acronym of commute trip reduction.

“CTR plan” means the city of Burien’s plan as set forth in this chapter to regulate and administer the CTR programs of affected employers within its jurisdiction.

“CTR program” means an employer’s strategies to reduce affected employees’ drive-alone commutes and average VMT per employee.

“CTR zone” means an area, such as a census tract or combination of census tracts, within Burien characterized by similar employment density, population density, level of transit service, parking availability, access to high occupancy vehicle facilities, and other factors that are determined to affect the level of drive-alone commuting.

“Custom bus/buspool” means a commuter bus service arranged specifically to transport employees to work.

“Dominant mode” means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.

“Drive-alone” means a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.

“Drive-alone trips” means commute trips made by employees made in single-occupant vehicles.

“Employee” means any person who receives financial or other remuneration in exchange for work provided to an employer, including owners or partners of the employer, provided an independent contractor shall not constitute an employee.

“Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)” means a person who is designated as responsible for the development, implementation and monitoring of an employer’s CTR program.

“Employer” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit, or private, that employs workers.

“Exemption” means a waiver from any or all CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the city based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.

“Flex time” is an employer policy that provides work schedules allowing individual employees flexibility in choosing the start and end time, but not the number, of their working hours.

“Full-time employee” means a person, other than an independent contractor, scheduled to be employed on a continuous basis for 52 weeks per year for an average of at least 35 hours per week.

“Good faith effort” means that an employer has met the minimum requirements identified in RCW 70.94.531 and this chapter and is working collaboratively with the city to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed upon length of time.

“Implementation” means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of an employee transportation coordinator (ETC), distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to drive-alone commuting, and commencement of other measures according to its approved CTR program and schedule.

“Major employer” means a private or public employer, including state agencies, that employs 100 or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays for at least 12 continuous months.

“Major employer worksite” or “affected employer worksite” or “worksite” means the physical location occupied by a major employer, as determined by the local jurisdiction.

“Major employment installation” means a military base or federal reservation, excluding tribal reservations, or other locations as designed by the city, at which there are 100 or more affected employees.

“Mode” means the type of transportation used by employees, such as single-occupant motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool, vanpool), transit, ferry, bicycle, and walking, compressed work week schedule and telecommuting.

“Notice” means written communication delivered via the United States Postal Service with receipt deemed accepted three days following the day on which the notice was deposited with the Postal Service, unless the third day falls on a weekend or legal holiday, in which case the notice is deemed accepted the day after the weekend or legal holiday.

“Peak period” means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

“Peak period trip” means any employee trip that delivers the employee to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

“Proportion of drive-alone trips” or “drive-alone rate” means the number of commute trips over a set period made by affected employees in SOVs divided by the number of potential trips taken by affected employees working during that period.

“Ride-matching service” means a system that assists in matching commuters for the purpose of commuting together.

“Single-occupant vehicle (SOV)” means a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.

“Single-occupant vehicle (SOV) trips” means trips made by affected employees in SOVs.

“Single worksite” means a building or group of buildings on physically contiguous parcels of land or on parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way occupied by one or more affected employers.

“Teleworking” or “telecommuting” means the use of telephones, computers, or other similar technology to permit an employee to work from home, eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a workplace closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.

“Transit” means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, passenger ferry, rail, shared-ride taxi, shuttle bus, or vanpool.

“Transportation demand management” means a broad range of strategies that are primarily intended to reduce and reshape demand on the transportation system.

“Transportation management association (TMA)” means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMA may represent employers within specific city limits, or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond city limits.

“Vanpool” means a vehicle occupied by five to 15 people traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle trip.

“Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee” means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles made by affected employees over a set period divided by the number of affected employees during that period.

“Waiver” means an exemption from CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the city based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment.

“Week” means a seven-day calendar period, starting on Monday and continuing through Sunday.

“Weekday” means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.

“Writing,” “written,” or “in writing” means original signed and dated documents. Facsimile (fax) transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed by the original signed and dated document via mail or delivery. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.020 Burien CTR plan.

The city’s commute trip reduction plan set forth in Attachment 1 to the ordinance codified in this chapter is incorporated herein by reference. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.030 CTR goals.

(1) Commute Trip Reduction Goals.

(a) The city’s goals for reductions in the proportions of drive-alone commute trips and vehicle miles traveled per employee by affected employers in Burien, major employment installations, and other areas designated by the city are hereby established by the city’s CTR plan. These goals establish the desired level of performance for the CTR program in its entirety.

(b) The city will set the individual worksite goals for affected employers based on how the worksite can contribute to the city’s overall goal established in the CTR plan. The goals will appear as a component of the affected employers’ approved implementation plan as outlined in BMC 10.60.060.

(2) Commute Trip Reduction Goals for Affected Employers.

(a) The drive-alone and VMT goals for affected employers in the city are hereby established as set forth in the CTR plan.

(b) If the goals for an affected employer or newly affected employer are not listed in the CTR plan, they shall be established by the city at a level designed to achieve the city’s overall goals for the jurisdiction and other areas as designated by the city. The city shall provide written notification of the goals for each affected employer worksite by providing the information when the city reviews the employer’s proposed program and incorporates the goals into the program approval issued by the city. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.040 Responsible agency.

The city shall be responsible for implementing this chapter, the CTR plan, and the city’s CTR program for its own employees. The city manager shall have the authority to issue such rules and administrative procedures and delegate authority to other city departments as may be necessary to implement this chapter. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.050 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer within the geographic limits of the CTR plan.

(1) Notification of Applicability.

(a) In addition to the city’s established public notification for adoption of an ordinance, a notice of availability of a summary of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a notice of the requirements and criteria for affected employers to comply with this chapter, and subsequent revisions shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation of Burien within 30 days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or revisions.

(b) Affected employers located in Burien are to receive written notification that they are subject to this chapter. Such notice shall be addressed to the company’s chief executive officer, senior official, CTR program manager, or registered agent at the worksite. Such notification shall provide 90 days for the affected employer to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city.

(c) Affected employers that, for whatever reason, did not receive notice within 30 days of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and are either notified or identify themselves to the city within 90 days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be granted an extension to assure up to 90 days within which to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city. 

(d) Affected employers that have not been identified or do not identify themselves within 90 days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city within 90 days from the adoption are in violation of this chapter and are subject to penalties as written in BMC 10.60.120. 

(e) If an affected employer has already performed a baseline measurement, or an alternative acceptable to the city, under previous iterations of this chapter, the employer is not required to perform another baseline measurement.

(2) Newly Affected Employers.

(a) Employers meeting the definition of “affected employer” must identify themselves to the city within 90 days of either moving into the boundaries of Burien or growing in employment at a worksite to 100 or more affected employees. Employers will be notified of this requirement via the business license application process. Employers who do not identify themselves within 90 days are in violation of this chapter.

(b) Newly affected employers identified as such shall be given 90 days to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city. Employers who do not perform a baseline measurement within 90 days of receiving written notification that they are subject to this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

(c) Not more than 90 days after receiving written notification of the results of the baseline measurement, the newly affected employer shall develop and submit a CTR program to the city. The program will be developed in consultation with city staff to be consistent with goals of the CTR plan. The program shall be implemented not more than 90 days after approval by the city. Employers who do not implement an approved CTR program according to this schedule are in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties outlined in BMC 10.60.120(2).

(3) Changes in Status as an Affected Employer. Any of the following changes in an employer’s status will change the employer’s CTR program requirements:

(a) If an employer initially designated as an affected employer no longer employs 100 or more affected employees, the employer will be monitored for the next 12 months. If the employer does not return to 100 or more employees at that time, the employer is no longer an affected employer. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify the city that it is no longer an affected employer. The burden of proof lies with the employer.

(b) If the same employer returns to 100 or more employees, that employer shall be treated as a newly affected employer and will be subject to the same CTR program requirements as other newly affected employers. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.060 Requirements for employers.

An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and drive-alone commute trips. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.070 Mandatory program elements.

Each employer’s CTR program shall include the following mandatory elements:

(1) Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). The employer shall designate an employee transportation coordinator (ETC) to administer the CTR program. The ETC and/or designee’s name, location, and telephone number must be prominently displayed physically or electronically at each affected worksite. The ETC shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program and act as liaison between the employer and the city. The objective is to have an effective transportation coordinator present at each worksite; an affected employer with multiple sites may have one ETC for all sites.

(2) Information Distribution. Information about alternatives to drive-alone commuting as well as a summary of the employer’s CTR program shall be provided to employees at least once a year and to new employees at the time of hire. The summary of the employer’s CTR program also shall be submitted to the city with the employer’s program description and regular report. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.080 Additional program elements.

In addition to the specific program elements described in BMC 10.60.070, the employer’s CTR program shall include additional elements as needed to meet CTR goals. Elements may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

(1) Provision of preferential parking for high-occupancy vehicles;

(2) Reduced parking charges for high-occupancy vehicles;

(3) Instituting or increasing parking charges for drive-alone commuters;

(4) Provision of commuter ride-matching services to facilitate employee ridesharing for commute trips;

(5) Provision of subsidies for rail, transit, or vanpool fares and/or transit passes;

(6) Provision of vans or buses for employee ridesharing;

(7) Provision of subsidies for carpools, walking, bicycling, teleworking, or compressed schedules;

(8) Provision of incentives for employees that do not drive alone to work;

(9) Permitting the use of employer’s vehicles for carpooling and vanpooling;

(10) Permitting flexible work schedules to facilitate employees’ use of transit, carpools, or vanpools;

(11) Cooperation with transportation providers to provide additional regular or express service to the worksite;

(12) Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit, carpool, and vanpool users;

(13) Provision of bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas, and showers for employees who bicycle or walk to work;

(14) Provision of a program of parking incentives such as a rebate for employees who do not use the parking facilities;

(15) Establishment of a program to permit employees to work part- or full-time at home or at alternative worksite closer to their homes that reduces commute trips;

(16) Establishment of a program of alternative work schedules, such as a compressed work week, which reduces commute trips;

(17) Implementation of other measures designed to facilitate the use of high-occupancy vehicles, such as on-site day care facilities, emergency taxi services, or guaranteed ride home programs;

(18) Charging employees for parking, and/or the elimination of free parking;

(19) Other measures that the employer believes will reduce the number and length of commute trips made to the site. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.090 CTR program report and description.

Affected employers shall review their program and file a regular progress report with the city in accordance with the format provided by the city.

(1) The CTR program report and description outlines the strategies to be undertaken by an employer to achieve the commute trip reduction goals for the reporting period. Employers are encouraged to consider innovative strategies and combine program elements in a manner that will best suit their location, site characteristics, business type, and employees’ commuting needs. Employers are further encouraged to cooperate with each other to implement program elements.

(2) At a minimum, the employer’s CTR program report and description must include:

(a) A general description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, employee parking availability, on-site amenities, and surrounding services;

(b) The number of employees affected by the CTR program and the total number of employees at the site;

(c) Documentation of compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements;

(d) Description of any additional elements included in the employer’s CTR program;

(e) A statement of organizational commitment to provide appropriate resources to the program to meet the employer’s established goals.

(3) Biennial Measure of Employee Commute Behavior. In addition to the baseline measurement, employers shall conduct a program evaluation as a means of determining worksite progress toward meeting CTR goals. As part of the program evaluation, the employer shall distribute and collect commute trip reduction program employee questionnaires (surveys) at least once every two years, and strive to achieve at least a 70 percent response rate from employees at the worksite. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.100 Record keeping.

Affected employers shall maintain a copy of their approved CTR program description and report, their CTR program employee questionnaire results, and all supporting documentation for the descriptions and assertions made in any CTR report to the city for a minimum of 48 months. The city and the employer shall agree on the record keeping requirements as part of the accepted CTR program. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.110 Schedule and process for CTR reports, program review and implementation.

(1) Document Review. The city shall provide the employer with written notification if a CTR program is deemed unacceptable. The notification must give cause for any rejection. If the employer receives no written notification of extension of the review period of its CTR program or comment on the CTR program or annual report within 90 days of submission, the employer’s program or annual report is deemed accepted. The city may extend the review period up to 90 days. The implementation date for the employer’s CTR program will be extended an equivalent number of days.

(a) Schedule. Upon review of an employer’s initial CTR program, the city shall establish the employer’s regular reporting date. This report will be in a form provided by the city.

(2) Modification of CTR Program Elements. Any affected employer may submit a request to the city for modification of CTR requirements. Such request may be granted if one of the following conditions exist:

(a) The employer can demonstrate it would be unable to comply with the CTR program elements for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or

(b) The employer can demonstrate that compliance with the program elements would constitute an undue hardship;

(c) The city may ask the employer to substitute a program element of similar trip reduction potential rather than grant the employer’s request.

(3) Extensions. An employer may request additional time to submit a CTR program description and report, or to implement or modify a program. Such requests shall be via written notice at least 30 days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Extensions not to exceed 90 days shall be considered for reasonable causes. The city of Burien shall grant or deny the employer’s extension request by written notice within 10 working days of its receipt of the extension request. If there is no response issued to the employer, an extension is automatically granted for 30 days. Extensions shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility in meeting program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any program element(s) shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s regular reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s biennial reporting date may be extended at the discretion of city.

(4) Implementation of Employer’s CTR Program. Unless extensions are granted, the employer shall implement its approved CTR program, including approved program modification, not more than 90 days after receiving written notice from the city that the program has been approved or with the expiration of the program review period without receiving notice from the city. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.120 Enforcement.

(1) Compliance. For purposes of this section, compliance shall mean:

(a) Fully implementing in good faith all mandatory program elements as well as provisions in the approved CTR program description and report;

(b) Providing a complete CTR program and description report on the regular reporting date; and

(c) Distributing and collecting the CTR program employee questionnaire during the scheduled survey time period.

(2) Program Modification Criteria. The following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of drive-alone trips shall be applied in determining requirements for employer CTR program modifications:

(a) If an employer meets either or both goals, the employer has satisfied the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to improve its CTR program.

(b) If an employer makes a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, but has not met the applicable drive alone or VMT goal, no additional modifications are required.

(c) If an employer fails to make a good faith effort as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, and fails to meet the applicable drive-alone or VMT reduction goal, the city shall direct the employer to revise its program within 30 days to come into compliance, including specific recommended program modifications. In response to the recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description and report, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within 30 days of receiving written notice to revise its program. The city shall review the revisions and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, the city will send written notice to that effect to the employer within 30 days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with program review staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by the city within 10 working days of the conference.

(3) Violations. The following constitute violations if the deadlines established in this chapter are not met:

(a) Failure to self-identify as an affected employer;

(b) Failure to perform a baseline measurement, including:

(i) Employers notified or that have identified themselves to the city within 90 days of the ordinance codified in this chapter being adopted and that do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by the city within 90 days from the notification or self-identification;

(ii) Employers not identified or self-identified within 90 days of the ordinance codified in this chapter being adopted and that did not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by the city within 90 days from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(c) Failure to develop and/or submit on time a complete CTR program;

(d) Failure to implement an approved CTR program, unless the program elements that are carried out can be shown through quantifiable evidence to meet or exceed VMT and drive-alone goals as specified in this chapter;

(e) Submission of false or fraudulent data in response to survey requirements;

(f) Failure to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534 and this chapter; or

(g) Failure to revise a CTR program as defined in RCW 70.94.534(4) and this chapter.

(4) Penalties.

(a) No affected employer with an approved CTR program that has made a good faith effort may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable drive-alone or VMT goal.

(b) Each day of failure to implement the program shall constitute a separate violation, subject to penalties as described in Chapter 7.80 RCW.

(c) An affected employer shall not be liable for civil penalties if failure to implement an element of a CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. This can be accomplished through the following:

(i) Propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the National Labor Relations Act; and

(ii) Advise the union of the existence of the statute and the mandates of the CTR program approved by the city and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with state law (RCW 70.94.531). [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.130 Exemptions and goal modifications.

(1) Worksite Exemptions. An affected employer may request the city to grant an exemption from all CTR program requirements or penalties for a particular worksite. The employer must demonstrate that it would experience undue hardship in complying with the requirements of this chapter as a result of the characteristics of its business, its work force, or its location(s). An exemption may be granted if, and only if, the affected employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstances, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement any measures that could reduce the proportion of drive-alone trips and VMT per employee. Exemptions may be granted by the city at any time based on written notice provided by the affected employer. The notice should clearly explain the conditions for which the affected employer is seeking an exemption from the requirements of the CTR program. The city shall grant or deny the request within 30 days of receipt of the request. The city shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(2) Employee Exemptions. Specific employees or groups of employees who are required to drive alone to work as a condition of employment may be exempted from a worksite’s CTR program. Exemptions also may be granted for employees who work variable shifts throughout the year and who do not rotate as a group to identical shifts. The city will use the criteria identified in the CTR board administrative guidelines to assess the validity of employee exemption requests. The city shall grant or deny the request within 30 days of receipt of the request. The city shall review annually all employee exemption requests and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(3) Modification of CTR Program Goals.

(a) An affected employer may request that the city modify its CTR program goals. Such requests shall be filed in writing at least 60 days prior to the date the worksite is required to submit its program description or biennial report. The goal modification request must clearly explain why the worksite is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The worksite must also demonstrate that it has implemented all of the elements contained in its approved CTR program.

(b) The city will review and grant or deny requests for goal modifications in accordance with procedures and criteria identified in the CTR board guidelines.

(c) An employer may not request a modification of the applicable goals until one year after the city’s approval of its initial program description or biennial report. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


10.60.140 Appeals.

(1) Appeal of Final Decisions. Employers may file a written appeal to the city’s hearing examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.15 BMC of the city’s final decisions regarding the following actions:

(a) Rejection of an employer’s proposed program.

(b) Denial of an employer’s request for a waiver or modification of any of the requirements under this chapter or a modification of the employer’s program.

(c) Denial of credits requested.

(2) Appeals filed under this section must be filed with the city clerk’s office within 14 calendar days after the employer receives notice of the final decision. Determinations on appeals shall be based on whether the decision being appealed was consistent with the state law. [Ord. 498 § 1 (Exh. A), 2009]


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS1

Chapters:

12.05    2016 Road Design and Construction Standards

12.10    Repealed

12.15    Special Events Permitting Code

12.17    Right-of-Way Use Code – General Provisions

12.18    Right-of-Way Use Code – Permits

12.20    Trail Use

12.25    Road Names – Building Addresses

12.30    Repealed

12.35    Street Lights

12.38    Street Trees and Trees on City Property

12.40    Utility Undergrounding Policy

12.45    Complete Streets1

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 12.05 2016 ROAD DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

Sections:

12.05.010    Adopted.


12.05.010 Adopted.

There is hereby created a new Chapter 12.05 BMC. The full text of Chapter 12.05 BMC, entitled “2016 Road Design and Construction Standards,” is attached to Ordinance No. 656 and shall be kept on file with the city clerk. Where the definitions contained within newly adopted Chapter 12.05 BMC differ in whole or in part from the definitions elsewhere in the Burien Municipal Code, the definitions set forth in this chapter shall control. [Ord. 656 § 3, 2016]


Chapter 12.10 STREET USE PERMITS

(Repealed by Ord. 395)


Chapter 12.15 SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITTING CODE

Sections:

12.15.010    Definitions.

12.15.020    Special event permit required – Purpose.

12.15.030    Exceptions to special event permit requirement.

12.15.040    Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate city services.

12.15.050    Time for filing application for special event permit.

12.15.060    When application for special event permit is deemed complete.

12.15.070    Date of special event not confirmed until permit issued.

12.15.080    Special event permit application.

12.15.090    Denial of a special event permit application – Appeals from denial.

12.15.100    Display of special event permit required.

12.15.110    City clerk’s action on special event permit application.

12.15.120    Insurance required to conduct special event.

12.15.130    Revocation of special event permit.

12.15.140    Cost recovery for special events.

12.15.150    Expressive activity special event.

12.15.160    Authorized special event vendors.

12.15.170    Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without permit.

12.15.180    Other permits and licenses.

12.15.190    Unlawful to sell goods in special event venue without authorization.

12.15.200    Cost recovery for unlawful special event.

12.15.210    Violation – Penalties.


12.15.010 Definitions.

“Activity” shall, for purposes of the definition of “special event,” mean and refer to any one or more of the following: outdoor athletic events, promotional or fund-raising events, weddings, block parties, socials, street dances, parades, marches, rallies, demonstrations, public assemblies, performances, exhibitions, entertainment or amusement events, farmers markets, public markets, craft fairs, parking lot sales, public street or public sidewalk sales, tent sales, displays, filming of movies, taping of video or television shows, fireworks displays, motorcades, motorized vehicle races or contests, soapbox derbies, rodeos, and tournaments. 

“Building” means any fully enclosed permanent structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. It includes push carts or sidewalk cafes for which the sale of goods, food, or beverages has been authorized.

“Demonstration” means a public display of group opinion as by a rally or march, the principal purpose of which is expressive activity.

“Departmental service charges” means the actual costs which a department of the city incurs in connection with activities for which a permit is required under this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs associated with fire safety, traffic and/or pedestrian control, water safety, the closure of streets or intersections, the diverting of traffic, the salaries of city personnel involved in administration or coordination of city services for the event, the cost to the city to provide support personnel, equipment, materials and supplies, and related city costs such as fringe benefits or employee overtime. 

“Event organizer” means any person who conducts, manages, promotes, presents, sponsors, organizes, aids, or solicits attendance at a special event.

“Exhibition, entertainment or amusement events” shall have their ordinary meanings and shall include the following organized events: arts and craft shows, concerts, carnivals, circuses, fairs, shows, theatrical performances, musical performances, and festivals, including any exhibition involving amusement attractions or rides, spectacles, animals, side shows, games, and the like.

“Expressive activity” includes conduct the sole or principal object of which is the expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means of opinion, views, or ideas and for which no fee or donation is charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at such activity. For purposes of this chapter, expressive activity does not include activities for which the principal purpose is entertainment.

“Extraordinary services” shall mean and refer to services above and beyond those routinely performed by the city police, fire and/or public works, and parks departments as a normal course of regular duty. Extraordinary services include but are not limited to those involving the closing of public streets, crowd control and security, and traffic control. 

“March” means an organized walk or event whose principal purpose is expressive activity.

“Organized” in addition to its ordinary meaning shall mean functioning within a formal structure, as in the coordination and direction of planned and controlled activities.

“Outdoor athletic event” means an organized competitive or recreational activity in which a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise that takes place in whole or in part outdoors including, by way of example and not limitation, team sports, tournaments, races, marathons, volksmarches and volkssports. “Sport or form of physical exercise” includes, by way of example and not limitation, bicycling, walking, running, sprinting, jogging, skateboarding, rollerblading and roller skating.

“Parade” means an organized group of persons, animals, bicycles, vehicles, carts, balloons, musical units and/or floats, or any combination thereof, travelling in public procession and having a common purpose, design, destination or goal, and the principal purpose of which is not expressive activity. 

“Person” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee or any of them, except where the context clearly requires a different meaning.

“Promotional or fund-raising events” shall have its ordinary meaning and shall mean and refer to organized activities intended to promote causes, products, or services or raise funds primarily for charitable purposes, and shall include, by way of example and not limitation, bike-a-thons, walk-a-thons, and fun runs.

“Rally” means a gathering whose principal purpose is expressive activity, especially one intended to inspire enthusiasm for a cause.

“Right-of-way” means, within the city of Burien, all public right-of-way and property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for street purposes, together with public property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for walkways, paths, trails, sidewalks, bikeways and horse trails, whether improved, unimproved, or unopened, including the air rights, sub-surface rights and easements related thereto, and over which the city of Burien has authority and control.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a right-of-way, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

“Sign” means any sign, pennant, flag, banner, inflatable display, or other attention-seeking device.

“Special event” shall mean any temporary organized activity sponsored by an event organizer which takes place, in whole or in part, outdoors, will result in people congregating at the event location for a particular and limited purpose and time, and meets any one or more of the following criteria: 

(a) City Property. The activity will be conducted in whole or in part on city-owned or controlled land that is not a city park or right-of-way; 

(b) City Parks. The activity will be conducted within a city park or facility, as those terms are defined at BMC 7.10.020 as now or hereafter amended, and the parks director determines that the activity requires a special events permit because:

(i) The activity is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the free and normal use of public rights-of-way or other public property of the city within the vicinity of the event; or

(ii) The activity is likely to result in the need for the city to provide extraordinary services in response to or arising out of the special event; or

(iii) The activity will require exclusive use of all or a substantial portion of a city park. 

Criteria to be considered include, by way of example and not limitation, available parking capacity in the vicinity of the special event, likely pedestrian and vehicular routes for travel to and from the special event, availability of public transportation, the number of days of the special event, the hours of the special event, the number of people anticipated to attend the special event, the capacity and safety of the permanent and temporary structures intended to house the special event, the proximity and availability of health and sanitation services, the proximity and availability of emergency services, the activity(ies) to be engaged in as part of the special event, the historical impacts of the special event or comparable special events, if known, upon use of public rights-of-way and public property and public services including police and fire, and other similar considerations; 

(c) Rights-of-Way. The activity will be conducted in whole or in part on city rights-of-way; 

(d) Sales Not Already Permitted. The activity will involve the sale of merchandise, food or beverages outdoors where not already permitted by city code, whether by for profit or nonprofit organizations;

(e) Public Disturbance Noise. The activity will include use of sound amplification, public address, loud speaker, audio, video, or television systems or other devices likely to result in public disturbance noise in violation of Chapter 9.105 BMC as now or hereafter amended.

“Special event permit” means a permit issued under this chapter.

“Special event venue” means that area for which a special event permit has been issued.

“Tax-exempt nonprofit organization” means an organization that is exempted from payment of income taxes by federal or state law and has been in existence for a minimum of six months preceding the date of application for a special event permit. 

“Vendor” means any person who sells or offers to sell any goods, food, or beverages within a special event venue. [Ord. 511 § 2, 2009]


12.15.020 Special event permit required – Purpose. 

(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of the city to establish a process for permitting special events that impact city right-of-way, public property, other facilities or services. It is recognized that these special events enhance the Burien lifestyle and provide benefits to the citizens through the creation of venues for expression and entertainment that are not normally provided as a part of governmental services. By recognizing special event venues, it is further intended to supplement land use and street right-of-way regulations, to provide a coordinated process for the regulation of certain activities to be conducted in conjunction with special events, to ensure the health and safety of patrons of special events, to prohibit illegal activity from occurring within special event venues, and to protect the rights and interests granted to a special event permit holder. It is further intended to create a mechanism for cost recovery without having an adverse effect on those events that contribute to the community. It is also the intent of the city to protect the rights of its citizens to engage in protected free speech expression activities and yet allow for the least restrictive and reasonable, time, place and manner regulation of those activities.

(2) Permit Required. Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, an event organizer shall obtain a special event permit from the city clerk for all special events.

(3) City Clerk. The city clerk, in coordination with other involved city departments and public agencies, is authorized to issue permits for special events occurring within the city limits, pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager. The city clerk is authorized to determine the special event venue. The city clerk shall set reasonable boundaries for the special event venue, balancing the special event requirements and public health, safety, and welfare. The city clerk is authorized to coordinate the issuance of a special event permit with other public agencies through whose jurisdiction or property the special event or portion thereof occurs and to issue a special event permit upon the concurrence of other public agencies involved.

(4) Rules and Regulations. The city manager is authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth within this chapter and the provisions of law that pertain to the conduct and operation of a special event. [Ord. 511 § 3, 2009]


12.15.030 Exceptions to special event permit requirement.

A special event permit is not required for any of the following activities; provided, that the special event shall be conducted in accordance with all laws and regulations governing public safety or health: 

(1) Funeral Processions. Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary or funeral home;

(2) Wedding Processions. Wedding processions conducted on public rights-of-way wherein applicable traffic regulations, laws or controls are complied with; 

(3) School, Church and Governmental Events. Any special events held or conducted by or on behalf a public or private school, college or school district, the state of Washington or other governmental entity or any church that is legally operated in the city, so long as the activity or event is conducted on property owned, used, or leased by the entity or its sponsor and is for the benefit of the entity that owns, uses, or leased the property on which the activity takes place;

(4) Expressive Activities on Sidewalks. Rallies, marches, demonstrations and picketing which take place on public sidewalks crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls and laws applicable to use of public sidewalks;

(5) Special Event Facilities. Events conducted at a facility designed for the special event purpose or upon facilities where such events are normally held, such as churches, events/convention centers, schools, athletic fields, auditoriums, stadiums, and theaters;

(6) Regularly Scheduled Athletic Events. Regularly scheduled outdoor athletic events conducted on property where such events are normally held;

(7) Outdoor Demonstrations on Public Property. Demonstrations on publicly owned property (other than public rights-of-way), unless:

(a) The activity is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the free and normal use of such public property or the public rights-of-way; or

(b) The activity is likely to result in the need for the city to provide extraordinary services in response to or arising out of the special event; 

(8) Other Authorized Uses. Authorized uses of public property permitted by other provisions of the Burien Municipal Code; and

(9) Governmental Activities. Activities conducted by a governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority. [Ord. 511 § 4, 2009]


12.15.040 Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate city services.

Issuance of a special event permit pursuant to this chapter does not obligate or require the city of Burien to provide city services, equipment, funding or personnel in support of a special event. [Ord. 511 § 5, 2009]


12.15.050 Time for filing application for special event permit.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, application for a special event permit shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 45 calendar days, nor more than two years, before the time when it is proposed to conduct the special event. Upon good cause shown, and provided that no risk or burden to the city ensues, the city clerk has discretion to allow a later filing. 

(2) Application for an expressive activity special event permit shall be filed with the city clerk not less than seven calendar days, nor more than two years, before the time when it is proposed to conduct the expressive activity special event. Upon good cause shown, and provided that no risk or burden to the city ensues, the city clerk has discretion to allow a later filing.

(3) Except as otherwise provided herein, applications for a special event at city-owned buildings and city parks shall be submitted to officials responsible for such buildings and in accordance with such time limits and procedures as may be established for such buildings and parks and are not subject to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 511 § 6, 2009]


12.15.060 When application for special event permit is deemed complete.

An application for a special event permit is deemed completed when the applicant has provided all of the information required pursuant to the special event permit rules and regulations. [Ord. 511 § 7, 2009]


12.15.070 Date of special event not confirmed until permit issued.

Notwithstanding the city clerk’s acceptance of a completed application, no date shall be considered confirmed until a special event permit is issued. [Ord. 511 § 8, 2009]


12.15.080 Special event permit application.

The application for a special event permit shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the special permit rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager. [Ord. 511 § 9, 2009]


12.15.090 Denial of a special event permit application – Appeals from denial.

(1) If the city clerk denies the application for the special event permit he or she shall notify the applicant in writing as soon as is reasonably practical.

(2) The denial of a special event permit may be appealed to the city manager or his or her designee. 

(3) An appeal shall be made in writing within five calendar days of the date of the written denial. An appeal is made by filing a written petition with the city clerk, setting forth the grounds for appeal.

(4) The city manager, or his or her designee, shall hear the appeal as soon as is reasonably practicable. The city manager shall determine if the application was denied by the city clerk based upon an error of fact or law and shall limit his/her review to the record before the city clerk; provided, that the city manager may, in his or her discretion, allow submission of additional evidence relevant to the alleged error of fact or law. [Ord. 511 § 10, 2009]


12.15.100 Display of special event permit required.

A copy of the special event permit shall be displayed in the special event venue in the method prescribed by the city clerk applicable to the particular special event and shall be exhibited upon demand of any city official. [Ord. 511 § 11, 2009]


12.15.110 City clerk’s action on special event permit application.

(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (6) of this section, the city clerk shall endeavor to take final action upon a completed application for a special event permit within 30 days of receipt of the completed application. 

(2) The city clerk is not required to take final action upon any special event permit application prior to 180 calendar days before the special event. 

(3) The city clerk is not required to take final action on an incomplete or untimely special event permit application.

(4) The city clerk is not required to take final action upon two or more special event permit applications submitted by the same applicant unless two or more weeks shall have elapsed between the respective dates of submission of each.

(5) Final action on a completed special event permit application shall consist of one of the following: 

(a) Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms of the application; or

(b) Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms of the application, as modified by mutual agreement between the city clerk and the applicant; or

(c) Denial of the special event permit application by the city clerk.

(6) The city clerk shall take final action upon a timely completed application for an expressive activity special event permit as soon as reasonably practicable after receipt of a completed application, and in any event prior to the time set for the expressive activity special event. [Ord. 511 § 12, 2009]


12.15.120 Insurance required to conduct special event.

The event organizer of a special event must possess or obtain insurance in the form and with coverages and limits as set forth in the special events permit rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager. [Ord. 511 § 13, 2009]


12.15.130 Revocation of special event permit.

(1) Any special event permit issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to revocation pursuant to this section.

(2) A special event permit may be revoked if the city clerk, or his or her designee, or the Burien police chief, or his or her designee, or the city manager, or his or her designee, determines:

(a) That the special event cannot be conducted without violating the standards or conditions for special event permit issuance; or

(b) The special event is being conducted in violation of any condition of the special event permit; or 

(c) The special event poses a threat to health or safety; or

(d) The event organizer or any person associated with the special event has failed to obtain any other required permit; or

(e) The special event permit was issued in error or contrary to law.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, notices of revocation shall be in writing and specifically set forth the reasons for the revocation.

(4) If there is an emergency requiring immediate revocation of a special event permit, the city clerk, or responsible public official, may notify the permit holder verbally of the revocation.

(5) An appeal from a revocation shall be handled in the same manner and under the same time requirements as denials of special event permits, pursuant to BMC 12.15.090. 

(6) It shall be unlawful to operate a special event after revocation of a special event permit. [Ord. 511 § 14, 2009]


12.15.140 Cost recovery for special events. 

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or when funded or waived by the city manager, for any special event, the city clerk shall impose a fee for departmental services charges. Factors that may be considered in evaluating whether the fee should be completely or partially waived include (a) the extent of use of public property or right-of-way, (b) the extent of use of city services or facilities, (c) whether the city is sponsoring or co-sponsoring the event, and (d) whether the event is sponsored by an organization for the necessary support of the poor or infirm.

(2) The city clerk shall require payment of departmental service charges, based upon a reasonable estimate thereof, at the time the completed application is approved, unless the city clerk for good cause extends time for payment. 

(3) If the event organizer fails to clean the special event venue or route of the special event both during and upon completion of the special event and to return the area or route to the same condition of material preservation and cleanliness as existed prior to the special event, the event organizer will be billed for actual city costs for cleanup and repair of the area or route occasioned by the special event. If the event organizer failed to comply with such requirements under a previously issued special event permit, the city clerk may require the event organizer to deposit adequate surety in the form of cash or bond. [Ord. 540 § 1, 2010; Ord. 511 § 15, 2009]


12.15.150 Expressive activity special event.

When a special event permit is sought for a demonstration, rally, or march, the following exceptions shall apply:

(1) Where the special event will not require temporary street closures, cost recovery shall be limited solely to a fee based on the administrative cost of processing the permit application.

(2) The insurance requirement shall be waived; provided, that the event organizer or an officer of the event organizer has filed with the application a verified statement that he or she intends the special event purpose to be First Amendment expression and the cost of obtaining insurance is financially burdensome and would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression. The verified statement shall include the name and address of one insurance broker or other source for insurance coverage contacted to determine premium rates for coverage.

(3) Where the special event will require temporary street closures and any one or more of the following conditions are met requiring the city to provide services in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare, the city clerk may condition the issuance of the special event permit upon payment of costs incurred by the city to a maximum of $500.00. Any fee schedule adopted by the city will contain a provision for waiver of or a sliding scale for payment of fees for city services, including police costs, on the basis of indigency, so that an indigent applicant’s First Amendment rights are not impaired in any fashion due to wealth: 

(a) The special event will substantially interrupt public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of its route; and/or

(b) The special event will cause an irresolvable conflict with construction or development in the public right-of-way or at a public park or public facility; and/or

(c) The special event will block traffic lanes or close right-of-way during peak commuter hours on weekdays between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on right-of-way designated as arterials by the city’s public works department; and/or

(d) The special event will require the diversion of police employees from their normal duties; and/or 

(e) The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles will unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency vehicles on the right-of-way; and/or

(f) The special event will substantially interfere with another special event for which a permit has already been granted or with the provision of city services in support of other scheduled special events; and/or

(g) The special event will have significant adverse impact upon residential or business access and traffic circulation in the same general venue.

(4) With regard to the permitting of expressive activity special events where the provisions in this section conflict with the provisions in any other section of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail. [Ord. 511 § 16, 2009]


12.15.160 Authorized special event vendors.

(1) The issuance of a special event permit confers upon the permit holder or event organizer the right to control the sale of goods, food, and beverages within the special event venue in accordance with the terms and conditions of the special event permit. The permit holder may grant no greater rights or privileges to vendors than the rights or privileges granted to the permit holder pursuant to the special event permit.

(2) Vendors authorized to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special event venue shall display their authorization in the manner required by the city manager. Only vendors displaying the required authorization shall be allowed to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special event venue. [Ord. 511 § 17, 2009]


12.15.170 Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without permit.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to conduct or manage a special event without a special event permit as required pursuant to this chapter.

(2) It is unlawful for any person, during the 180-day period prior to a special event that will take place in whole or in part upon the right-of-way or city property, to promote any such special event prior to submittal of a special event permit application. [Ord. 511 § 18, 2009]


12.15.180 Other permits and licenses.

The issuance of a special event permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain any other permit or license required pursuant to the Burien Municipal Code or any other applicable law. [Ord. 511 § 19, 2009]


12.15.190 Unlawful to sell goods in special event venue without authorization.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, resell, or offer to sell or resell, any goods, food, or beverages in a special event venue, except:

(1) From any building; or

(2) From any tent, booth, or temporary structure expressly authorized pursuant to a special event permit. [Ord. 511 § 20, 2009]


12.15.200 Cost recovery for unlawful special event.

Whenever a special event is conducted without a special event permit, when one is required, or a special event is conducted in violation of the terms of an issued special event permit, the event organizer shall be responsible for, and the city shall charge the event organizer for, all city costs incurred for personnel and equipment for a public safety response caused or necessitated by the adverse impacts of the special event or the violation of the special event permit upon public safety. [Ord. 511 § 21, 2009]


12.15.210 Violation – Penalties.

(1) Violation of BMC 12.15.020(2), 12.15.130(6) or 12.15.170 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by imprisonment for up to 90 days in jail, or by both such fine or imprisonment.

(2) Violation of BMC 12.15.100 or 12.15.190 is a Class I civil infraction and punishable by a maximum fine of $250.00 for each such violation. [Ord. 511 § 22, 2009]


Chapter 12.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE CODE – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

12.17.010    Short title.

12.17.020    Purpose.

12.17.030    Territorial application.

12.17.040    Construction – Intent.

12.17.050    Definitions.

12.17.060    Powers of the director.

12.17.070    Hold harmless.

12.17.080    Assurance device/insurance.

12.17.085    Maintenance of facilities.

12.17.090    Inspections.

12.17.095    Building moving.

12.17.100    Relocation.

12.17.110    Correction and discontinuance of unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions.

12.17.120    Shared use of excavations.

12.17.130    Warning and safety devices.

12.17.140    Construction notification signs.

12.17.150    Impact of work on existing improvements.

12.17.160    Pavement and sidewalk cutting restrictions.

12.17.170    Restoration of the public right-of-way.

12.17.180    Debris and spilled loads in the right-of-way.

12.17.190    Reserved.

12.17.200    Billings and collections.

12.17.210    Adoption of procedures.

12.17.220    Appeal of right-of-way use procedures and related requirements.

12.17.230    Appeal of final decision to hearing examiner.

12.17.240    Liability.

12.17.250    Violation – Penalty.


12.17.010 Short title. 

This chapter is known as the right-of-way use code. It is referred to as the “code.” [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]




12.17.020 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this code to provide for the issuance of right-of-way use permits in order to regulate activities within the right-of-way in the city of Burien in the interest of public health, safety and welfare; and to provide for the fees, charges, warranties, and procedures required to administer the permit process. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.030 Territorial application. 

This code and the procedures adopted hereunder shall be in effect throughout the city of Burien. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.040 Construction – Intent.

(1) This code is enacted to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.

(2) It is expressly the purpose of this code and any procedures adopted hereunder to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code or any procedures adopted hereunder. 

(3) It is the specific intent of this code and any procedures adopted hereunder to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this code upon the permittee, and no provision is intended to impose any duty upon the city of Burien, or any of its officers, employees or agents. Nothing contained in this code or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burien, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code or any procedures adopted hereunder by the city of Burien, its officers, employees or agents. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.050 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(1) “Citation and notice” means a written document initiating a criminal proceeding after an arrest and issued by an authorized peace officer, in accordance with the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction.

(2) “City” means the city of Burien, Washington.

(3) “City inspector” means the designated employee(s) of the department responsible for inspecting the installation of warning and safety devices in the public right-of-way and restoration of public rights-of-way disturbed by work.

(4) “Complaint” means a written document certified by the prosecuting attorney initiating a criminal proceeding in accordance with the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction.

(5) “Department” means the public works department or other department designated by the city manager.

(6) “Director” means the director of the public works department, or his/her designated representative, or other person designated by the city manager.

(7) “Emergency” means a condition of imminent danger to the health, safety, and welfare of property or persons located within the city including, but not limited to, damage to persons or property from natural or manmade consequences, such as storms, earthquakes, riots or wars.

(8) “Franchised utilities” means utilities that have city approval to use city rights-of-way for the purpose of providing their services within the city, whether by written franchise or other agreement granted by the city.

(9) “Nonprofit” means not for monetary gain unless for charitable purposes.

(10) “Oral directive” means a directive given orally by city personnel to correct or discontinue a specific condition.

(11) “Permit” means a document issued by the city granting permission to engage in an activity not allowed without a permit.

(12) “Permit center” means the central location for applying for permits.

(13) “Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.

(14) “Private use” means use of the public right-of-way for the benefit of a person, partnership, group, organization, company, or corporation, other than as a thoroughfare for any type of vehicles, pedestrians or equestrians.

(15) “Procedure” means a procedure adopted by the director to implement this code, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this code or by other codes, ordinances, or resolutions of the city or other agencies.

(16) “Right-of-way” means all public streets and property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for street purposes, together with public property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for walkways, paths, trails, sidewalks, bikeways and horse trails, whether improved, unimproved, or unopened, including the air rights, subsurface rights and easements related thereto.

(17) “Right-of-way use permit” or “permit” means a permit for use of the right-of-way issued in conformance with BMC 12.17.080.

(18) “Stop work order” means a notice posted at the site of activity that requires all work to be stopped until the city approves continuation of work.

(19) “Telecommunications carrier” means every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering and providing telecommunications or cable services.

(20) “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optic cable, pedestals, antennas, electronics, poles, and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications or cable services.

(21) “Telecommunications provider” means every person who provides telecommunications or cable services over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.

(22) “Telecommunications service(s)” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.

(23) “Underground location service” means the underground utilities location center that will locate all underground utilities prior to an excavation.

(24) “Unsafe condition” means any condition which the director determines is a hazard to health, or endangers the safe use of the right-of-way by the public, or does or may impair or impede the operation or functioning of any portion of the right-of-way, or which may cause damage thereto. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.060 Powers of the director. 

The director shall have the power to:

(1) Administer the provisions of this code including but not limited to interpreting the code and issuing rules necessary for its administration. The director may correct errors and omissions and is authorized to adjust the amount of fees required by this code to be proportional to the scope of the work for which the permit is required.

(2) Administer and coordinate the enforcement of this code and all procedures adopted hereunder relating to the use of rights-of-way. 

(3) Advise the city council, city manager and other city departments on matters relating to use of the right-of-way.

(4) Carry out such other responsibilities as required by this code or other codes, ordinances, or procedures of the city.

(5) Request the assistance of other city departments to administer and enforce this code. 

(6) Assign the responsibility for interpretation and application of specified procedures to the public works department. 

(7) Waive the right-of-way use fee when it is determined by the director that the application will be of benefit to the public. Fees for right-of-way permits for development-related activities will not be waived. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.070 Hold harmless.

As a condition to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, the permittee shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents, for any and all suits, claims or liabilities caused by, or arising out of any use authorized by any such permit. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.080 Assurance device/insurance.

(1) In each case where the city requires or allows an applicant to provide an assurance device, the director shall determine the type of assurance device or insurance that will be required. The assurance device may be a nonrevocable letter of credit, set-aside letter, assignment of funds, certificate of deposit, deposit account, bond, or other readily accessible source of funds. A bond will be accepted only when circumstances make a bond the only reasonable form of assurance as determined by the director, and the bond adequately protects the interests of the city, or when a bond is required under state law or local regulations. 

(2) The requirements for performance deposits and insurance are based on considerations of the applicant’s prior performance, nature of the proposed use, cost of the activity, length of use, public safety, potential damage to right-of-way and potential liability or expense to the city.

(3) If, after the date by which the required work or improvements are to be completed under a performance assurance device, the director determines that the work or improvements have not been complied with, he/she shall notify the applicant. Such notice shall include statements of:

(a) The work that must be done or the improvement that must be made to comply with the requirements and the assurance device;

(b) The amount of time that the applicant has to commence and complete the required work or improvements; and 

(c) That, if the work or improvements are not commenced and completed within the time specified, the city will use the proceeds of the assurance device to have the required work or improvements completed. 

(4) Interest from any interest-bearing form of assurance device will accrue to the benefit of the depositor. 

(5) If the work or improvements covered by the assurance device are not completed within the time specified in the notice given under subsection (3) of this section, the city shall obtain the proceeds of the device and do the work or make the improvements covered by the device. The city may either have employees of the city do the work or make the improvements or, by using procurement procedures established by law, have a contractor do the work or make the improvements. 

(6) If at any time the director determines that actions or inaction associated with any assurance device have created an emergency situation endangering the public health, safety, or welfare, creating a potential liability for the city, or endangering city streets, utilities, or property; and if the nature or timing of such an emergency precludes the notification of applicants as provided in subsection (3) of this section while still minimizing or avoiding the effects of the emergency, the city may use the assurance device to correct the emergency situation. The city may either have employees of the city do the work or make the improvements, or may have a contractor do the work or make the improvements. If the city uses the assurance device as provided by this section, the applicant shall be notified in writing within four days of the commencement of emergency work. The notice must state the work that was completed and the nature or timing of the emergency that necessitated the use of the assurance device without prior notification. 

(7) The permit owner is responsible for all costs incurred by the city in doing the work and making the improvements covered by the assurance device. The city shall release or refund any proceeds of a performance device remaining after subtracting all costs for doing the work covered by the device. The owner of the permit shall reimburse the city for any amount expended by the city that exceeds the proceeds of the device. The city shall have a claim against the owner for the amount of any excess.

(8) In each case where the city uses any of the proceeds of the device, it shall give the owner of the permit an itemized statement of all proceeds and funds used. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.085 Maintenance of facilities. 

Each applicant or lessee shall maintain its facilities in a good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state, and local requirements. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.090 Inspections.

As a condition of issuance of any permit or authorization which requires approval of the department, each applicant shall be required to consent to inspections by the department or any other appropriate city department. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.095 Building moving. 

Whenever any person shall have obtained permission from the city to use any street or public way for the purpose of moving any building, an applicant or lessee, upon seven days’ written notice from the city, shall raise or remove, at the expense of the person desiring to move the building, any of the applicant’s or lessee’s facilities that may obstruct the removal of such building; provided, that the person desiring to move the building shall comply with all requirements of the city for the movement of buildings. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.100 Relocation. 

Whenever the city undertakes or approves the construction of any sewer, water or storm drainage line (eight-inch inside diameter or larger) or other street improvement project including, without limitation: installation of traffic signals, street lights, I-NET system, sidewalks and pedestrian amenities, wherein the facility so constructed or approved is or shall become, by gift, transfer, dedication or otherwise, a public facility owned, maintained or operated by the city, and such project necessitates the relocation of any utility company’s then existing facilities, the city shall:

(1) Provide such utility company written notice requiring such relocation at least 90 days prior to the commencement of such improvement project;

(2) Provide such utility company with copies of pertinent portions of the plans and specifications for such street improvement project so that such utility company may relocate its facilities to accommodate such street improvement project. No later than 80 days after receipt of such notice and plans and specifications, such utility company shall complete the relocation of its facilities so as to accommodate such improvement project, at no charge or expense to the city, at least 10 days prior to commencement of construction of such improvements; provided, that such 80-day notice period shall be extended by mutual agreement if necessitated by occurrence of an “act of God”;

(3) If the city requires the subsequent relocation of such utility company’s facility within five years of the date of relocation of the same facility pursuant to this section, the city shall bear the entire cost of such relocation;

(4) As to any relocation of a utility company’s facilities wherein the cost and expense thereof is to be borne by such utility company in whole or in part, in accordance with this section, such utility company may, after receipt of written notice requesting relocation, submit to the city written alternatives to such relocation. Upon receipt, the city shall evaluate such alternatives and shall timely advise such utility company in writing if one or more of the proposed alternatives is suitable to accommodate the work which would otherwise necessitate relocation of such facilities. If so requested by the utility company, the city shall give each alternative proposal full and fair consideration. In no case shall the city arbitrarily reject reasonable alternatives. In the event that the city is satisfied, after due consideration, that there is no other reasonable alternative, the utility company shall relocate its facilities as otherwise provided in this section. The city’s determination that there is no reasonable alternative shall be conclusive and shall not be subject to any city administrative appeal process; and

(5) The foregoing provisions shall be applicable to all utilities within the right-of-way, whether such utilities are publicly owned or privately owned, and whether or not such utilities have an existing franchise with the city for use of the right-of-way. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.110 Correction and discontinuance of unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions.

(1) Whenever the director determines that any condition on any right-of-way is in violation of, or any right-of-way is being used contrary to, any provision of this code or procedures adopted hereunder or other applicable codes or standards, or without a right-of-way use permit, the director may order the correction or discontinuance of such condition or any activity causing such condition.

(2) The director is authorized to order correction or discontinuance of any such condition or activities following the methods specified in any of the procedures adopted pursuant to this code or pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(3) The director shall also have all powers and remedies which may be available under state law, this code, and procedures adopted hereunder for securing the correction or discontinuance of any condition specified in this section.

(4) The director is authorized to use any or all of the following methods in ordering correction or discontinuance of any such conditions or activities as the director determines appropriate including but not necessarily limited to:

(a) Serving of oral or written directives to the permittee or other responsible person requesting immediate correction or discontinuance of the specified condition;

(b) Service of a notice of civil violation pursuant to BMC 1.15.120, ordering correction or discontinuance of a specific condition or activity within any reasonable period as the director may determine;

(c) Service of a civil infraction filed in the King County district court, division south, pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC;

(d) Revocation of previously granted permits where the permittee or other responsible person has failed or refused to comply with requirements imposed by the city related to such permits;

(e) Issuance of a stop work order to immediately stop work until authorization is received from the city to proceed with such work;

(f) Service of summons and complaint certified by the city prosecutor or a citation and notice to appear by an arresting peace officer upon the permittee or other responsible person who is in violation of this or other city ordinances;

(g) Any object or thing which shall occupy any right-of-way without a permit is declared a nuisance per Chapters 8.45 and 9.75 BMC. The department may attach a notice to any such object or thing stating that if it is not removed from the right-of-way within 24 hours of the date and time stated on the notice, the object or thing may be taken into custody and stored at the owner’s expense. The notice shall provide an address and phone number where additional information may be obtained. If the object or thing is a hazard to public safety, it may be removed summarily by the city. Notice of such removal shall be thereafter given to the owner, if known. This section does not apply to motor vehicles legally occupying the right-of-way;

(h) All expenses incurred by the city in abating the condition or any portion thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by such persons who have been given notice or who own the object or thing or placed it in the right-of-way, which debt shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt; and

(i) The city shall also have all powers and remedies which may be available under law, this code and procedures adopted hereunder for securing the correction or discontinuance of any conditions specified by the city. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 395 § 2, 2004] 


12.17.120 Shared use of excavations. 

If at any time a utility company submits a permit request to excavate for installation of its facilities, the city may request in writing that such utility company provide an opportunity to install city facilities within the excavation; provided, that:

(1) Such joint use shall not unreasonably delay the work of the utility company’s excavation;

(2) Such joint use shall be arranged and accomplished on terms and conditions satisfactory to both parties; and

(3) To the extent reasonably possible, the utility company shall, at the direction of the city, cooperate with the city and provide other private utility companies with the opportunity to utilize joint or shared excavations in order to minimize disruption and damage to the right-of-way as well as to minimize traffic-related impacts. In the event the city directs a utility company to utilize joint or shared excavations with another utility company, then such utility company shall install facilities supplied by the city in such joint or shared excavations at no cost to the city for such installation if such utility company agrees that there is a commensurate cost savings to them. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004] 


12.17.130 Warning and safety devices.

(1) Warning lights, safety devices, signs and barricades shall be provided on all rights-of-way when at any time there might be an obstruction or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. All obstructions on rights-of-way shall have sufficient barricades and signs posted in such a manner as to indicate plainly the danger involved. Warning and safety devices may be removed when the work for which the right-of-way use permit has been granted is complete and the right-of-way restored to the conditions directed by the department.

(2) As a condition for the issuance of any right-of-way use permit, the public works department may require an applicant to submit a traffic detour plan showing the proposed detour routing and location and type of warning lights, safety devices, signs and barricades intended to protect vehicular or pedestrian traffic at the site for which the right-of-way use permit is requested. If a traffic plan is required, no right-of-way use permit will be issued until the traffic plan is approved.

(3) Unless otherwise specified in adopted right-of-way use procedures, the current editions of the following standard manuals shall apply to the selection, location, and installation of required warning and safety devices; provided, that the public works department or the city inspector may impose additional requirements if site conditions warrant such enhanced protection of pedestrian or vehicular traffic:

(a) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as adopted by the Federal Highway Administration.

(b) Street Standards, City of Burien Public Works Department.

(c) Part VIII, “Regulations for Use of Public Streets and Projections over Public Property,” Uniform Building Code.

(4) Any right-of-way use permit that requires a partial lane or street closure will require a licensed flagperson, properly attired, or an off-duty police officer for the purpose of traffic control during the construction. The use of police officers is mandatory for manual control of traffic at signalized intersections. 

(5) All decisions of the designated city inspector shall be final in all matters pertaining to the number, type, location, installation, and maintenance of warning and safety devices in the public right-of-way during any actual work or activity for which a duly authorized right-of-way use permit has been issued.

(6) Any failure of a permit holder to comply with the oral or written directives of the city inspector related to the number, type, location, installation, or maintenance of warning and safety devices in the public right-of-way shall be handled as provided for in this chapter or in Chapter 8.45 BMC or in any other manner at law or equity. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.140 Construction notification signs.

(1) Any work or activity by a utility or a franchise utility or telecommunications company, its contractors or subcontractors, within the public right-of-way that will take at least four hours or more, or will be excavating or trenching approximately 100 feet or more shall provide and install temporary construction notification signs. 

(2) The signs shall include the utility or telecommunication company’s name and logo, the company’s employee contact name for the project and a phone number for the company.

(3) The sign size shall be a minimum of 30 inches by 30 inches and should not exceed 48 inches by 48 inches. All writing, lettering, or numbers shall be not less than four inches in height and be visible and readable by passing motorists.

(4) The signs may be installed on temporary posts or Type I barricades. They shall be located at each end of the project facing approaching traffic and/or within the area of any lane closure or construction activity.

(5) The signs shall be installed at the start of any construction or activity and shall remain until the construction work or activity has been completed and any restoration has been completed and approved by the city inspector.

(6) The director may approve exceptions to this section where the contractor can show that compliance would be impractical. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004] 


12.17.150 Impact of work on existing improvements.

(1) If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel, convenient for users, and consistent with city standards. Whenever it is necessary for the safety of the public, the city may remove any obstructions, hazards or nuisances from rights-of-way. Anyone causing the obstructions, hazards or nuisances shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the expense of such removal.

(2) Each permittee shall cover an open excavation with non-skid steel plates ramped to the elevation of the contiguous street, pavement, or other public right-of-way, or otherwise protected in accordance with city standards. 

(3) All excavated material that is piled adjacent to any excavation shall be maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the excavation, pedestrians, or users of the right-of-way. When the confines of the area being excavated are too small to permit the piling of excavated material next to the excavation, the director shall have the authority to require the permittee to haul the excavated material to a storage site and then return the excavated material to the excavation at the time of backfilling. It is the responsibility of the permittee to secure the necessary permission and make all arrangements for any required storage and disposal of excavated material. 

(4) At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or personal property of a private property owner or the city, such permittee shall ensure at the permittee’s expense that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work. 

(5) Existing drainage channels, such as gutters, swales or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval by the director prior to the blockage of the channel. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.160 Pavement and sidewalk cutting restrictions.

(1) The pavement on any street shall not be cut or excavated for a period of five years after the pavement has been constructed or resurfaced. In cases of emergency or construction failure, or if all alternatives to pavement cutting have been exhausted, the director may grant a waiver, which may be subject to the placement of additional conditions on the permit in accordance with the city’s street standards. If a traverse cut is made within the five-year “no-cut” period, a maximum 150-foot-long, minimum half-width, hardsurface overlay shall be placed over the cut. 

(2) Sidewalk cuts shall be restored to their original specification and surface treatment, with the restoration covering no less than the section between expansion joints. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.170 Restoration of the public right-of-way.

(1) Restoration. In any case in which the sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way is or is caused be excavated, the owner and permittee shall restore such excavation in the manner prescribed by the orders, regulations and department standards.

(2) Backfill, and Replacement of Pavement Base. Backfilling in a right-of-way opened or excavated pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the excavation was begun, unless the director determines a greater degree of compaction is necessary to produce a satisfactory result. All backfilling shall be accomplished according to city standards and specifications. All backfills shall be inspected and approved by the director or his/her designee prior to any overlaying or patching. 

(3) Pavement Restoration. The permittee shall restore the surface of any public right-of-way to its original condition and replace any removed or damaged pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as that which is adjoining, including the gravel base material. All restoration shall conform to the city standards and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the permit. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.180 Debris and spilled loads in the right-of-way.

(1) The owner or operator of any vehicle that has spilled, dropped, dumped or in any manner whatsoever deposited any matter upon the right-of-way shall cause the right-of-way to be cleaned to the satisfaction of the department. Upon failure to do so the department may have the right-of-way cleaned and the costs thereof shall be charged to the person or persons so responsible. The department has the authority to designate haul routes and time of day for operations involving hauling over public rights-of-way. 

(2) Earth-hauling contractors, builders, or anyone else utilizing vehicles upon rights-of-way shall provide persons or equipment to keep the right-of-way clean at all times to the satisfaction of the department. Upon failure to do so, the department may issue an immediate stop work order, revoke city permits, and the responsible person or persons may be directed to immediately clean the right-of-way to the satisfaction of the department. Upon failure to do so the department may cause to have cleaned the right-of-way and charge the costs thereof to the person or persons so responsible. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.190 Reserved.

[Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.200 Billings and collections. 

The department, jointly with the finance department, may establish administrative rules and procedures pertaining to the billing and collection of fees and charges adopted pursuant to this code. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.210 Adoption of procedures. 

The director may prepare and adopt procedures for the purpose of implementing this code or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this code or other codes, ordinances of the city or other agencies. Such procedures do not require approval by the city council. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.220 Appeal of right-of-way use procedures and related requirements. 

Any applicant who questions the specific department procedures, requirements or directives related to the private use of the public right-of-way may request in writing that the director grant relief from the requirement or grant an alternative interpretation of the requirement. The director will decide upon such written requests within 10 days. Changes to requirements may be granted if they will improve safety or improve quality. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.230 Appeal of final decision to hearing examiner. 

A decision of the director in accordance with this title, including a decision issued pursuant to BMC 12.17.220, may be appealed to the hearing examiner pursuant to BMC 2.20.020, except that the “director” as used therein shall mean the public works director. Anyone desiring to appeal a decision of the director shall be required to complete a notice of appeal as set forth in BMC 2.20.060. The appeal hearing shall be governed by BMC 2.20.070. Appeals of decisions of the hearing examiner shall be to superior court. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.240 Liability.

The director and other employees charged with the enforcement and administration of this code, acting for the city in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties shall not thereby render themselves liable personally for any damages which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of such duties. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.17.250 Violation – Penalty.

The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and subject to enforcement as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


Chapter 12.18 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE CODE – PERMITS

Sections:

12.18.010    Permit requirements.

12.18.020    Additional permits.

12.18.030    Right-of-way use permits.

12.18.040    Right-of-way use permit applications – Requirements.

12.18.050    Processing of right-of-way use permit applications.

12.18.060    Permit fees and charges.

12.18.070    Specifications.

12.18.080    Permit exception.

12.18.090    Revocation of permits.

12.18.100    Renewal of permits.

12.18.105    No transfer or assignment.

12.18.110    Permit cancellation charges.

12.18.120    Completion of construction.

12.18.130    As-built drawings.

12.18.140    Responsibilities of the owner.


12.18.010 Permit requirements.

(1) Except as otherwise provided at BMC 12.18.030 for special events and Chapter 12.38 BMC for maintenance, removal, pruning or windowing of trees and/or vegetation in the right-of-way, it is unlawful for anyone to make private use of any public right-of-way without first having obtained a right-of-way use permit issued by the city or to use any right-of-way without complying with all the provisions of such right-of-way use permit issued by the city.

(2) Pursuant to BMC 12.18.030(6), any telecommunications carrier or provider who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any right-of-way of the city for the purpose of providing telecommunications services shall first obtain authorization in the form of a franchise authorizing the use of such right-of-way consistent with the requirements and conditions of such franchise. 

(3) All permit applicants shall, before commencing any construction in city rights-of-way, comply with all requirements of Chapter 19.122 RCW, the one number locator service.

(4) Use of the right-of-way of the city for special events shall be governed by Chapter 12.15 BMC; provided, that all special events that may alter the appearance of or disturb the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way shall be subject to the requirements for a type C permit in addition to the requirements for a special events permit.

(5) A permit shall not be required under this chapter for the maintenance, removal, pruning or windowing of trees and/or vegetation in the right-of-way of the city that is subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.38 BMC; provided, that maintenance, removal, pruning or windowing of trees and/or vegetation in the right-of-way of the city that is part of other work or activities to be performed in the right-of-way of the city shall be subject to this chapter. [Ord. 512 § 1, 2009; Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.020 Additional permits. 

An applicant who applies for a right-of-way permit must comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to obtain all permits or licenses required by other agencies. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.030 Right-of-way use permits.

(1) Type A – Short-Term Nonprofit.

(a) Type A permits are issued for use of a right-of-way for 72 or less continuous hours for nonprofit purposes that are not classified as special events pursuant to Chapter 12.15 BMC, which do not involve any alteration to the appearance of or a physical disturbance to the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way or any improvements located in, over, under and upon the right-of-way.

(b) This type of use may involve disruption of pedestrian and vehicular traffic or access to private property, and may require inspections, cleanup and police surveillance. For periods longer than 72 hours, these uses may be required to obtain a Type D annual right-of-way permit. If any of these uses are for profit, and are not classified as special events pursuant to Chapter 12.15 BMC, a Type B permit will be required. 

(2) Type B – Short-Term Profit. 

(a) Type B permits are issued for uses of right-of-way for 72 or less continuous hours for profit purposes, which do not involve the physical disturbance of the right-of-way and are not classified as special events pursuant to Chapter 12.15 BMC.

(b) This type of use may involve disruption to pedestrian and vehicular traffic or access to private property, and may require inspections, cleanup and police surveillance. For periods longer than 72 consecutive hours, a Type D annual right-of-way permit may be required.

(c) Type B permits include, but are not limited to, the following when they are for profit purposes:

(i) House or large structure moves other than those which require a Type E permit;

(ii) Temporary sale of goods;

(iii) Temporary street closures.

(3) Type C – Disturbance of City Right-of-Way.

(a) Type C permits are issued for use of a right-of-way, for a period not in excess of 180 continuous days, for activities that may alter the appearance of or disturb the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way but do not necessarily involve the installation of permanent structures.

(b) Type C permits include but are not limited to: 

(i) Boring;

(ii) Culverts;

(iii) Curb cuts;

(iv) Paving;

(v) Drainage facilities;

(vi) Driveways;

(vii) Fences;

(viii) Landscaping;

(ix) Painting/striping;

(x) Sidewalks;

(xi) Street trenching;

(xii) Utility installation, repair, replacement.

(c) Permanent structures not included in the above list that are placed in the right-of-way for a period over 72 hours may require a Type D annual right-of-way use permit, below. The director shall have the discretion to determine whether a Type C or D permit, or a facilities lease shall be required for any particular use or uses. 

(4) Type D – Annual Right-of-Way Permit.

(a) Type D annual right-of-way permits are issued for uses in excess of 72 hours that will not physically disturb the right-of-way and are associated with long-term use of the right-of-way.

(b) The use of the right-of way for structures, facilities, and uses that involve capital expenditures and long-term commitments require this type of permit; provided, however, that more intensive long-term uses of the right-of-way such as the location of facilities and permanent structures on the right-of-way will require a facilities lease (Type F permit). 

(c) Type D permits include, but are not limited to: 

(i) Air rights and aerial facilities;

(ii) Bus shelters and stops;

(iii) Access to construction sites and haul roads;

(iv) Loading zones;

(v) Newspaper sale, distribution, and storage facilities;

(vi) Recycling facilities;

(vii) Sales structures;

(viii) Sidewalk cafes;

(ix) Special and unique structures, such as awnings, benches, clocks, decorations, flagpoles, fountains, kiosks, marquees, private banners, public mailboxes, and street furniture;

(x) Underground rights;

(xi) Utility facilities;

(xii) Waste facilities.

(d) The director shall have the discretion to determine whether a Type C or D permit or a facilities lease shall be required for any particular use or uses. 

(5) Type E – Hauling Loaded Vehicles.

(a) Type E permits are issued for uses of right-of-way, for a period not in excess of 180 continuous days, for those activities that have the potential of altering the appearance of, or disturbing the surface or subsurface of, the right-of-way due to hauling large quantities. 

(b) Type E permits include, but are not limited to: 

(i) Frequent use hauling involving an average of six loaded vehicles per hour during any eight-hour period in one day, for two or more consecutive days.

(ii) Any hazardous waste hauling.

(c) Type E permits may be issued to a general contractor to authorize construction and fill activities by the said general contractor and by subcontractors. 

(6) Type F Permits – Facilities Lease or Franchise. A Type F permit (facilities lease or franchise) is issued for use of a right-of-way for a period in excess of 180 continuous days, for those activities that have the potential of altering the appearance of or disturbing the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way or for the location of permanent structures on the right-of-way. Uses requiring a facilities lease or franchise shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:

(a) Location of garages, buildings, or other structures within the right-of-way;

(b) Location of telecommunications facilities within the right-of-way;

(c) Location of utility infrastructure within the right-of-way.

The director shall have the discretion to determine whether a franchise will be required rather than a facilities lease. The city council reserves the sole discretion to lease city property and other facilities, and no vested or other right shall be created by this section or any provision of this chapter applicable to such facilities leases. The terms of such facilities leases and franchises, including the fees associated with such lease or franchise, shall be negotiated with the lessee or franchisee on a case-by-case basis. [Ord. 512 § 2, 2009; Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.040 Right-of-way use permit applications – Requirements. 

Any person that desires a right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city, which shall include the following information unless specifically waived by the director:

(1) The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

(2) A description of the services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant. 

(3) Engineering plans, licensed surveys, specifications stamped by a registered professional engineer, and a map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify: 

(a) The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed facilities;

(b) The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route; 

(c) The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other entities; and

(d) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

(4) If an applicant, other than a franchised utility, is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence must be provided that surplus space is available for locating its proposed facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route, including evidence of prior approval by the owner of the utility poles, and evidence that such facilities shall receive approval through the Type 1 review process pursuant to BMC 19.65.065.

(5) If an applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing public rights-of-way, information must be provided in sufficient detail to identify: 

(a) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s facilities; 

(b) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s facilities; and

(c) Evidence of ownership or a right to use such ducts or conduits.

(6) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new non-public power ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way, information must be provided in sufficient detail to identify:

(a) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

(b) The excess capacity that will exist in the applicant’s facilities; 

(c) A preliminary construction schedule and completion date;

(d) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities; 

(e) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the facilities described in the application;

(f) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities;

(g) All deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter; and

(h) An application fee, which shall be set by the city council by resolution.

(7) For a franchised utility, the professional engineering stamp requirements of subsection (3) of this section are waived, in accordance with the terms and conditions of that utility’s franchise.

(8) All right-of-way use permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across, or along any public right-of-way shall include a traffic control plan which is consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicle travel. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.050 Processing of right-of-way use permit applications.

Processing of right-of-way use permit applications includes the following seven steps:

(1) Step 1: Application Submittal. The applicant completes the top half of the permit application form and submits the application to the city of Burien permit counter for review. Submission is required no later than 30 days before the proposed use of a street, sidewalk or public right-of-way. Applications for a new private use of the public right-of-way must be submitted at least 90 days before the proposed use. Applications must comply with the requirements of BMC 12.17.090.

(2) Step 2: Initial Review. The city’s permit specialist will check the permit application and advise the applicant of any additional information needed, and the fees and other requirements necessary for the right-of-way use permit.

(3) Step 3: Fees, Deposits and Insurance. The applicant provides permit application and review fees, minimum one-hour inspection fee, performance deposit, and proof of comprehensive liability insurance certificate and cleanup deposit (when required).

(4) Step 4: Review and Approval Process. The application will be reviewed by the public works department, which is responsible for the management of street, sidewalk and public right-of-way uses. As required, the public works department shall coordinate the review of right-of-way use permit applications by other departments, including police, fire, parks and recreation, planning, and the city attorney. The review process may require that the applicant meet with city departments to provide additional information. Identification or verification of other requirements or conditions to assure public safety or public use may result from the review process. Permit approval is indicated by the signature of the director (or designee). When the regulatory, code, insurance and performance security requirements of right-of-way permits are fulfilled, denial or cancellation of a valid, existing permit may occur only when required by a city of Burien city council-authorized street improvement project, or for emergency response to a public safety hazard.

(5) Step 5: Notification to City. The applicant must notify the designated department or individual within the city 48 hours prior to the start of the permitted event or project. (The application identifies the city contact person who is to be notified.)

(6) Step 6: Permit Inspection (As Needed). Provides for the inspection of the applicant’s activities for compliance with the conditions of the permit. Prior to each required inspection, the applicant must give at least 24 hours’ notice to the city’s inspector. The city’s inspector will document all conditions for which the applicant will be charged for services, such as damage repair or cleanup. The record of inspections and charges will be maintained as a separate document, and filed with the permit application.

(7) Step 7: Permit Completion. Provides for the termination of the permit, the return of deposits, insurance certificates, performance bonds, etc., to the applicant, and the collection of any repair, cleanup or other charges due to the city. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.060 Permit fees and charges. 

The fee for each permit shall be set forth in a fee schedule to be adopted by the city council. Fees and charges adopted pursuant to this section may be increased or decreased by the city council on the director’s recommendation in accordance with changes in the costs incurred by the city. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.070 Specifications.

All work to be performed under any permit issued under this code shall conform to all other city codes, the current development standards of the public works department and all other standards used by the city in the administration of this code. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.080 Permit exception.

(1) A right-of-way use permit shall not be required of utilities or franchised utilities when responding to emergencies that require work in the right-of-way, such as water or sewer main breaks, gas leaks, downed power lines or similar emergencies; provided, that the department shall be notified by the responding utility or city contractor verbally or in writing, as soon as practicable following onset of an emergency. Nothing herein shall relieve a responding utility or city contractor from the requirement to apply for a right-of-way use permit within 48 hours after beginning emergency work in the right-of-way.

(2) The director shall determine whether permits shall be required for routine maintenance and construction work performed by city utilities and city maintenance crews. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.090 Revocation of permits.

(1) The director may revoke or suspend any permit issued under BMC 12.17.090 whenever: 

(a) The work or activity does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved, or conditions of approval, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this code or procedures, or other city ordinances or state law;

(b) The city has been denied access to investigate and inspect how the right-of-way is being used; 

(c) The permittee has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for a permit;

(d) The progress or condition of the approved work or activity indicates that it is or will be inadequate to protect the public and adjoining property or the street or utilities in the street, or any excavation or fill endangers or will endanger the public, the adjoining property or street, or utilities in the street. 

(2) Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, all use of the right-of-way shall cease, except as authorized or directed by the director. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.100 Renewal of permits. 

Each permit shall be of a duration as specified on the permit and may not be renewed. If continued use of the right-of-way is desired by the permittee after expiration of a permit, he must apply for a new permit. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.105 No transfer or assignment.

Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remains responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and responsible for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this title and under said permit. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.110 Permit cancellation charges. 

If the permittee should fail to properly notify the city of Burien as required prior to the start of the use authorized by a permit, fail to notify the city’s inspector prior to required inspections, and/or fail to fully and accurately record all required information, the permit may be cancelled. If the permit is cancelled for failure to notify, due to misuse of the permit and/or incomplete or inaccurate record-keeping, the permittee will be charged the full cost of the original permit for each such failure. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.120 Completion of construction. 

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the public and other ways and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a right-of-way permit within public and other ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance, unless a specific alternate number of days is approved by the director at the time a right-of-way permit is issued. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.130 As-built drawings. 

Except for franchised utilities, within 60 days after completion of construction, the director may require the permittee to furnish the city with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified by a licensed surveyor as accurately depicting the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities constructed pursuant to a right-of-way permit. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


12.18.140 Responsibilities of the owner.

The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the applicant or lessee, are responsible for the performance of and compliance with all the provisions of Chapter 12.17 BMC and this chapter. [Ord. 395 § 2, 2004]


Chapter 12.20 TRAIL USE

Sections:

12.20.010    Definitions.

12.20.020    Public use of trails.

12.20.030    Exceptions.

12.20.040    Conditional exemptions.

12.20.050    General conditions.

12.20.060    Violations – Penalty.


12.20.010 Definitions.

“Trails” means all public property designated as a trail including, but not limited to:

(1) The Indian Trail located in the plats of Secoma Beach subdivision Nos. 1, 2, and 3, as recorded in Volume 15, pages 70 and 94, and Volume 16, page 25, book of plats;

(2) All public accesses to, from and across the Indian Trail, including public rights-of-way from existing or future roadway to the trail and public rights-of-way from the trail to the waterfront, which are not designated as street; or

(3) Any right-of-way identified as a trail on the city of Burien trail map as adopted, or subsequently amended, by the Burien city council. [Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


12.20.020 Public use of trails.

Use of city-owned property designated as trails shall be limited to pedestrian uses only. Operating motorized vehicles or bicycles, parking, equestrian uses, and barricading or impeding pedestrian uses, is prohibited on or across trails. [Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


12.20.030  Exceptions.

The following uses and activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

(1) Utility work performed by public utilities or licensed contractors; provided, that all required permits are first obtained from the city of Burien including, but not limited to, right-of-way use permits, right-of-way construction permits, street use permits, building permits, utility use permits and/or special use permits.

(2) Actions taken in response to emergencies which threaten the public health and safety, or which pose an imminent risk of damage to property, as long as any activity taken pursuant to this subsection is reported to the department of public facilities and services. The director of public facilities and services shall confirm that an emergency exists and determine what, if any, further action shall be required to protect the health, safety, welfare and environment and to repair any damage.

(3) City approved maintenance activities. [Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


12.20.040 Conditional exemptions.

(1) The existing driveways located at or serving the following addresses on a regular and/or continuous basis shall be considered legal trail crossings and driving on them shall be permitted subject to requirements of subsections (2) through (5) of this section. The following list is exhaustive, and no additional trail crossings shall be authorized except as authorized by BMC 12.20.030:

(a) 16203 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 3, Lot 34, 763240-0405;

(b) 16331 Maplewild Ave SW, 252303-9047;

(c) 16343 Maplewild Ave SW, 252303-9039;

(d) 16733 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 72, 763120-0005;

(e) 16747 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 74, 262303-9082;

(f) 16759 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 76, 262303-9002;     16757 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 75, 763120-0035;

(g) 16901 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 79A, 763120-0060; 16903 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 79, 262303-9025; 16767 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 78, 262303-9024; 16769 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 78A, 763120-0055;

(h) 16917 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 81, 262303-9006;

(i) 16931 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 83, 262303-9006;

(j) 16947 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 1, Lot 86, 262303-9010; and

(k) 16409 Maplewild Ave SW, Secoma Beach Div. No. 3, Lot 48, 252303-9037.

(2) The driveway shall be maintained by the driveway owner(s) or user(s) at the owner’s or user’s expense, in a manner that does not adversely affect the physical integrity of the trail or the safety of trail users.

(3) The driveway shall not be modified without a building permit or right-of-way use permit, right-of-way construction permit or street use permit issued by the city of Burien.

(4) The driveway owner(s) or user(s) shall perform, at their expense, measures as may be required by the city to preserve any portion of the physical integrity of the trail and protect the safety of trail users.

(5) Upon a finding by the city council that any one or more of the requirements of this section have not been satisfied, proven by the city by a preponderance of the evidence, the authority to drive on or across trails, as set forth in this section, shall be suspended until such times as the city council determines that all of the requirements of this section have been satisfied. [Ord. 434 § 1, 2005; Ord. 158 § 1, 1995; Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


12.20.050 General conditions.

Construction or grading activity on or to a trail, or on private property abutting the trail that affects the physical integrity of the trail or the safety of trail users, is prohibited unless a building permit and/or a right-of-way use permit, right-of-way construction permit, or street use permit is first obtained. The city may deny or condition a permit based on a finding that the proposed activity will adversely affect the physical integrity of the trail or the safety of trail users. [Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


12.20.060 Violations – Penalty.

The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and subject to enforcement as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 143 § 1, 1995]


Chapter 12.25 ROAD NAMES – BUILDING ADDRESSES

Sections:

12.25.010    Road names – Building addressing – Adopted by reference.


12.25.010 Road names – Building addressing – Adopted by reference.

Chapter 16.08 KCC, as now in effect, and as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference, except that the words “county council” and the word “council” in KCC 16.08.060 shall refer to the city council. [Ord. 25 § 3, 1993]


Chapter 12.30 PARKS

(Repealed by Ord. 475)


Chapter 12.35 STREET LIGHTS

Sections:

12.35.010    Authority to bill for street light usage.

12.35.020    Lien – Authorized.

12.35.030    Lien – Priority.

12.35.040    Lien – Claims – Generally.

12.35.050    Lien – Duration – Limitation of action.

12.35.060    Lien – Foreclosure.


12.35.010 Authority to bill for street light usage. 

The city of Burien shall have the authority to bill owners of real property within the city of Burien for the operation of street lights therein; provided, however, that this authority shall not extend to areas in which property owners are billed by another municipal corporation or political subdivision, such as a water or sewer district, for the operation of street lights. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2003]


12.35.020 Lien – Authorized.

The city of Burien shall have a lien for any unpaid street light bill authorized by this chapter against the real property billed for street light usage. The lien for the unpaid balance may include the cost of filing the lien, as well as interest accruing at 12 percent per annum. [Ord. 387 § 2, 2003]


12.35.030 Lien – Priority.

A lien imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens, except for state and city taxes, with which it shall be on a parity. [Ord. 387 § 3, 2003]


12.35.040 Lien – Claims – Generally. 

(1) Filing. The city manager or his designee shall cause a claim for lien to be filed for record in the office of the records and elections division within 90 days from the date the street light bill becomes due.

(2) Contents. The claim of lien shall contain the following:

(a) The authority of the ordinance codified in this chapter for imposing the lien;

(b) A description of the property to be charged with the lien;

(c) The name of the known or reputed owner, and if not known, the fact shall be alleged; and

(d) The amount, including lawful and reasonable costs, for which the lien is claimed.

(3) Verification. The city manager or his authorized representative shall sign and verify the claim by oath to the effect that the affiant believes the claim is just.

(4) Amendment. The claim of lien may be amended in case of subsequent unpaid balances which may accrue for street light usage against the real property associated with the original lien. [Ord. 387 § 4, 2003]


12.35.050 Lien – Duration – Limitation of action.

No lien created by this chapter binds the property subject to the lien for a period longer than three years after the claim has been filed unless an action is commenced in the proper court within that time to enforce the lien. [Ord. 387 § 5, 2003]


12.35.060 Lien – Foreclosure.

The lien provided by this chapter may be foreclosed and enforced by a civil action having jurisdiction. [Ord. 387 § 6, 2003]


Chapter 12.38 STREET TREES AND TREES ON CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

12.38.010    Purpose.

12.38.020    Definitions.

12.38.030    Power and authority.

12.38.040    Tree protection, maintenance and permit requirements.

12.38.050    Tree planting on city property.

12.38.060    Violations – Penalties.

12.38.070    Appeal.

12.38.080    City maintenance responsibility list.


12.38.010 Purpose.

Trees have substantial benefits to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Burien, as well as to the environment. Additionally, the presence of trees in our community advances the economic, social and aesthetic well-being of the community by minimizing erosion, siltation and water pollution of lakes, streams and Puget Sound; providing slope stabilization and animal habitat; and reducing air pollution. Accordingly, the purpose of this chapter is to provide for the planting, maintenance and protection of trees within the city of Burien (hereafter “the city”) on city property. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “City arborist” means the person designated by the city manager, or his/her designee, to administer the provisions of this chapter.

(2) “City maintenance responsibility list” means a list identifying the right-of-way and city property on which the city maintains the street trees and other vegetation. The list shall be on file with the city clerk, and may be amended at any time by the city manager or his/her designee. 

(3) “City property” means all improved rights-of-way, unimproved rights-of-way, and all other parcels, lots, or acreages, including parks and open spaces, within the city of Burien owned by the city.

(4) “Crown” means the leaves and branches of a tree, from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top. 

(5) “Crown cleaning” means the removal of dead, dying, diseased, crowded, weakly attached, low-vigor branches and watersprouts from a tree’s crown. 

(6) “Crown raising” means the removal of the lower branches of a tree in order to provide a height of up to eight feet for pedestrian clearance, up to 16 feet for vehicular clearance or such increase deemed appropriate by the city arborist. 

(7) “Crown thinning” means the selective removal of branches not to exceed more than 25 percent of the leaf surface to increase light penetration and air movement, and to reduce weight. 

(8) “Crown topping” means the cutting of a trunk or main branch to a point where there is no branch large and vigorous enough to become a new leader. 

(9) Geologically Hazardous Area. See definition in BMC 19.10.190. 

(10) “Hazardous tree” means any tree that receives an 11 or 12 rating under the International Society of Arboricultural rating method set forth in Hazard Tree Analysis for Urban Areas. 

(11) “Improved right-of-way” means rights-of-way within the city that are paved, graded, or otherwise altered in any way for the purpose of vehicle, pedestrian, or bicycle travel. 

(12) “Other vegetation” means trees, bushes, shrubs, grasses, or other plant material on or encroaching upon improved or unimproved rights-of-way. 

(13) “Planting strip” means that portion of an improved right-of-way used for the purpose of planting and maintaining street trees and other vegetation. 

(14) “Prune” or “pruning” means the pruning of a tree through crown thinning, crown cleaning, windowing or crown raising, but not including crown topping of trees, or any practice or act that is likely to result in death of or significant damage to the tree. 

(15) “Replacement tree” means any tree that is planted in order to satisfy the tree replacement requirements of a tree permit. 

(16) “Right-of-way” means all city property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for street purposes, together with city property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for walkways, sidewalks, and bikeways, whether improved, unimproved, or unopened, including the air rights, subsurface rights and easements related thereto. 

(17) “Street tree” means any tree which is located within the improved or unimproved right-of-way in the city of Burien. 

(18) “Unimproved right-of-way” means rights-of-way that are not paved, graded, or otherwise altered for the purpose of vehicle, pedestrian, or bicycle travel. 

(19) “Windowing” means the selective removal of branches not to exceed more than 25 percent of the leaf surface while retaining the symmetry and natural form of the tree in order to increase views and light penetration. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.030 Power and authority.

(1) The city shall have the exclusive power and authority over the planting, care and removal of trees and vegetation within all city property owned by the city of Burien as necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve and enhance the quality and beauty of such areas. 

(2) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall oversee the planting, care and removal of trees on city property. The city shall maintain trees planted by the city and may remove any of the following trees located on or near city property: trees, or parts thereof, that present unsafe conditions; trees that are disruptive of utilities or public improvements; and trees infected with any significant disease or insect. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.040 Tree protection, maintenance and permit requirements.

(1) The city shall maintain all trees and other vegetation on the city maintenance responsibility list established pursuant to this chapter. No person shall prune or remove trees or other vegetation on the city property identified on the city maintenance responsibility list. 

(2) The owner of property adjacent to an improved or unimproved right-of-way not listed on the city maintenance list shall maintain street trees and other vegetation located within the maintenance area. “Maintenance area” shall mean that area of the right-of-way described as follows: the right-of-way area bounded by the property owner’s boundary line contiguous to the right-of-way extending perpendicular on either end to the centerline of the right-of-way. Maintenance area within an improved right-of-way shall include the planting strip between the sidewalk and curb and the strip between the property line and the sidewalk or, if no sidewalk exists, the strip between the property line and the shoulder of the street; provided, that it shall not include the planting area within a center median. 

(3) The owner of property adjacent to an improved or unimproved right-of-way may prune trees within the owner’s maintenance area; provided, that the best practices, policies, techniques and methods for pruning trees established by the International Society of Arboriculture are followed, including crown cleaning, crown thinning, crown raising and windowing. Crown topping is not permissible. The city shall prepare and distribute educational materials describing best practices, policies, techniques, methods and procedures for pruning trees.

(4) Public utilities shall maintain any vegetation that interferes with their utilities and may prune trees; provided, that the best practices, policies, techniques and methods for pruning trees established by the International Society of Arboriculture are followed. 

(5) No person shall perform pruning other than that permitted by this chapter or remove trees in planting strips, improved or unimproved right-of-way without an approved tree permit. A tree permit will not be issued to a private individual for the pruning or removal trees or other vegetation on city property identified on the city maintenance responsibility list, including streets, parks and open spaces. The issuance of a tree permit shall be based on the following: 

(a) The applicant demonstrates in the following order that all of the following conditions have been satisfied:

(i) The applicant establishes that the tree is located on a right-of-way;

(ii) The applicant submits a valid petition executed by at least 60 percent of the property owners located within a 300-foot radius of the subject tree(s) in favor of the proposed pruning of the tree; 

(iii) The applicant pays a fee to cover all costs associated with reviewing the pruning request; and

(iv) The pruning is performed by the city but at the sole cost and expense of the applicant. 

(b) The city arborist determines that the requested action or treatment is necessary based upon meeting one of the following criteria: 

(i) Consideration of generally accepted arboriculture standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture; 

(ii) Determination that the tree is a nuisance tree, i.e., a tree which is causing physical damage to property or has been damaged by past maintenance practices, and for which generally accepted arboriculture practices cannot correct the problem; 

(iii) Action or treatment can be performed without adversely affecting the health of the tree or adjacent tree(s); 

(iv) Action or treatment can be performed without adversely affecting geologically hazardous areas; or

(v) Determination that the existing trees and other vegetation are appropriate for the location. 

(c) A tree permit shall not be granted if the sole purpose of the proposed action is the removal of a tree for view enhancement. 

(d) When the city arborist determines that the removal of a tree is necessary in connection with a tree permit, the tree(s) shall be replanted or replaced. The cost of the removal and replacement of the tree shall be the responsibility of the permittee. Replacement trees shall meet the following guidelines: 

(i) All replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall (coniferous tree) or have a minimum two-inch caliper (deciduous tree), unless a smaller size tree or shrub is approved the by the city arborist;

(ii) The number of replacement trees shall be at the ratio of three replacement trees for every one tree removed;

(iii) In lieu of planting replacement trees, and at the sole discretion of the city arborist, the permittee may contribute to the city’s tree fund a dollar amount equal to the value of the replacement trees, including installation costs; and

(iv) The permittee may be required to maintain all replacement trees in a healthy condition for period of two years after planting. The permittee may be obligated to replant any replacement tree that dies, becomes diseased or is removed during this two-year time period.

(6) Permission to crown top healthy trees shall not be granted. Trees that are severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires, or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be topped for public safety. 

(7) The removal of trees in geologically hazardous areas is subject to the requirements contained in Chapter 19.40 BMC, Critical Areas. No cutting of trees in geologically hazardous areas is allowed between October 1st and April 1st of any calendar year unless approved by the public works director or required due to an emergency situation involving immediate danger to life and property. 

(8) In addition to the requirements of this chapter, persons must comply with all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations including, without limitation, the Endangered Species Act, the Bald Eagle Protection Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, as now existing or herein adopted or amended. [Ord. 502 § 1, 2008]


12.38.050 Tree planting on city property.

The following rules shall apply to any planting on rights-of-way and city property:

(1) New planting of trees and other vegetation on city right-of-way shall be allowed by permit only to ensure proper selection and placement of appropriate plant materials. The purpose of this requirement is to enhance aesthetic continuity and minimize right-of-way maintenance. 

(2) Planting Plan Required. A tree-planting plan drawn to scale shall accompany each permit application. Such plan shall show graphically the following: 

(a) Location and species of existing trees and vegetation;

(b) Location and species of proposed trees and vegetation;

(c) Location of property lines and right-of-way lines;

(d) Dimension of planting strip or tree well;

(e) Location and type of utility; and

(f) Location of proposed facilities (example: irrigation system).

(3) Tree planting methods shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications as developed by the city. 

(4) New trees planted in the right-of-way shall be selected from a list of recommended species approved by the city. This list will be periodically updated. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.060 Violations – Penalties.

(1) The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and subject to enforcement as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(2) Nuisance. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to have committed, or to continue to commit, a nuisance and is subject to applicable enforcement provisions contained in Chapters 1.15 and 8.45 BMC.

(3) Action under RCW 64.12.030. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein, the city may bring an action in trespass under the timber trespass statute, RCW 64.12.030, for the removal or damage to any tree or ornamental shrub on city property. Should the city obtain judgment against a person or persons under RCW 64.12.030, the city shall be entitled to treble the amount of damages claimed or assessed therefor.

(4) Additional Enforcement Procedures. The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to any other remedies in law or equity. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.070 Appeal.

Denials of tree permits may be appealed to the city of Burien hearing examiner in the same manner as a Type 1 decision and using the same process, standards of review, and time periods set forth in BMC 19.65.065. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


12.38.080 City maintenance responsibility list.

There shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk a city maintenance responsibility list for street trees and other vegetation on rights-of-way and city property. This list shall be as set forth below, but may be amended at any time by the city manager, or his/her designee:

(1) All trees and other vegetation on designated city-owned property, including all parks, open space, City Hall and the Burien Community Center.

(2) Any tree or other vegetation that the city has planted in the interest of the city.

(3) Any tree or other vegetation in a right-of-way that impedes vehicle or pedestrian traffic or obstructs the vision of vehicles or pedestrian.

(4) Trees and other vegetation along the following rights-of-way or in the following areas:

(a) SW 152nd Street from 1st Avenue South to 10th Avenue SW;

(b) 4th Avenue SW from SW 128th Street to SW 156th Street;

(c) Ambaum Boulevard SW from SW 116th Street to SW 144th Street;

(d) 13th Avenue SW from SW 144th Street to the entrance of Seahurst Park;

(e) SW 150th Street from 1st Avenue South to Ambaum Boulevard SW;

(f) The west side of 6th Avenue SW from SW 148th Street to SW 150th Street;

(g) The north side of SW 148th Street from 1st Avenue South to 2nd Avenue SW; and

(h) The Triangle Park area formed by the intersection of Ambaum Boulevard SW, 8th Avenue SW and SW 154th Street. [Ord. 402 § 1, 2003]


Chapter 12.40 UTILITY UNDERGROUNDING POLICY

Sections:

12.40.010    Undergrounding – Policy.

12.40.020    Undergrounding – Purpose.

12.40.030    Undergrounding – Scope.

12.40.040    Facilities excepted.

12.40.050    Cost.

12.40.060    Permits and fees.

12.40.070    Undergrounding requirements.

12.40.080    Service connection requirements.

12.40.090    Street lighting.

12.40.100    Connections and disconnections of affected service.

12.40.110    Site screening.

12.40.120    As-built drawings.

12.40.130    Joint trenches.

12.40.140    Request for waiver.


12.40.010 Undergrounding – Policy.

It is the policy of the city to require the underground installation of all new electrical and communication facilities, with certain exceptions noted in this chapter. The city council finds that the convenience, health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the community require that all new facilities specified in this chapter be installed underground. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.020 Undergrounding – Purpose.

The purpose of utility conversion policy is to establish minimum requirements and procedures for the underground installation and relocation of electric and communication facilities within the city. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.030 Undergrounding – Scope.

This chapter shall apply to anyone who owns electrical or communication facilities, and to all new electrical and communication systems, including but not limited to electric power, telephone, telecommunication, and cable television facilities within the corporate city limits. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.040 Facilities excepted.

(1) The following facilities are excepted from the undergrounding requirements of this chapter:

(a) Electric utility substations, pad-mounted transformers, and switching facilities not located on the public right-of-way where site screening is or will be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.25 BMC, Tree Retention and Landscaping. 

(b) Electric transmission systems of a voltage of 115 kV or more (including poles and wires) and equivalent communication facilities. 

(c) Ornamental street lighting standards, as defined by the public works director. 

(d) Telephone pedestals, cross connect terminals, repeaters, cable warning signs, and other equivalent communication facilities. 

(e) Municipal equipment, including but not limited to traffic control equipment and police and fire sirens. 

(f) Temporary services for construction. 

(g) Replacement of existing overhead facilities due to damage by natural or manmade causes. 

(h) Secondary wiring for street lighting. 

(i) Cable television cables to the extent that such cables are to be hung on existing utility poles in areas of the city where electrical facilities under 115 kV or other distribution facilities are primarily overhead. 

(2) The director shall decide if a facility qualifies for an exception. The decision is determinative and final. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.050 Cost.

(1) The cost of constructing new facilities underground or relocating existing aerial facilities underground shall be borne by the serving utilities, the owners of the real property to be served, or others in accordance with the applicable valid tariffs on file with the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission, or other rules and regulations, or the published policies of the respective utilities furnishing such service, or as may be contractually agreed upon between the utility and such owner or applicant. The cost of constructing new facilities underground or relocating existing aerial facilities underground to be borne by the serving utilities or the owners to be served shall include the cost of acquisition of private property for such construction or relocation necessitated by a city construction project.

(2) In the absence of filed tariffs, rules or regulations, published policies, or contractual agreement, the cost of constructing new facilities underground or relocating existing aerial facilities underground may be financed by a local improvement district or any other method authorized by state law. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.060 Permits and fees.

(1) Unless as otherwise provided in any existing franchise agreement, a permit for underground construction shall be obtained from the department prior to construction of facilities in the public right-of-way. 

(2) An appropriate fee shall be charged for this permit, consistent with the schedule on file with the department. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.070 Undergrounding requirements.

(1) New Facilities.

(a) New electrical or communication service to a building where no service previously existed shall be constructed underground. Does not include restorations and/or repairs.

(b) All major additions of new facilities (three or more spans and/or 500 feet or more) shall be underground. 

(c) Minor additions of new facilities may be constructed aerially where existing services are aerial. 

(2) Rebuilds, Replacements and Additions.

(a) A relocation necessitated by a public works project, including, but not limited to, road realignment or widening, sewer and water main projects, a major rebuild or replacement of existing aerial facilities (three or more spans and/or 500 feet or more) shall be underground, and a permit from the department shall be required; except undergrounding shall not be required in those cases where the director finds that undergrounding will not be in the best interest of the public. 

(b) A minor rebuild, replacement or relocation of existing aerial facilities that does not alter the essential system configuration may be constructed aerially. 

(c) When there is casualty damage to an overhead service system or other major service outage, the facilities may be restored aerially. 

(d) Installation of additional conductors to provide one three-phase circuit is allowed on existing aerial facilities. 

(e) Reconductoring for routine maintenance that does not constitute a major rebuild is allowed on existing aerial facilities. Routine maintenance is also allowed on existing facilities for pole replacements and replacement of miscellaneous hardware. 

(f) No work permitted by this subsection shall result in an increase in the number of utility poles, except an additional pole may be installed if an existing pole that is suitable as a termination for underground installation is not available within 300 feet of the closest property line of the development site. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.080 Service connection requirements.

(1) Single-Family Residential Areas. All electrical or communication service lines from either existing overhead or underground facilities to the service connection of new structures shall be installed underground.

(2) Non-Single-Family Residential Areas. All new electrical or communication service lines from either existing overhead or underground facilities to the service connection of new and existing structures shall be installed underground. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.090 Street lighting.

 Street lighting facilities or systems, conforming to the city public works department standards in effect, shall be installed as an integral part of all underground projects constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.100 Connections and disconnections of affected service.

 The owner of real property abutting an underground project shall be responsible, at his or her expense, for converting to underground service and disconnecting his or her aerial services within 30 days following notice in writing of availability of such underground service. Time in consummating such connection and disconnection is of the essence, and such notice to the property owner, customer or subscriber may be mailed, postage prepaid, or delivered in person. In the event that such conversion and disconnection is not accomplished within 30 days of receipt of notice, the city may order the work done and the actual cost shall constitute a lien against the real property, subject to enforcement as provided by law. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.110 Site screening.

 Where a permit for the underground project is required by this chapter, plans for all above-ground facilities shall be submitted to the department of community development for approval of site screening and setbacks, prior to issuance of a permit by the public works department. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.120 As-built drawings.

 A drawing of a completed underground project in a form acceptable to the department and conforming to generally accepted engineering practices shall be submitted in duplicate to the public works department within 30 days of the completion of any underground project within the city. No bond money, deposit or fee shall be released to the developer until the department receives the drawings. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.130 Joint trenches.

 Where several utilities are planned or required in the same corridor, every effort shall be made by the utilities to use joint trenches for such facilities. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


12.40.140 Request for waiver.

(1) All applications for waivers from the foregoing underground requirements shall be first filed with the director.

(2) A waiver shall not be granted by the director unless the director finds that the utility owner or user or other affected parties can demonstrate that it would be an undue hardship to place the facilities concerned underground. For purposes of this chapter, undue hardship is intended to mean: 

(a) A technological or environmental difficulty associated with the particular facility or with the particular real property involved that would render the installation unfeasible; or

(b) The cost of the underground construction outweighs the general welfare consideration in requiring underground construction. 

(3) The director may grant a deferral of the requirement for undergrounding if the current underground construction would not be in the best interests and welfare of the public. A deferral is predicated upon the applicant’s willingness to sign a no-protest LID agreement for future installation. The director’s decision is determinative and final. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2004]


Chapter 12.45 COMPLETE STREETS

Sections:

12.45.010    Complete streets – Policy.

12.45.020    Exceptions.


12.45.010 Complete streets – Policy.

The city of Burien will plan for, design and construct all new transportation projects to provide reasonable and appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and persons of all abilities. All public street projects or public street reconstruction projects in the city shall be in conformity with the city’s transportation master plan. [Ord. 556 § 1, 2011]


12.45.020 Exceptions.

Facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and/or persons of all abilities are not required to be provided:

(1) Where their establishment would be contrary to public safety;

(2) When the cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable future use;

(3) Where there is no identified need as established in city plans and future travel demand models;

(4) Where the establishment would be inconsistent with the transportation master plan and comprehensive plan; or

(5) Where their inclusion in a small project would create a very short section of improvements with problematic transitions on either end or that are unlikely to be followed by similar improvements at either end resulting in little progress on implementing complete streets networks as set forth in the transportation master plan. [Ord. 556 § 1, 2011]


Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS1 Revised 1/20

Chapters: 

13.05    Sewage Disposal Systems Code

13.10    Surface Water Management Revised 1/201

Copies of all state and county codes adopted by reference in this title are available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 


Chapter 13.05 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS CODE

Sections:

13.05.010    Short title.

13.05.020    County sewage code adopted.

13.05.030    Amendment adoption.

13.05.040    Disposal systems maintenance.

13.05.050    Administration and enforcement.


13.05.010 Short title.

This chapter is known as and may be referred to as the “sewage disposal systems code.” [Ord. 14 § 59, 1993]


13.05.020 County sewage code adopted.

Title 13 (board of health sewage regulations) of the Code of the King County Board of Health, as presently constituted and as may be subsequently amended, is adopted and shall be applicable within the city, as amended, added to, and excepted in this chapter. [Ord. 14 § 60, 1993]


13.05.030 Amendment adoption.

The following amendments, additions, and exceptions to the board of health sewage regulations, as adopted by this chapter, are amended, added to, or excepted as adopted and shall be applicable within the city. [Ord. 14 § 61, 1993]


13.05.040 Disposal systems maintenance.

Sewage disposal systems shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter and no sewage disposal system shall be used which directly or indirectly discharges upon the surface of the ground or into any waters within the city unless the contents of such system have been subjected to approved purification and bactericidal treatment. [Ord. 14 § 62, 1993]


13.05.050 Administration and enforcement.

The codes, standards, rules, and regulations adopted by this chapter shall be administered by the Seattle/King County department of public health. [Ord. 14 § 63, 1993]


Chapter 13.10 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT Revised 1/20

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

13.10.010    Definitions.

13.10.020    Surface water manuals adopted and amended.

13.10.030    Administration.

13.10.040    Administrative standards and procedures.

13.10.050    Enforcement.

13.10.060    Liberal construction.

13.10.080    Conflicting provisions.

13.10.090    Severability.

Article II. Surface Water Runoff

13.10.110    Scope.

13.10.120    Purposes.

13.10.130    Drainage review – When required – Type.

13.10.140    Drainage review – Requirements.

13.10.150    Critical drainage and/or erosion areas.

13.10.160    Engineering plans for the purposes of drainage review.

13.10.170    Construction timing and final approval.

13.10.175    Vesting period for lots in final short plats.

13.10.180    Liability insurance required.

13.10.190    Financial guarantees authorized.

13.10.200    Drainage facilities accepted by the city for maintenance.

13.10.210    Drainage facilities not accepted by the city for maintenance.

13.10.220    Hazards.

13.10.230    Surface water contamination.

13.10.240    Illicit discharges and connections.

13.10.250    Best management practices.

13.10.260    Water quality standards.

13.10.270    Operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities.

13.10.280    Stormwater connection fee.

Article III. Surface Water Management Program

13.10.310    Authority.

13.10.320    Purpose.

13.10.330    Applicability.

13.10.340    Policy.

13.10.350    Rate structure. Revised 1/20

13.10.360    Rate adjustments and appeals. Revised 1/20

13.10.370    Billing procedure.

13.10.380    Delinquencies and foreclosures.

13.10.390    Surface water management fund.

13.10.400    Additional use of revenues.

Article IV. Inspection and Enforcement

13.10.500    Inspection and sampling.

13.10.510    Enforcement – Violations.

13.10.520    Enforcement – Civil penalties.

Article I. General Provisions


13.10.010 Definitions.

The definitions in this section shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

“Adjustment” means a department approved variation in the application of the requirements of BMC 13.10.140 and the Surface Water Design Manual to a particular project in accordance with BMC 13.10.140(3). “Adjustment” replaces “variance,” which was used in prior editions of the Surface Water Design Manual.

“AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. See also the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010 and 90.48.520.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement under RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.

“Basin” means a geographic area that contains and drains to a stream or river named and noted on common maps, such as Miller Creek, Salmon Creek, or Walker Creek, or a geographic area that drains to a non-flowing water body named and noted on common maps, such as Lake Burien or Puget Sound.

“Basin plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and land use management adopted by ordinance for managing surface water and stormwater within the basin.

“Best management practice” or “BMP” means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedure, or structural and/or managerial practice approved by the city that, when used singly or in combination, prevents or reduces the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to surface water, stormwater and groundwater.

“City” means the city of Burien.

“Clean Water Act” means 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended.

“Clearing” means the topping, cutting, killing, grubbing, or removing of vegetation or other organic material by physical, mechanical, chemical or any other similar means.

“Closed depression” means an area greater than 5,000 square feet at the overflow elevation that is low-lying and that has no or such a limited surface water outlet that the area acts as a stormwater retention facility.

“Construct or modify” means to install a new drainage pipe or ditch or make improvements to an existing drainage pipe or ditch, for purposes other than maintenance, that either serves to concentrate previously unconcentrated surface water or stormwater runoff or serves to increase, decrease or redirect the conveyance of surface water or stormwater runoff. “Construct or modify” does not include installation or maintenance of a driveway culvert installed as part of a single-family residential building permit.

“Construction stormwater pollution prevention BMP” means a control or measure that prevents or reduces the discharge of pollutants and sediments resulting from construction activities.

“Conveyance system” means the drainage facilities and features, both natural and constructed, that provide for the collection and transport of surface water or stormwater runoff. The natural elements of the “conveyance system” include swales and small drainage courses, streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. The constructed elements of the conveyance system include gutters, ditches, pipes, catch basins, channels and most flow control and water quality facilities.

“Department” means the department of public works.

“Developed parcel” means any parcel altered from the natural state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious surfaces.

“Development” means any activity that requires a permit or approval, including, but not limited to, a building permit, grading permit, shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, special use permit, zoning variance or reclassification, subdivision, short subdivision, urban planned development, binding site plan, site development permit or right-of-way use permit. “Development” does not include forest management activities.

“Directed drainage review” means the drainage review for a proposed single-family residential project or agricultural project that is not subject to simplified or large project drainage review.

“Director” means the director of public works, or any duly authorized representative of the director.

“Discharge” means to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, or pour forth any matter or to cause or allow matter to flow, run or seep from land or be thrown, drained, released, dumped, spilled, emptied, emitted or poured into water.

“Drainage” means the collection, conveyance, containment or discharge, or any combination thereof, of stormwater runoff or surface water.

“Drainage facility” means a constructed or engineered feature that collects, conveys, stores, treats or otherwise manages stormwater runoff or surface water. “Drainage facility” includes, but is not limited to, a constructed or engineered stream, lake, wetland or closed depression, pipe, channel, ditch, gutter, flow control facility, flow control BMP, water quality facility, erosion and sediment control facility and any other structure and appurtenance that provides for drainage.

“Drainage review” means an evaluation by city staff of a proposed project’s compliance with the drainage requirements in the Surface Water Design Manual and with all other applicable drainage requirements. The types of drainage review include: simplified drainage review, targeted drainage review, directed drainage review, full drainage review, and large project drainage review.

“Erosion and sediment control” means any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation, and ensure that sediment laden water does not leave the site or enter into wetlands or aquatic areas.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to do one or more of the following: ensure timely and proper completion of improvements; ensure compliance with the Burien Municipal Code; or provide secured warranty of materials, workmanship of improvements and design. “Financial guarantees” include assignments of funds, cash deposit, surety bonds or other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. “Performance guarantee,” “maintenance guarantee” and “defect guarantee” are considered subcategories of “financial guarantee.”

“Flow control BMP” means a small scale drainage facility or feature that is part of a development site strategy to use processes such as infiltration, dispersion, storage, evaporation, transpiration, forest retention and reduced impervious surface footprint to mimic pre-development hydrology and minimize stormwater runoff. “Flow control BMPs” include the methods and designs specified in the Surface Water Design Manual.

“Flow control facility” means a drainage facility designed in accordance with the drainage requirements in this chapter to mitigate the impacts of increased stormwater runoff generated by site development. A “flow control facility” is designed either to hold water for a considerable length of time and then release it by evaporation, plant transpiration or infiltration into the ground, or to hold runoff for a short period of time and then release it to the conveyance system.

“Full drainage review” means the evaluation required by this chapter for any proposed project, unless the project is subject to simplified drainage review, directed drainage review, targeted drainage review or large project drainage review, that:

(a) Would result in 2,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface, replaced impervious surface or new plus replaced impervious surface; or

(b) Would result in 7,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity.

“Groundwater” means all water found in the soil and stratum beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any surface water.

“High-use site” means the area of a commercial, industrial or road intersection site that generates a higher-than-average number of vehicle turnovers or has other characteristics that generate the potential for chronic oil accumulation. “High-use site” includes:

(a) The area of a commercial or industrial site subject to:

(i) An expected daily traffic count greater than 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of gross building area;

(ii) Petroleum storage or transfer in excess of 1,500 gallons per year, not including routine heating oil storage or transfer at the end-user delivery; or

(iii) Use, storage or maintenance of a fleet of 25 or more diesel or jet fuel vehicles, each weighing over ten tons; or

(b) A road intersection with average daily traffic counts of 25,000 vehicles or more on the main roadway and 15,000 or more vehicles on any intersecting roadway, excluding pedestrian or bicycle use improvement projects.

“Historic site conditions” means those that existed on the site prior to any development in the Puget Sound region. For lands not currently submerged (i.e., outside the ordinary high water mark of a lake, wetland, or stream), historic site conditions shall be assumed to be forest cover unless reasonable, historic, site-specific information is provided to demonstrate a different vegetation cover.

“Hydraulically connected” means connected through surface flow or water features such as wetlands or lakes.

“Illicit connection” means any manmade conveyance that is connected to a municipal separate storm sewer without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar types of connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the municipal separate storm sewer system.

“Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city’s storm drain system, except as expressly allowed by this chapter.

“Impervious surface” means a hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions before development or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, areas that are paved, graveled or made of packed or oiled earthen materials, or other surfaces that similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water and stormwater. For purposes of applying the impervious surface thresholds in this chapter, permeable pavement, vegetated roofs and underdrained pervious surfaces are considered “impervious surface,” while an open uncovered flow control or water quality facility is not.

“Improvement” means a permanent, human-made, physical change to land or real property including, but not limited to, buildings, streets, driveways, sidewalks, crosswalks, parking lots, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, drainage facilities and landscaping.

“Lake management plan” means a plan describing the lake management recommendations and requirements adopted by public rule for managing water quality within individual lake basins.

“Land disturbing activity” means an activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover, both vegetative and nonvegetative, or to the existing soil topography. “Land disturbing activity” includes, but is not limited to, demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling, excavation and compaction. “Land disturbing activity” does not include tilling conducted as part of agricultural practices, landscape maintenance or gardening.

“Land use code” means restrictions on the type of development for a specific parcel of land as identified by records maintained by the King County department of assessments as modified or supplemented by information resulting from investigation by the division. Land use codes are preliminary indicators of the extent of impervious surface and are used in the initial analysis to assign an appropriate rate category for a specific parcel.

“Large project drainage review” means the evaluation required by this chapter for any proposed project that:

(a) Would, at full buildout of the extent of project site, result in 50 acres or more of new impervious surface within a drainage subbasin or a number of subbasins hydraulically connected across subbasin boundaries; or

(b) Has a project site of 50 acres or more within a critical aquifer recharge area, as defined in BMC Title 19.

“Licensed civil engineer” means a person registered with the state of Washington as a professional engineer in civil engineering.

“Maintenance” means those usual activities taken to prevent a decline, lapse, or cessation in the use of currently serviceable structures, facilities (including without limitation drainage facilities), equipment, or systems, if there is no expansion of the structure, facilities, equipment, or system and there are no significant hydrologic impacts. “Maintenance” includes the repair or replacement of nonfunctional facilities or the replacement of existing structures with different types of structures, if the repair or replacement is required by one or more environmental permits or to meet current engineering standards, and the functioning characteristics of the original facility or structure are not changed.

“Master drainage plan” means a comprehensive drainage control plan required for projects subject to large project drainage review and intended to prevent significant adverse impacts to constructed drainage system, surface water and groundwater, both on site and off site.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” or “NPDES” means the national program for controlling pollutants from point source discharges directly into waters of the United States under the Clean Water Act.

“Native vegetated surface” means a surface in which the soil conditions, ground cover and species of vegetation are like those of the original native condition for the site, as more specifically set forth in the Surface Water Design Manual.

“Natural discharge location” means the location where runoff leaves the project site under existing site conditions as defined in the Surface Water Design Manual.

“New impervious surface” means the creation of impervious surface or the addition of a more compacted surface such as the paving of existing dirt or gravel.

“New pervious surface” means the conversion of a native vegetated surface or other native surface to a nonnative pervious surface, including, but not limited to, pasture land, grassland, cultivated land, lawn, landscaping or bare soil, or any alteration of existing nonnative pervious surface that results in increased stormwater runoff as defined in the Surface Water Design Manual.

“Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

“Open space” means any parcel, property or portion thereof classified for current use taxation under, or for which the development rights have been sold to, the city of Burien or King County. This definition includes lands which have been classified as open space, agricultural or timber lands under criteria contained in the appropriate city or county code, or Chapter 84.34 RCW.

“Parcel” means the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, the boundaries and surface area of which is documented for property tax purposes and given a tax lot number by the King County assessor.

“Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, corporation or governmental agency.

“Pollution-generating impervious surface” means an impervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in stormwater runoff. “Pollution-generating impervious surface” includes those surfaces subject to vehicular use, industrial activities, or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals, and that receive direct rainfall or the run-on or blow-in of rainfall. A covered parking area would be included if runoff from uphill could regularly run through it or if rainfall could regularly blow in and wet the pavement surface. Metal roofs are also considered pollution-generating impervious surface unless they are treated to prevent leaching. A roof with a vent that emits significant amounts of dusts, mists, or fumes from indoor manufacturing, industrial, or commercial activities is included. A vegetated roof that loses soil or is exposed to pesticides or fertilizers is also included.

“Pollution-generating pervious surface” means a nonimpervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in stormwater runoff. “Pollution-generating pervious surfaces” include surfaces subject to vehicular use, industrial activities, storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals, and that receive direct rainfall or the run-on or blow-in of rainfall; or surfaces subject to the use of pesticides and fertilizers. “Pollution-generating pervious surface” includes, but is not limited to, the lawn and landscaped areas of a residential site, commercial site, industrial site or land use, golf course, park sports field, and standard grassed modular grid pavement.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

“Program” means the surface water management program as set forth in this chapter.

“Project” means any proposed action to alter or develop a site that may also require drainage review.

“Project site” means the portion of a site and any off-site areas subject to proposed project activities, alterations and improvements, including those required by this chapter.

“Rate category” means the classification in this chapter given to a parcel in the service area based upon the type of land use on the parcel and the percentage of impervious surface area contained on the parcel.

“Redevelopment project” means a project that proposes to add, replace or modify impervious surface for purposes other than a residential subdivision or maintenance on a site that:

(a) Is already substantially developed in a manner that is consistent with its current zoning or with a legal nonconforming use; or

(b) Has an existing impervious surface coverage of 35 percent or more.

“Replaced impervious surface” means an existing impervious surface proposed to be removed and reestablished as impervious surface, excluding impervious surface removed for the sole purpose of installing utilities or performing maintenance. For structures, “removed” includes the removal of buildings down to the foundation. For other impervious surfaces, “removed” means the removal down to base course or bare soil. For purposes of this definition, “base course” means the layer of crushed rock that typically underlies an asphalt or concrete pavement.

“Residence” means a building or structure or portion thereof, designed for and used to provide a place of abode for human beings. The term “residence” includes the term “residential” or “residential unit” as referring to the type of or intended use of a building or structure.

“Residential parcel” means any parcel which contains no more than three residences or three residential units which are within a single structure and is used primarily for residential purposes.

“Runoff” means that portion of water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that flows over the surface or just below the surface from where it fell and is found in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands and shallow groundwater as well as on ground surfaces. For the purpose of this definition, “groundwater” means all waters that exist beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake or reservoir, or other body of surface water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such water stands or flows, percolates or otherwise moves.

“Salmon conservation plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, land use management adopted by ordinance, capital projects, public education activities and enforcement programs for conservation and recovery of salmon within a water resource inventory area designated by the state under WAC 173-500-040.

“Service area” means the incorporated areas of the city of Burien.

“Shared facility” means a drainage facility designed to meet one or more of the requirements of BMC 13.10.140 for two or more separate projects contained within a basin. Shared facilities usually include shared financial commitments for those drainage facilities.

“Simplified drainage review” means the drainage review for a proposed standalone-clearing project or single-family residential project that:

(a) Would result in impervious and new pervious surface insufficient to require a flow control or water quality facility as specified in the Surface Water Design Manual; and

(b) Meets the simplified drainage requirements and BMPs specified in the Surface Water Design Manual, including flow control BMPs, construction stormwater pollution prevention BMPs, and drainage plan submittal requirements.

“Single-family residential project” means any project that (a) constructs or modifies a single-family dwelling unit, (b) makes improvements (e.g., driveways, roads, outbuildings, play courts, etc.) or clears native vegetation on a lot that contains or will contain a single-family dwelling unit, or (c) is a plat, short plat, or boundary line adjustment that creates or adjusts lots that will contain single-family dwelling units.

“Site” means a single parcel, or either two or more contiguous parcels that are under common ownership or documented legal control or a portion of single parcel under documented legal control separate from the remaining parcel, used as a single parcel for a proposed project for purposes of applying for authority from the city to carry out a proposed project. For projects located primarily within dedicated rights-of-way, “site” includes the entire width of right-of-way subject to improvements proposed by the project.

“Stormwater” means the water produced during precipitation or snowmelt, which runs off, soaks into the ground or is dissipated into the atmosphere. Stormwater that runs off or soaks into the ground ultimately becomes surface water or groundwater.

“Stormwater compliance plan” means a plan or study and all regulations and procedures that have been adopted by the city or King County to implement the plan or study, including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and enforcement programs for managing stormwater quantity and quality discharged from the city’s municipal separate storm sewer system in compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program under the Clean Water Act.

“Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual” means the manual, and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual, describing best management practices and procedures for existing facilities and existing and new activities not covered by the Surface Water Design Manual.

“Stormwater pollution prevention plan” means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a premises and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.

“Stormwater runoff” means stormwater that flows over, or just below, the surface where it fell or melted. “Stormwater runoff” contributes to and becomes surface water or groundwater.

“Subbasin” means a geographic area that:

(a) Drains to a stream or water body named and noted on common maps; and

(b) Is contained within the basin of the stream or water body.

“Surface and stormwater management services” means the services provided by the department, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations and facility design and construction.

“Surface and stormwater management system” means constructed drainage facilities and any natural surface water drainage features that do any combination of collection, storing, controlling, treating or conveying surface and stormwater.

“Surface water” means the water that exists on land surfaces before, during, and after stormwater runoff occurs and includes, but is not limited to, the water found on ground surfaces and in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands, and shallow groundwater.

“Surface Water Design Manual” means the manual, and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual, describing surface and stormwater design and analysis requirements, procedures and guidance. The “Surface Water Design Manual” is formally adopted by reference in this chapter.

“Targeted drainage review” means an abbreviated evaluation required by this chapter for certain types of proposed projects that are not subject to full or large project drainage review. Targeted drainage review may be required for some projects in simplified drainage review.

“Undeveloped parcel” means any parcel which has not been altered from its natural state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious surface.

“Water quality facility” and “water quality treatment facility” means a drainage facility designed in accordance with the drainage requirements in this chapter to mitigate the impacts of increased pollutants in stormwater runoff. A “water quality treatment facility” uses processes that include but are not limited to settling, filtration, adsorption and absorption to decrease pollutant concentrations and loadings in stormwater runoff. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.020 Surface water manuals adopted and amended.

The 2016 King County Surface Water Design Manual (“KCSWDM”) and the 2016 King County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual (“KCSPPM”) are hereby adopted by reference as, respectively, the City of Burien Surface Water Design Manual (“SWDM”) and the City of Burien Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual (“SPPM”), with the following modifications:

(1) Chapter 1, Paragraph 1.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

1.1.1 WHEN IS DRAINAGE REVIEW REQUIRED?

All development, redevelopment or new impervious surface regardless of size, scope and nature that is subject to a City of Burien permit or approval shall be subject to, at a minimum, a simplified drainage review by the City in accordance with the provisions of this manual. Clearing of 7,000 square feet or greater of land with no other construction activity shall be subject to a simplified drainage review. Targeted, full, directed or large project drainage review may be required based on specific project and site characteristics as described in Section 1.1.2.

(2) If any provisions of the SWDM or the SPPM as adopted conflict with any provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter will control. Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references to “King County” or “county” in the SWDM and the SPPM shall mean and refer to the city of Burien; references to the King County department of development and environmental services or its acronym “DDES” shall mean and refer to the city of Burien department of public works and those agencies contracting with the city of Burien to enforce this chapter; references to the water and land resources division of the King County department of natural resources or its acronym “WLR” shall mean and refer to the city of Burien department of public works; references to the King County department of natural resources and parks or its acronym (“DNRP”) shall mean and refer to the city of Burien department of public works; all references to Chapter 9.04 and to Chapter 9.12 KCC or any specific sections thereof shall mean and refer to this chapter and the equivalent sections thereof.

(3) Terms and standards that are defined in the SWDM and SPPM by reference to KCC Title 21A shall mean and refer to those terms and standards as defined in BMC Title 19; provided, that when such terms have no defined meaning in BMC Title 19, the city adopts and incorporates by reference as part of this chapter the definitions set forth in applicable administrative rules or regulations adopted by the public works director or as otherwise determined by the public works director.

(4) All references in the SWDM to the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual shall mean and refer to the SPPM as adopted by the city of Burien pursuant to this chapter.

(5) All references in the SPPM to the SWDM shall mean and refer to the SWDM as adopted by the city of Burien pursuant to this chapter.

(6) The definition of “critical drainage area” in Chapter 1 of the SWDM is amended by striking “by administrative rule under the procedures specified in Chapter 2.98 KCC.”

(7) The reference in Section 1.1.2.4 of the SWDM to “urban planned development” shall mean and refer to the equivalent such designation under the city of Burien comprehensive plan as determined by the city of Burien community development director.

(8) The note following the third sentence of Section 1.1.3 of the SWDM is stricken.

(9) The last paragraph of Section 1.1.4 beginning with “Additional mitigation” is stricken.

(10) The reference in Section 1.2.2 at paragraph 2 of the SWDM to KCC 21A.24.110 shall mean and refer to the applicable provision of BMC Title 19.

(11) All references to “critical area review” and to “critical area report” in the SWDM and the SPPM shall mean and refer to “critical area review” and “critical area study,” respectively, pursuant to BMC Title 19.

(12) References in the SWDM and SPPM to Chapter 16.82 KCC shall mean and refer to the clearing and grading provisions of the Burien Municipal Code.

(13) Subsection F of Section 1.2.4.3 of the SWDM is omitted.

(14) The reference in Section 1.2.7 to King County Ordinance 12020 shall mean and refer to the financial guarantee requirements of the applicable provisions of the Burien Municipal Code.

(15) The first paragraph of Section 1.4.4 of the SWDM is stricken and replaced with the following:

All variances (“Adjustments”) from Chapter 13.10 BMC, the SWDM and the SPPM shall be governed by the procedures, standards and requirements set forth at BMC 19.65.085, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Consistent with these requirements, the general steps of the variance review process for specific types of adjustments are presented as follows:

(16) The reference in Section 1.4.5 of the SWDM to Chapter 20.20 KCC shall mean and refer to BMC 19.65.085.

(17) References to offices of King County shall mean and refer to the equivalent offices of the city of Burien.

(18) Except when the context indicates otherwise, references in the SWDM and the SPPM to specific codes or sections of codes of King County, such as the King County critical areas code, shoreline management code, clearing and grading code, and road standards, shall mean and refer to the equivalent codes or sections of codes of the city of Burien. 

(19) References to plants selected for bioretention facilities shall mean and refer to the city’s bioretention plant list, Appendix A of the 2016 Road Design and Construction Standards. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.030 Administration.

(1) Administration.

(a) The director is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Adopted administrative rules will be made available to the public from the department. This includes, but is not limited to, the SWDM and the SPPM.

(b) The director is authorized to develop procedures for applying adopted rules and regulations during the review of permit applications for the development of land. These procedures may also be contained in the SWDM and the SPPM.

(2) Inspections. The director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, monitor for proper function of drainage facilities, monitor for proper implementation of BMPs, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are present or operating on a subject property or portion thereof, the director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter; provided, that if such premises or portion thereof is occupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and demand entry.

(4) Access. Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to the director to inspect, monitor or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter. The director shall notify the responsible party in writing of failure to comply with this access requirement. If the director does not receive a response from the responsible party within seven days of receipt of the written notification, the director may order the work required completed or otherwise address the cause of improper access. The obligation for the payment of all costs that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing such work to be done shall thereby be imposed on the person holding title to the subject property. Unless entry is consented to by the owner or other person in control of any building, structure, property or portion thereof, or conditions are believed to exist which create a threat of immediate and substantial harm, the director, before entry, shall obtain a warrant as authorized by the laws of the state of Washington. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.040 Administrative standards and procedures.

The director may develop administrative standards and procedures relating to the implementation of this chapter. This includes but is not limited to:

(1) Procedures for the imposition and collection of service charges, connection fees, and/or for filing of liens and initiation of foreclosure on delinquent accounts and the collection of the debt service portion of the service charge;

(2) Lake management plans for Lake Burien;

(3) Standards and procedures for granting discounts to the surface water management fee;

(4) Procedures for a grant program to help citizens in reducing the impact of excess storm and surface water runoff by removing impervious surface from their property. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.050 Enforcement.

The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter. 

The director shall gain compliance with this chapter by requiring the implementation of BMPs and, when necessary, AKART. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.060 Liberal construction.

This chapter is exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.080 Conflicting provisions.

Any documents and/or manuals formally adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter which implement the policies promulgated in this chapter are governed by the Burien Municipal Code. Any inconsistencies identified will be controlled by the Burien Municipal Code. If any provisions of any other chapter of the Burien Municipal Code conflict with this chapter, that which provides more environmental protection shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.090 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person, property, or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application of the provisions to other persons, property, or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]

Article II. Surface Water Runoff


13.10.110 Scope.

Compliance with the standards in this chapter, the SWDM, and the SPPM does not necessarily mitigate all probable and significant environmental impacts to aquatic biota. Fishery resources and other living components of aquatic systems are affected by a complex set of factors. While employing a specific flow control standard may prevent stream channel erosion or instability, other factors affecting fish and other biotic resources (such as increases in stream flow velocities) are not directly addressed by the SWDM and the SPPM. Thus, compliance with these manuals should not be construed as mitigating all probable and significant surface water impacts, and additional mitigation may be required to protect aquatic biota in streams and wetlands. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.120 Purposes.

The city council finds this article is necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the comprehensive management of stormwater and surface waters and erosion control, especially that which preserves and utilizes the many values of the city’s natural drainage system including open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education and urban separation. The city council also finds that the city shall conduct programs to reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation; prevent and mitigate habitat loss; enhance groundwater recharge; and prevent water quality degradation by providing minimum requirements for reducing and controlling the discharge of contaminants and through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review, construction inspection, enforcement, and maintenance in order to promote the effectiveness of the requirements contained in this chapter. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.130 Drainage review – When required – Type.

(1) All development and land disturbing activity, including all redevelopment or new impervious surface regardless of size, scope and nature, that is subject to a city of Burien permit or approval, shall be subject to, at a minimum, a simplified drainage review. Clearing of 7,000 square feet or greater of land with no other construction activity shall be subject to a simplified drainage review regardless of the need to obtain another city of Burien permit or approval. Targeted, full, directed, or large project drainage review shall be required based on specific project and site characteristics as described in the SWDM.

(2) The drainage review for any proposed project shall be scaled to the scope of the project’s size, type of development, and potential for stormwater impacts to surface water and groundwater to facilitate the preparation and review of project applications. If drainage review for a proposed project is required under subsection (1) of this section, the department shall determine which of the following drainage reviews apply as specified in the SWDM:

(a) Simplified drainage review; 

(b) Targeted drainage review;

(c) Directed drainage review;

(d) Full drainage review; or

(e) Large project drainage review.

(3) Exceptions. Development, including redevelopment, in the airport industrial zone that is complying with the NERA Master Drainage Plan (NERA MDP) shall be subject to a modified small project drainage review, prepared in accordance with Appendix I of the NERA MDP. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.140 Drainage review – Requirements.

(1) Every application for a permit or approval that is subject to drainage review must meet each of the core requirements set forth in the SWDM for the type of drainage review that is required.

(2) The SWDM defines three flow control levels for impact mitigation. The city applies the Level 2 standard as the default standard within the entire city. The city may require Level 3 flow control for specific areas in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1.2.3 of the SWDM. The flow control levels may be reduced or waived for specific areas (e.g., Salmon Creek Basin) where a plan or study approved by the Department of Ecology shows that a lower standard (e.g., Level 1 flow control) is sufficient or no facility is necessary. Level 1 and Level 3 flow control levels designated by King County pursuant to the King County Basin Plan, and approved by the Department of Ecology, that apply to specific areas that have been, after such designation, annexed to the city, shall apply to those specific areas until such time as the city, by and through the public works director, adopts a different flow control level.

(3) A proposed project required to have drainage review shall meet the special requirements that apply to the site and that are described in detail in the SWDM. The department shall verify if a proposed project is subject to and must meet any of the special requirements set forth in the SWDM.

(4)(a) An adjustment to the requirements contained in this section or other requirements in the SWDM may be proposed. The resulting development shall be subject to all of the remaining terms and conditions of this chapter and the adjustment shall:

(i) Produce a compensating or comparable result in the public interest; and

(ii) Meet this chapter’s objectives of safety, function, appearance, environmental protection and maintainability based upon sound engineering judgment.

(b) If complying with subsection (4)(a)(i) of this section will deny all reasonable use of a property, the best practicable alternative shall be obtained as determined by the director according to the adjustment process defined in the SWDM.

(c) Requests for adjustments that may conflict with the requirements of any other city department shall require review and concurrence with that department. The director shall coordinate to resolve conflicts between adjustments to the SWDM and requirements of other departments.

(d) A request for an adjustment is a Type 1 decision and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures specified in BMC 19.65.085 and the SWDM.

(e) The city may require monitoring of experimental designs and technology or untested applications proposed by the applicant in order to determine compliance with subsection (4)(a) of this section and the approved plans and conditions.

(f) The applicant may appeal an adjustment decision to the hearing examiner by following the appeal procedures as specified in Chapter 2.20 BMC and the SWDM. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.150 Critical drainage and/or erosion areas.

Development in areas where the department has determined that the existing flooding, drainage and/or erosion conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of the surrounding community shall meet special drainage requirements set by the director until such time as the community hazard is alleviated. Such conditions may include the limitation of the volume of discharge from the subject property to predevelopment levels, preservation of wetlands or other natural drainage features or other controls necessary to protect against community hazard. Where alternate facility designs or methods will produce a compensating or comparable result in the public interest and which will meet this section’s objectives of safety, function, appearance, environmental protection and maintainability, based upon sound engineering judgment, an adjustment to the special drainage requirements promulgated under this section may be proposed; provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to all of the remaining terms and conditions of this chapter. Where application of this section will deny all reasonable use of a property and a facility or design that produces a compensating or comparable result cannot be obtained, then a best practicable alternative may be obtained, to be determined by the director according to the adjustment process defined in the SWDM. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.160 Engineering plans for the purposes of drainage review.

(1) All engineering plans shall be submitted to the department for review in accordance with the SWDM, including those drainage plans developed by the city for surface water or stormwater capital improvement, repair, maintenance, or restoration projects or other linear government agency projects, such as roadways, railways, pipelines, utility lines, and trails.

(2) All master drainage plans, if required, shall be submitted to the department for drainage review in accordance with the specifications in the SWDM. The master drainage plan process should commence at the same time as the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) process.

(3) The expiration time frames as specified in the SWDM shall apply to all permit and approval applications.

(4) All plans shall be processed in accordance with the drainage review procedures specified in the SWDM.

(5) All submittal procedures, definitions and specifications for the required contents of engineering plans are presented in the SWDM. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.170 Construction timing and final approval.

(1) No work related to permanent or temporary storm drainage control for a permitted development may proceed without the approval of the director.

(2) Erosion and sediment control measures associated with both the interim and permanent drainage systems shall be:

(a) Constructed in accordance with the approved plan prior to any grading or land clearing other than that associated with an approved erosion and sediment control plan; and

(b) Satisfactorily sequenced and maintained until all improvements, restoration, and landscaping associated with the permit and approvals for the project are completed and the potential for on-site erosion has passed.

(3) The applicant shall have constructed and have in operation those portions of the drainage facilities necessary to accommodate the control of surface and stormwater runoff discharging from the site before the construction of any other improvements or buildings on the site, or to final recording of a plat or short plat, unless upon written request of the applicant, the development engineer authorizes recording before construction of facilities in order to minimize impacts that may result from construction of facilities during inappropriate times of the year. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.175 Vesting period for lots in final short plats.

A lot within a short subdivision shall be governed for a period of three years by the provisions of this chapter in effect at the time a fully completed application for a short subdivision approval was received by the city. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.180 Liability insurance required.

The applicant required to construct the drainage facility pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a combined single limit per occurrence liability policy in an amount established by the city, which shall name the city as an additional insured and protect the city from liability relating to the construction or maintenance of the facility until construction approval or acceptance for maintenance, whichever is last. Proof of this required liability policy shall be provided to the director prior to commencing construction of any drainage facility. If this liability insurance is not kept in effect as required, the city may initiate enforcement action. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.190 Financial guarantees authorized.

The department is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of the title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of this code. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.200 Drainage facilities accepted by the city for maintenance.

(1) The city is responsible for the maintenance, including performance and operation, of drainage facilities which have formally been accepted for maintenance by the director.

(2) The city may assume maintenance of privately maintained drainage facilities only if the following conditions have been met:

(a) All necessary easements or dedications entitling the city to properly maintain the drainage facility have been conveyed to the city;

(b) The director has determined that the facility is in the dedicated public road right-of-way or that maintenance of the facility will contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(i) Flooding;

(ii) Downstream erosion;

(iii) Property damage due to improper function of the facility; 

(iv) Safety hazard associated with the facility;

(v) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

(vi) Degradation to the general welfare of the community; and

(c) The director has declared in writing acceptance of maintenance responsibility by the city. Copies of this document will be kept on file in the department.

(3) The director may terminate the department’s assumption of maintenance responsibilities in writing after determining that continued maintenance will not significantly contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(a) Flooding;

(b) Downstream erosion;

(c) Property damage due to improper function of the facility; 

(d) Safety hazard associated with the facility;

(e) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

(f) Degradation to the general welfare of the community. Copies of this document will be kept on file in the department.

(4) A drainage facility which does not meet the criteria of this section shall remain the responsibility of the applicant required to construct the facility and persons holding title to the property for which the facility was required. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.210 Drainage facilities not accepted by the city for maintenance.

(1) The person or persons holding title to the property and the applicant required to construct a drainage facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the department and remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. This responsibility includes maintenance of a drainage facility which is:

(a) Under a maintenance guarantee or defect guarantee; 

(b) A private road conveyance system;

(c) Located within and serving only one single-family residential lot;

(d) Located within and serving a multifamily or commercial site unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(e) Located within or associated with an administrative or formal subdivision which handles runoff from an area of which less than two-thirds is designated for detached or townhouse dwelling units located on individual lots unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(f) Previously terminated for assumption of maintenance responsibilities by the department in accordance with this chapter; or

(g) Not otherwise accepted by the city for maintenance.

(2) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or for any multifamily or commercial project required to have a flow control or water quality treatment facility, the applicant shall record a declaration of covenant as specified in the SWDM. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall include, but not be limited to provisions for notice to the persons holding title to the property of a city determination that maintenance and/or repairs are necessary to the facility and a reasonable time limit in which such work is to be completed.

(a) In the event that the titleholders do not effect such maintenance and/or repairs, the city may perform such work upon due notice. The titleholders are required to reimburse the city for any such work. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall be included in any instrument of conveyance of the subject property and shall be recorded with the King County records division.

(b) The city may enforce the restrictions set forth in the declaration of covenant provided in the Surface Water Design Manual.

(3) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or approvals for the project or the release of financial guarantees posted to guarantee satisfactory completion, the person or persons holding title to the subject property for which a drainage facility was required shall pay a fee established by the director to reasonably compensate the city for costs relating to inspection of the facility to ensure that it has been constructed according to plan and applicable specifications and standards.

(4) The duties specified in this section with regard to payment of inspection fees and reimbursement of maintenance costs shall be enforced against the person or persons holding title to the property for which the drainage facility was required.

(5) Where not specifically defined in this section, the responsibility for performance, operation and maintenance of drainage facilities and conveyance systems, both natural and constructed, shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.220 Hazards.

(1) Whenever the director determines that any existing construction site, erosion and sedimentation problem, drainage facility, business or residential activity that might result in prohibited discharges, or any violation of this chapter poses a hazard to life and limb, endangers any property, and/or adversely affects the condition or capacity of other drainage facilities, the safety and operation of city right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the city, the applicant/person to whom the permit was issued pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the property within which the drainage facility is located, the applicant/person responsible for maintenance of the facility, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the director shall within the period specified therein repair or otherwise address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Should the director have reasonable cause to believe that the situation is so adverse as to preclude written notice, the director may take the measures necessary to eliminate the hazardous situation; provided, that the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner before acting. In such instances the applicant of whom a drainage plan was required pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the property and/or the person responsible for the maintenance of the facility shall be obligated for the payment of all costs incurred. If costs are incurred and a financial guarantee pursuant to this chapter or other city requirement has been posted, the director shall have the authority to collect against the financial guarantee to cover costs incurred. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.230 Surface water contamination.

At the direction of the director, the city shall investigate any structure or use which is apparently causing or has been a cause of surface water pollution, and if it is determined that a violation exists, the city may take enforcement action as authorized pursuant to BMC 13.10.510 and 13.10.520. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.240 Illicit discharges and connections.

(1) Prohibited Discharges. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any contaminants into surface and stormwater or groundwater. Contaminants include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Trash or debris;

(b) Construction materials;

(c) Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and heating oil; 

(d) Antifreeze and other automotive products;

(e) Metals in either particulate or dissolved form; 

(f) Flammable or explosive materials;

(g) Radioactive material; 

(h) Batteries;

(i) Acids, alkalis, or bases;

(j) Paints, stains, resins, lacquers or varnishes; 

(k) Degreasers and solvents;

(l) Drain cleaners;

(m) Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 

(n) Steam cleaning wastes;

(o) Soaps, detergents or ammonia; 

(p) Swimming pool or spa filter backwash;

(q) Chlorine, bromine and other disinfectants; 

(r) Heated water;

(s) Domestic animal wastes; 

(t) Sewage;

(u) Recreational vehicle waste; 

(v) Animal carcasses;

(w) Food wastes;

(x) Bark and other fibrous materials;

(y) Collected lawn clippings, leaves, or branches; 

(z) Silt, sediment, or gravel;

(aa) Dyes, except as stated in subsection (3)(a) of this section; 

(bb) Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water; or 

(cc) Any hazardous material or waste, not listed above.

(2) Allowable Discharges. Certain discharges may be made directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system. The following types of discharges shall not be considered prohibited discharges for the purpose of this chapter unless the director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing significant contamination of surface water or groundwater:

(a) Spring water;

(b) Diverted stream flows;

(c) Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps, foundation drains or footing drains; 

(d) Lawn watering with potable water or collected rainwater;

(e) Pumped groundwater flows that are uncontaminated;

(f) Materials placed as part of an approved habitat restoration or bank stabilization project; 

(g) Natural uncontaminated surface water or groundwater;

(h) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

(i) The following discharges from boats: engine exhaust; cooling waters; effluent from sinks, showers and laundry facilities; and treated sewage from Type I and Type II marine sanitation devices;

(j) Collected rainwater that is uncontaminated;

(k) Uncontaminated groundwater that seeps into or otherwise enters stormwater conveyance systems; 

(l) Air conditioning condensation;

(m) Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with stormwater runoff; 

(n) Non-stormwater discharge authorized by another NPDES or State Waste Discharge Permit;.

(o) Discharges from emergency fire-fighting activities; and

(p) Other types of discharges as determined by the director.

(3) Exceptions.

(a) Dye testing is allowable but requires verbal notification to the city of Burien public works department at least one day prior to the date of test.

(b) A person does not violate subsection (1) of this section if that person has properly designed, constructed, implemented and is maintaining BMPs and is carrying out AKART as required by this chapter, but contaminants continue to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater; or that person can demonstrate that there are no additional contaminants being discharged from the site above the background conditions of the water entering the site. A person who, under this subsection, is not in violation of subsection (1) of this section is liable for any prohibited discharges through illicit connections, dumping, spills, improper maintenance of BMPs or other discharges that allow contaminants to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater.

(c) Emergency response activities or other actions that must be undertaken immediately or within a time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter in order to avoid an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be exempt from this section. The director by public rule may specify actions that qualify for this exception in city procedures. A person undertaking emergency response activities shall take steps to ensure that the discharges resulting from such activities are minimized. In addition, this person shall evaluate BMPs and the site plan, where applicable, to restrict recurrence.

(4) Illicit Connections. Any connection, identified by the director, that could convey anything not composed entirely of surface and stormwater, directly to surface, storm, or groundwaters is considered an illicit connection and is prohibited with the following exceptions: connections conveying allowable discharges, connections conveying discharges pursuant to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit as issued by the state (other than an NPDES surface water permit) or a state waste discharge permit, and connections conveying effluent from on-site sewage disposal systems to subsurface soils. Presence of prohibited connections as defined herein constitutes a violation of this chapter as set forth in BMC 13.10.510 and 13.10.520. Water quality analysis or investigation for potential illicit connection and illicit discharge will be conducted by the city or by the state certified laboratory. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.250 Best management practices.

(1) Any person causing or allowing discharge to a public drainage facility, natural drainage system, surface and stormwater, or groundwater shall control contamination in the discharge by implementing appropriate source control BMPs. Failure to implement such practices shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The best management practices (“BMPs”) shall be applied to any business or residential activity that might result in prohibited discharges as specified in the SPPM or as determined necessary by the director. Activities that might result in prohibited discharges include but are not limited to the following:

(a) Potable water line flushing;

(b) Dust control with potable water;

(c) Automobile and boat washing;

(d) Pavement and building washing;

(e) Swimming pool and hot tub maintenance;

(f) Auto repair and maintenance;

(g) Building repair and maintenance;

(h) Landscape maintenance;

(i) Hazardous waste handling;

(j) Solid and food waste handling; and

(k) Application of pesticides.

(2) Compliance with this chapter shall be achieved through the use of the BMPs described in the SPPM. In applying the SPPM, the director shall first require the implementation of source control BMPs. If these are not sufficient to prevent contaminants from entering surface and stormwater or groundwater, the director may require implementation of treatment BMPs as set forth in AKART. The city will provide, upon reasonable request, available technical assistance.

(3) In applying the SPPM to prohibited discharges from normal single-family residential activities, the director shall use public education and warnings as the primary method of gaining compliance with this chapter and shall not use citations, notice and orders, assessment of civil penalties and fines, or other compliance actions as authorized in Chapter 2 BMC, unless the director determines: (a) the discharge from a normal single-family residential activity, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing a significant contribution of contaminants to surface and stormwater or groundwater; or (b) the discharge from a normal single-family residential activity poses a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, endangers any property or adversely affects the safety and operation of city right-of-way, utilities or other city-owned or maintained property.

(4) Persons implementing BMPs through another federal, state or local program will not be required to implement the BMPs prescribed in the city’s SPPM, unless the director determines the other program’s BMPs are ineffective at reducing the discharge of contaminants or not being implemented. If the other program requires the development of a stormwater pollution prevention plan or other best management practices plan, the person shall make the plan available to the city upon request. Other federal, state, and local programs include, but are not limited to any of the following:

(a) General or individual NPDES permit from the Washington State Department of Ecology or the United States Environmental Protection Agency;

(b) Forest practices under Chapter 76.09 RCW or on lands being converted to another use or when regulatory authority is otherwise provided to local government by RCW 76.09.240; or

(c) State Waste Discharge General Permit, under the authority of Chapter 90.48 RCW; or

(d) Other programs identified by the director. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.260 Water quality standards.

The city of Burien hereby adopts by reference the water quality standards established under the authority of Chapter 90.48 RCW and contained within Chapter 173-201A WAC as presently written or hereafter amended. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.270 Operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities.

(1) Standards for maintenance of stormwater facilities existing on public or private property within the city are contained in the SWDM and the SPPM. Any maintenance agreement submitted and approved by the city through the permit process shall supersede maintenance requirements contained in the SWDM and the SPPM.

(2) No person shall cause or permit any drainage facility on any public or private property to be obstructed, filled, graded, or used for disposal of debris. Any such activity constitutes a violation of this chapter.

(3) Any modification of an existing drainage facility must be approved and permitted by the city. Failure to obtain permits and approvals, or to violate conditions thereof for any such alteration, constitutes a violation of this chapter.

(4) The city will maintain all elements of the storm drainage system beginning at the first catch basin within the public right-of-way, and in easements or tracts dedicated to and accepted by the city.

(5) All private stormwater facilities, including, but not limited to, nonresidential stormwater facilities, roof downspout drains and driveway drains serving single-family residences, shall be maintained by the property owner.

(6) Maintenance of Nonresidential Stormwater Facilities by Owners.

(a) Any person or persons holding title to a nonresidential property for which stormwater facilities have been required by the city shall be responsible for the continual operation, maintenance, and repair of said stormwater facilities in accordance with the criteria set forth in the SWDM and the SPPM.

(b) For nonresidential stormwater facilities, failure to meet the maintenance requirements specified in the SWDM and the SPPM constitutes a violation of this chapter, and shall be enforced against the owner(s) of the subject property served by the stormwater facility.

(7) City Acceptance of Existing Residential Stormwater Facilities. The city may accept for maintenance those stormwater facilities serving residential developments existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that meet the following conditions:

(a) The stormwater facilities serve more than one individual house or property;

(b) An inspection by the director has determined that the stormwater facilities are functioning as designed;

(c) The stormwater facilities have had at least two years of satisfactory operation and maintenance, unless otherwise waived by the director;

(d) An inspection by the director has determined that the stormwater facilities are accessible for maintenance using existing city equipment;

(e) The person or persons holding title to the properties served by the stormwater facilities have submitted a petition containing the signatures of the title holders of more than 50 percent of the lots served by the stormwater facilities requesting that the city maintain the stormwater facilities;

(f) An easement or dedication of the property is offered by the property owner at no cost;

(g) All easements entitling the city to properly access, operate and maintain the subject stormwater facilities have been conveyed to the city and have been recorded with the King County office of records and elections;

(h) The person or persons holding title to the properties served by the stormwater facilities show proof of the correction of any defects in the drainage facilities, including provision of maintenance access, as required by the director; and

(i) The city formally accepts said infrastructure for operation and maintenance.

(8) Disposal of waste from maintenance activities shall be conducted in accordance with the Minimum Functional Standards for Solid Waste Handling, Chapter 173-304 WAC; guidelines published by the Washington State Department of Ecology for disposal of waste materials from stormwater maintenance activities; and, where appropriate, the Dangerous Waste Regulations, Chapter 173-303 WAC. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.280 Stormwater connection fee.

(1) There is established a connection fee for properties in the airport industrial zone complying with the NERA MDP and connecting to the regional stormwater facilities described in the NERA MDP.

(2) The connection fee shall be charged on development and redevelopment sites submitting land use applications. A development site shall be subject to the connection fee for the initial connection to the regional stormwater system; the site shall not be subject to the connection fee upon subsequent redevelopment.

(3) The connection fee shall be calculated on the entire development site as:

developable area in acres x $23,327,

where the developable area is defined as all portions of the subject parcel(s) not covered by critical areas.

(4) The connection fee shall be payable by the applicant upon application for a development permit. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]

Article III. Surface Water Management Program


13.10.310 Authority.

(1) There is hereby created and established the surface water management program of the city of Burien under which the provisions of this chapter will be carried out.

(2) The surface water management program created by this chapter shall be administered by the director. Pursuant to interlocal agreement, King County and its department of public works is designated as the city’s agent for providing drainage services under this program to the residents and property owners of the city and for the purpose of collecting surface water service charges from city property owners. A copy of the interlocal agreement shall be available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public.

(3) Whenever necessary to examine the property characteristics of a particular parcel for the purposes of implementing this chapter, the director may enter any property or portion thereof at reasonable times in compliance with the following procedures:

(a) If the property or portion thereof is occupied, the director shall present identification credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry;

(b) If the property or portion thereof is unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry; and

(c) Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person in control of any property or portion thereof, the director, before entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the state of Washington.

(4) The director is authorized to enforce this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Article IV of this chapter.

(5) The program may provide services related to surface and stormwater management, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations, and facility design and construction. The program may contract for services with interested municipalities or special districts including but not limited to sewer and water districts, school districts, port districts or other governmental agencies. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.320 Purpose.

It is the finding of the city that the surface water management program is necessary in order to promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing and operating a comprehensive approach to surface and stormwater problems which would reduce flooding, erosion and sedimentation, prevent and mitigate habitat loss, enhance groundwater recharge and prevent water quality degradation. It is the finding of the city that the most cost-effective and beneficial approach to surface and stormwater management is through preventative actions and protection of the natural drainage system. In approaching surface and stormwater problems the program shall give priority to methods which provide protection or enhancement of the natural surface water drainage system over means which primarily involve construction of new drainage facilities or systems. The purpose of the rates and charges established herein is to provide a method for payment of all or any part of the cost and expense of surface and stormwater management services. These rates and charges are necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing uncontrolled surface and stormwater, erosion, and water pollution; to preserve and utilize the many values of the city’s natural drainage system including water quality, open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education, urban separation and drainage facilities; and to provide for the comprehensive management and administration of surface and stormwater. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.330 Applicability.

Developed parcels within the service area shall be billed each year for surface and stormwater management services pursuant to RCW 35.67.020. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.340 Policy.

(1) It is the finding of the city that developed parcels contribute to an increase in surface and stormwater runoff to the surface and stormwater management system. This increase in surface and stormwater runoff results in the need to establish rates and charges to finance the city’s activities in surface and stormwater management. Developed parcels shall be subject to the rates and charges of the program based on their contribution to increased runoff. The factors to be used to determine the degree of increased surface and stormwater runoff to the surface and stormwater management system from a particular parcel shall be the percentage of impervious surface coverage on the parcel, the total acreage of the parcel and any mitigating factors as determined by the city.

(2) It is the finding of the city that undeveloped parcels do not contribute as much as developed parcels to an increase in surface and stormwater runoff into the surface and stormwater management system. Undeveloped properties shall be exempt from the rates and charges of the program.

(3) It is the finding of the city that maintained drainage facilities mitigate the increased runoff contribution of developed parcels by providing on-site drainage control. Parcels served by flow control facilities which were required for development of the parcel or can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide flow control of surface and stormwater to the standards in this chapter shall receive a discount as provided in the rates and charges of the program, if the facility is maintained at the parcel owner’s expense to the standard established by the department.

(4) It is the finding of the city that improvements to the quality of surface water runoff can decrease the impact of that runoff on the environment. Parcels served by water quality treatment facilities that were required for development of the parcel or that can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide treatment of surface and stormwater to the standards in this chapter shall receive a discount as provided in the rates and charges of the surface and stormwater management program, if the facility is maintained at the parcel owner’s expense to the standard established by the department.

(5) It is a finding of the city that open space properties provide a benefit to the surface and stormwater management system by the retention of property in an undeveloped state. Open space properties shall receive a discount from the rates and charges to encourage the retention of property as open space.

(6) The majority of the parcels in the service area are residential. The variance between residential parcels in impervious surface coverage is found to be minor and to reflect only minor differences in increased runoff contributions. The administrative cost of calculating the service charge individually for each residential parcel and maintaining accurate information would be very high. A flat charge for residential parcels is less costly to administer than calculating a separate charge for each parcel and is equitable because of the similarities in impervious surface coverage between residential parcels. Therefore, residential parcels shall be charged a flat charge based upon an average amount of impervious surface.

(7) Very lightly developed nonresidential parcels which have an impervious surface coverage of 10 percent or less of the total parcel acreage are characterized by a very low intensity of development and generally a large number of acres. A greater number of acres of undeveloped land associated with an impervious surface results in significantly less impact to the surface and stormwater management system. These parcels shall be charged a flat rate which will encourage the retention of large areas of very lightly developed land.

(8) Lightly to very heavily developed nonresidential parcels which have an impervious surface coverage of more than 10 percent have a substantial impact on the surface and stormwater management system. The impact of these parcels on the surface and stormwater management system increases with the size of the parcels. Therefore, lightly to very heavily developed properties shall be charged a rate determined by the percent of impervious surface coverage multiplied by the parcel acreage.

(9) The city roads and state highway programs provide substantial annual programs for the construction and maintenance of drainage facilities, and the road systems and their associated drainage facilities serve as an integral part of the surface and stormwater management system. City and state road drainage systems, unlike the drainage systems on other properties, are continually being upgraded to increase both conveyance capacity and control. It is envisioned that the roads program will work cooperatively with the surface and stormwater management program to improve regional surface and stormwater management services, as new information is available from basin plans and other sources. City roads and state highways shall not be charged a rate in recognition of the benefit to the surface and stormwater management services provided by the drainage facilities associated with the city roads and state highway programs; provided, that those drainage facilities are constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with this chapter.

(10) Comprehensive management of surface and stormwater runoff must include anticipation of future growth and development in the design and improvement of the surface and stormwater management system. Service charge revenue needs shall be based upon the present and future requirements of the surface and stormwater management system, and these needs shall be considered when determining the rates and charges of the program.

(11) Basin plans are essential to establishing a comprehensive approach to a capital improvement program, maintenance of facilities and regulation of new developments. A plan should analyze the measures needed to control surface and stormwater runoff which results from existing and anticipated development within the basin. The measures investigated to control runoff should include land use regulation such as setback requirements or community plan revisions which revise land use densities as well as the use of drainage facilities. A plan also should recommend the quantity and water quality runoff control measures required to further the purposes set forth in this chapter, and community goals. The institutional requirements and regulations, including but not limited to land use management, funding needs, and incentives for preserving the natural surface and stormwater drainage system should be identified in the plan. The proposed ordinances and regulations necessary to implement the plan shall be transmitted to the council simultaneously with the plan.

(12) Areas with development related surface and stormwater problems require comprehensive management of surface and stormwater.

(13) Additional surface and stormwater runoff problems may be caused by new land use development if not properly mitigated both through protection of natural systems and through constructed improvements. The SWDM and the SPPM and this chapter have been adopted to mitigate the impact of land use development. Further mitigation of these impacts is based on expertise which continues to evolve as new information on our natural systems is obtained and new techniques are discovered. The program, through reconnaissance studies, basin plans, and other special studies, will continuously provide valuable information on the existing problems and areas of the natural drainage system that need special protection. The city is researching and developing methods to protect the natural drainage system through zoning, buffering and setbacks to alleviate existing problems. Setback and buffering measures allow natural preservation of wetlands and stream corridors to occur, alleviate erosion and water pollution, and provide a safe environment for the small mammals and fish which inhabit sensitive areas. Based upon the findings in this subsection, and as information and methods become available, the director, as appropriate, shall draft and submit to the council regulations and development standards to allow protection of the surface and stormwater management system including natural drainage systems.

(14) The program will maintain long-term fiscal viability and fund solvency for all of its related funds. The program’s approach to financial reporting and disclosure will be comprehensive, open and accessible.

(15) The program shall prepare an annual, multiyear capital improvement program which encompasses all of the program’s activities related to the acquisition, construction, replacement, or renovation of capital facilities or equipment. All proposed new facilities will be subject to a consistent and rigorous needs analysis. The program’s capital facilities will be planned and financed to ensure that the benefits of the facilities and the costs for them are balanced over time. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.350 Rate structure. Revised 1/20

(1) The service charges shall be based on the relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from a given parcel to the surface and stormwater management system. The percentage of impervious surfaces on the parcel, the total parcel acreage and any mitigating factors as provided in this chapter will be used to indicate the relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from the parcel to the surface and stormwater management system. The relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from each parcel will determine that parcel’s share of the service charge revenue needs. The service charge revenue needs of the program are based upon all or any part, as determined by the council, of the cost of surface and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for that purpose.

(2) The department shall determine the service charge for each parcel within the service area by the following methodology:

(a) Residential and very lightly developed nonresidential parcels shall receive a flat rate service charge for the reasons set forth in this chapter.

(b) Light to very heavily developed parcels shall be classified into the appropriate rate category by their percentage of impervious surface coverage. Land use codes or data collected from parcel investigations, or both, will be used to determine each parcel’s percentage of impervious surface coverage.

After a parcel has been assigned to the appropriate rate category, the service charge for the parcel will be calculated by multiplying the total acreage of the parcel times the rate for that category.

(3) There are hereby imposed upon all developed properties in the service area annual service charges as follows:

Surface Water Management Service Charges 

	Class	Impervious Surface %	Rate

	Residential	N/A	$173.74/parcel/year

	Very Light	0 to 10%	$173.74/parcel/year

	Light	greater than 10% to 20%	$434.18/acre/year

	Moderate	greater than 20% to 45%	$935.74/acre/year

	Moderately Heavy	greater than 45% to 65%	$1,574.02/acre/year

	Heavy	greater than 65% to 85%	$2,134.50/acre/year

	Very Heavy	greater than 85% to 100%	$2,719.82/acre/year

	City Roads	N/A	Exempt

	State Highways	N/A	Exempt

The minimum service charge in any class shall be $173.74 per parcel per year. Mobile home parks’ maximum annual service charges in any class shall be $173.74 times the number of mobile home spaces.

(4) The city council will review the surface water management service charges annually to ensure the long-term fiscal viability of the program and to guarantee that debt covenants are met. The program will use equitable and efficient methods to determine service charges. [Ord. 721 § 1, 2019; Ord. 698 § 1, 2018; Ord. 673 § 1, 2017; Ord. 664 § 1, 2016; Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.360 Rate adjustments and appeals. Revised 1/20

(1) Any person billed for service charges may file a request for rate adjustment with the department within three years of the date from which the bill was sent. However, filing of such a request does not extend the period for payment of the charge.

(2) Requests for rate adjustment may be granted or approved by the director only when one of the following conditions exists:

(a) The parcel is owned and is the personal residence of a person or persons determined by the county assessor as qualified for a low income senior citizen property tax exemption authorized under RCW 84.36.381. Parcels qualifying under this subsection shall be exempt from all charges imposed in this chapter;

(b) The acreage of the parcel charged is in error;

(c) The parcel is nonresidential and the actual impervious surface coverage of the parcel charged places it in a different rate category than the rate category assigned by the department;

(d) The parcel is nonresidential and the parcel meets the definition of open space in this chapter. Parcels qualifying under this subsection will be charged only for the area of impervious surface and at the rate which the parcel is classified under using the total parcel acreage;

(e) The parcel is served by one or more flow control or water quality treatment facilities required under this chapter, or can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide flow control or water quality treatment of surface and stormwater to the standards in this chapter, and any such facility is maintained at the expense of the parcel owner to the standards required by the department. Nonresidential parcels except in the light category qualifying under this subsection shall be charged at the rate of one lower rate category than as classified by its percentage of impervious surface coverage. Nonresidential parcels in the light rate category qualifying under this subsection shall be charged at the rate of $173.74 per parcel per year. Residential parcels and parcels in the very light category qualifying under this subsection shall be charged $86.86 per parcel per year; or

(f) The service charge bill was otherwise not calculated in accordance with this chapter.

(3) The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the rate adjustment sought should be granted.

(4) At the director’s discretion, before a rate adjustment will be granted, the property owner may be required to grant permission for city staff to inspect the property to determine if the applicable requirements in subsection (2) of this section have been met. If the property owner refuses to grant access for an inspection, the director may not grant the rate adjustment.

(5) Decisions on requests for rate adjustments shall be made by the director based on information submitted by the applicant and the results of the inspection, if applicable. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the director’s decision. If an adjustment is granted which reduces the charge for the current year or two prior years, the applicant shall be refunded the amount overpaid in the current and two prior years.

(6) If the director finds that a service charge bill has been undercharged, then either an amended bill shall be issued which reflects the increase in the service charge or the undercharged amount will be added to the next year’s bill. This amended bill shall be due and payable under this chapter. The director may include in the bill the amount undercharged for two previous billing years in addition to the current bill.

(7) Decisions of the director on requests for rate adjustments shall be final unless, within 20 days of the date the decision was mailed, the applicant submits in writing to the director a notice of appeal setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for appeal and requesting a hearing before the hearing examiner. The examiner’s decision shall be a final decision pursuant to Chapter 2.15 BMC. [Ord. 721 § 1, 2019; Ord. 698 § 2, 2018; Ord. 673 § 2, 2017; Ord. 664 § 2, 2016; Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.370 Billing procedure.

(1) All property subject to charges of the program shall be billed based on the property characteristics existing on November 1st of the year prior to the billing year and at the rate as set forth in this chapter. Billing year is the year that the bills are sent. The service charge shall be displayed and billed on the annual property tax statement for the parcel and shall be mailed to the name and address shown on the real property tax roll at the time annual property tax bills are prepared. Parcels which are exempt from property taxes and do not receive an annual property tax statement will receive a bill only for the service charge. If a payment less than the sum of the total property tax plus service charge or less than the sum of one-half of the property tax plus one-half of the service charge is received for a combined property tax and service charge, and the parcel owner has not otherwise specified, the director of finance shall first apply the payment to the annual property tax of the parcel pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 84.56 RCW and then apply any remaining amount to the service charge.

(2) The total amount of the service charge shall be due and payable to the finance department on or before the thirtieth day of April and shall be delinquent after that date; however, if one-half of such service charge is paid on or before the said thirtieth day of April, the remainder shall be due and payable on or before the thirty-first day of October and shall be delinquent after that date.

(3) Parcel characteristics affecting the service charge which are altered after November 1st of any year shall not be a basis for calculation of the service charge until after December 31st of the following year. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.380 Delinquencies and foreclosures.

Delinquent service charges shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of delinquency until paid. The city shall have a lien for delinquent service charges, including interest thereon, against any property subject to service charges. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments. Such lien shall be effective and shall be enforced and foreclosed pursuant to Chapter 35.67 RCW. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.390 Surface water management fund.

All service charges shall be deposited in the surface water management fund, which fund is hereby created to be used only for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost and expense of providing surface water management services, or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for that purpose. Moneys in the fund not needed for immediate expenditure shall be invested for the benefit of the surface water management fund, but sufficient funds shall be transferred no later than the end of the fiscal year in which they were first appropriated for capital projects appropriated in the surface and stormwater management construction fund. The program’s fund balances and other financial resources will be invested conservatively to match strong security of principal with market rates of return. For investment purposes the director of finance is hereby designated the fund manager. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.400 Additional use of revenues.

The city may use revenues received from collection of service charges for the purpose of maintaining road drainage systems. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]

Article IV. Inspection and Enforcement


13.10.500 Inspection and sampling.

(1) Inspections for compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed as follows:

(a) Construction and Development Inspection. The director or designee shall have access to any site for which a permit as listed in BMC 13.10.130 has been issued, during regular business hours, for the purpose of review of erosion control practices and stormwater facilities, and to ensure compliance with the terms of such permit. Applicants for any such permit shall agree in writing, as a condition of issuance thereof, that such access shall be permitted for such purposes. Inspection procedures shall be as outlined in subsection (2) of this section.

(b) Inspection for Cause. Whenever there is cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed, the director or designee is authorized to inspect the property during regular business hours, and at any other time reasonable given the circumstances. Inspection procedures shall be as outlined in subsection (2) of this section.

(c) Inspection for Maintenance and Source Control Best Management Practices. The director or designee may inspect stormwater facilities in order to ensure continued functioning of the facilities for the purposes for which they were constructed, and to ensure that maintenance is being performed in accordance with the standards of this chapter and any maintenance schedule adopted during the plan review process for the property. The director also may enter the site for the purposes of observing source control best management practices. The property owner or other person in control of the site shall allow any authorized representative of the director or designee access during regular business hours, or at any other time reasonable in the circumstances, for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and records examination.

(d) Drainage Pipeline Video Inspection for New and Redevelopment. The property owner or the applicant shall conduct video inspection of the newly constructed or modified drainage systems that are equal or larger than an eight-inch diameter pipe. The city may require pipeline video inspection for a pipe smaller than eight inches. The applicant or property owner shall be responsible for the cost of video inspections.

(2) Inspection Procedure. Prior to making any inspections, the director or designee shall present identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and request entry of the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, if available, or as provided below.

(a) If the property or any building or structure on the property is unoccupied, the director or his designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property or portions of the property and request entry.

(b) If, after reasonable effort, the director or his designee is unable to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and has reason to believe the condition of the site or of the surface and stormwater drainage system creates an imminent hazard to persons or property, the inspector may enter.

(3) Water sampling and analysis for determination of compliance with this chapter shall be allowed as follows:

(a) Sample Collection. When the director has reason to believe that a violation exists or is occurring on a property, the director shall have the authority to set up on the site such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, or flow measuring operations.

(b) Sample Analysis. Analysis of samples collected during investigation of potential violations shall be analyzed by a laboratory certified by the State Department of Ecology as competent to perform the required analysis using standard practices and procedures.

(c) Cost of Sample Collection and Analysis. If it is determined that a violation of this chapter exists on the site, the owner of the property shall pay the city’s actual costs for collecting samples and for laboratory analysis of those samples. If it is found that a violation does not exist, the city will pay such charges.

(d) Establish a Sampling Plan. If it is determined that a violation of this chapter exists, the director may require the property owner or applicant to prepare a monitoring and sampling plan to assure that compliance is occurring. The monitoring and sampling plan shall be approved by the director prior to implementation. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.510 Enforcement – Violations.

Any violations of this chapter, the SWDM, or the SPPM are violations of this chapter and code and are subject to the provisions of this section. In addition to the listed enforcement options, the city may also pursue any other lawful civil, criminal or equitable remedy or relief. At the director of public works’ discretion, the choice of enforcement option taken and the severity of any monetary penalty shall be based on the nature of the violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, the public resources expended to take enforcement action and ensure compliance with this chapter, and/or the degree of bad faith of the persons subject to the enforcement action. Enforcement options are cumulative and shall not be deemed exclusive.

(1) Nuisance. Any structure, condition, act or failure to act which violates any provision of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated using the procedures of Chapters 1.15, 8.45 and 9.75 BMC, as currently written or hereafter amended or as otherwise allowed by law.

(2) Violation. Any structure, condition, act or failure to act which violates any provision of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and is subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this section, Chapter 1.15 BMC, and BMC 13.10.520.

(3) Criminal. Any willful violation of the provisions of this chapter is deemed a misdemeanor. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


13.10.520 Enforcement – Civil penalties.

Any person, firm, corporation, or association or any agent thereof who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for all damages to public or private property arising from such violation and for all costs of inspection and sampling in the event the violation constitutes an illicit discharge. If the city repairs or replaces the damaged property, the actual cost to the city for such repair or replacement shall be assessed against the responsible party and shall be due and payable within 10 days of the date of written notice of the same. Delinquent bills may be collected by a civil action or as otherwise allowed by law. If the city obtains judgment, it shall also be entitled to reimbursement for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees expended in the litigation.

(1) Monetary Penalty.

(a) The amount of the monetary penalty per day or portion thereof for each violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(b) In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of this code or city ordinances providing for a civil penalty, this chapter shall control.

(2) Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to correct the violation as ordered by the director of public works. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2016]


Title 14 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Chapters:

14.05    Repealed

14.10    State Environmental Policy Act Procedures


Chapter 14.05 SEPA PROCEDURES AND POLICIES

(Repealed by Ord. 506)


Chapter 14.10 STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT PROCEDURES

Sections:

14.10.010    Definitions and abbreviations.

14.10.020    Lead agency and responsible official.

14.10.030    Purpose and general requirements.

14.10.040    Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations.

14.10.050    Planned actions. 

14.10.060    Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents. 

14.10.070    Comments and public notice. 

14.10.080    Use of existing environmental documents. 

14.10.090    Substantive authority.

14.10.100    SEPA/GMA integration.

14.10.110    Appeals of determination of nonsignificance and adequacy of a final EIS.

14.10.120    Department procedural rules.


14.10.010 Definitions and abbreviations.

(1) The city of Burien adopts by reference the definitions contained in WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799. In addition, the following definitions are adopted for this chapter:

(a) “City council” means the Burien city council. 

(b) “Department” means the city of Burien department of community development. 

(c) “Director” means the director of the city of Burien department of community development.

(2) The following abbreviations are used in this chapter:

(a) “SEPA” means the State Environmental Policy Act.

(b) “DNS” means determination of nonsignificance.

(c) “DS” means determination of significance.

(d) “EIS” means environmental impact statement. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.020 Lead agency and responsible official.

The procedures and standards regarding lead agency responsibility contained in WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-948 are adopted, subject to the following: 

(1) The department shall serve as the lead agency and the director shall serve as the responsible official for all SEPA activity by the city of Burien, unless otherwise designated by the city manager. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.030 Purpose and general requirements.

The procedures and standards regarding the timing and content of environmental review specified in WAC 197-11-055 through 197-11-100 are adopted subject to the following: 

(1) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-055(4), the department shall adopt rules and regulations establishing a process for environmental review at the conceptual stage of permit applications that require detailed project plans and specifications. 

(2) The optional provision of WAC 197-11-060(3)(c) is adopted.

(3) Under WAC 197-11-100, the applicant shall prepare the initial environmental checklist, unless the lead agency specifically elects to prepare the checklist. The lead agency shall make a reasonable effort to verify the information in the environmental checklist and shall have the authority to determine the final content of the environmental checklist.

(4) The director may set reasonable deadlines for the submittal of information, studies, or documents necessary for, or subsequent to, threshold determinations. Failure to meet such deadlines shall cause the application to be deemed withdrawn, and plans or other data previously submitted for review may be returned to the applicant together with any unexpended portion of the application review fees. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.040 Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations.

(1) The city of Burien adopts the standards and procedures specified in WAC 197-11-300 through 197-11-390 and 197-11-800 through 197-11-890 for determining categorical exemptions and making threshold determinations, subject to the following:

(a) The following exempt threshold levels are hereby established pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) for the exemptions in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b):

(i) The construction or location of any residential structures of up to 20 dwelling units; 

(ii) The construction of an office, school, commercial, recreational, service, or storage building with up to 12,000 square feet of gross floor area, and with associated parking facilities designed for up to 40 automobiles; 

(iii) The construction of a parking lot designed for up to 40 automobiles; 

(iv) Any fill or excavation of up to 500 cubic yards throughout the total lifetime of the fill or excavation.

(b) The determination of whether a proposal is categorically exempt shall be made by the department.

(2) New residential or mixed use development within the urban center designated in the Burien comprehensive plan that is consistent with the goals, policies, density and intensity of use called for in the Burien comprehensive plan is categorically exempt from Chapter 43.21C RCW pursuant to RCW 43.21C.229.

(3) Review and issuance of a threshold determination shall follow the procedures for a Type 1 review pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC.

(4) The mitigated DNS provision of WAC 197-11-350 shall be enforced as follows:

(a) If the department issues a mitigated DNS, conditions requiring compliance with the mitigation measures that were specified in the application and environmental checklist shall be deemed conditions of any decision or recommendation of approval of the action.

(b) If at any time the proposed mitigation measures are withdrawn or substantially changed, the responsible official shall review the threshold determination and, if necessary, may withdraw the mitigated DNS and issue a DS. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.050 Planned actions.

(1) The purpose of this section is to streamline and expedite the permit review process for projects that qualify as planned actions.

(2) Development proposals within the Northeast Redevelopment Area as designated in the Burien comprehensive plan are designated to be planned actions if:

(a) The significant environmental impacts of the proposal have been adequately addressed in the final supplemental environmental impact statement (hereafter “SEIS”) prepared for the Northeast Redevelopment Area issued November 23, 2009; and

(b) The proposed project includes appropriate mitigating measures included in the SEIS; and

(c) The development proposal implements the comprehensive plan policies relating to the Northeast Redevelopment Area; and

(d) The development proposal is for uses allowed in BMC 19.15.030, professional residential zone, or BMC 19.15.070, airport industrial zone; and

(e) The project is not an essential public facility as defined in RCW 36.70A.200; and

(f) The thresholds for total development analyzed in the SEIS would not be exceeded; and

(g) The requirements of RCW 43.21C.031 and WAC 197-11-164 through 197-11-172 are met.

(3) Planned Action Determination.

(a) Application. To assist the director in making his/her determination, the applicant shall submit a planned action environmental checklist and supporting information. The director shall specify the submittal requirements on a submittal checklist. Within 28 calendar days after a complete submittal, the director shall issue a written determination on whether the proposed development qualifies as a planned action pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. A request for a planned action determination shall not require the issuance of a threshold determination under SEPA, as provided by RCW 43.21C.031, WAC 197-11-172(2)(a) and this chapter.

(b) Positive Determination. If the director determines that the proposed project qualifies as a planned action, no further environmental review is required under this chapter.

(c) Negative Determination. If the director determines that the proposed project does not qualify as a planned action, the proposed project shall require additional environmental review and appropriate mitigation.

(d) Appeals. There is no administrative appeal of the director’s determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request to have the development processed as a planned action.

(4) Nothing in this section limits the city from using this chapter or other applicable law to place conditions on the project in order to mitigate nonsignificant impacts through the normal project review and permitting process. [Ord. 530 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009; Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.060 Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents. 

The procedures and standards for preparation of environmental impact statements and other environmental documents pursuant to WAC 197-11-400 through 197-11-460 and 197-11-600 through 197-11-640 are adopted, subject to the following:

(1) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-408(2)(a), all comments on determinations of significance and scoping notices shall be in writing, except where a public meeting on EIS scoping occurs pursuant to WAC 197-11-410(1)(b).

(2) Pursuant to WAC 197-11-420, 197-11-620, and 197-11-625, the department shall be responsible for preparation and content of EISs and other environmental documents. The department shall contract with consultants as necessary for the preparation of environmental documents. The department may consider the opinion of the applicant regarding the qualifications of the consultant but the department shall retain sole authority for selecting persons or firms to author, co-author, provide special services, or otherwise participate in the preparation of required environmental documents.

(3) Consultants or subconsultants selected by the city to prepare environmental documents for a private development proposal shall not: act as agents for the applicant in preparation or acquisition of associated underlying permits; have a financial interest in the proposal for which the environmental document is being prepared; perform any work or provide any services for the applicant in connection with or related to the proposal.

(4) The department may establish and maintain one or more lists of qualified consultants who are eligible to receive contracts for preparation of environmental documents. Separate lists may be maintained to reflect specialized qualifications or expertise. When the department requires consultant services to prepare environmental documents, the department may select a consultant from the lists and negotiate a contract for such services, or may issue requests for qualifications and/or requests for proposals to use in the consultant selection process. 

(5) All costs of preparing the environmental document shall be borne by the applicant. The department shall promulgate administrative rules that establish procedures necessary to implement this section.

(6) In the event an applicant decides to suspend or abandon the project, the applicant must provide formal written notice to the department and consultant. The applicant shall continue to be responsible for all monies expended by the department or consultants to the point of receipt of notification to suspend or abandon, or other obligations or penalties under the terms of any contract let for preparation of the environmental documents.

(7) The department shall only publish an EIS when it believes that the EIS adequately discloses: the significant direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of the proposal and its alternatives; mitigation measures proposed and committed to by the applicant, and their effectiveness in significantly mitigating impacts; mitigation measures that could be implemented or required; and unavoidable significant adverse impacts. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.070 Comments and public notice. 

(1) The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-500 through 197-11-570 are adopted regarding public notice and comments.

(2) For purposes of WAC 197-11-510, public notice shall be required as indicated below:

(a) Notification of threshold determinations for project actions shall follow the requirements for the underlying land use review in Chapter 19.65 BMC or the notice requirements of BMC Title 17, whichever is applicable. If neither of these applies, the Type 1 land use review notice requirements in Chapter 19.65 BMC shall be followed. 

(b) Notification of threshold determinations for nonproject actions shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the proposal is located.

(c) Notification of the issuance of a draft EIS shall follow the requirements of WAC 197-11-455.

(d) Notification of the issuance of a final EIS shall follow the requirements of WAC 197-11-460.

(e) Notification of the issuance of an addendum shall follow the requirements of WAC 197-11-625.

(f) Notification of the adoption of an existing environmental document shall follow the requirements of WAC 197-11-630.

(3) The responsible official may require further notice if deemed necessary to provide adequate public notice of a pending action. Failure to require further or alternative notice shall not be a violation of any notice procedure. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.080 Use of existing environmental documents. 

The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-600 through 197-11-640 are adopted regarding use of existing environmental documents. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.090 Substantive authority.

(1) The procedures and standards of WAC 197-11-650 through 197-11-660 regarding substantive authority and mitigation, and WAC 197-11-158, regarding reliance on existing plans, laws and regulations, are adopted.

(2) For the purposes of RCW 43.21C.060 and WAC 197-11-660(a), the following policies, plans, rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, are designated as potential bases for the exercise of the city of Burien’s substantive authority under SEPA, subject to the provisions of RCW 43.21C.240 and subsection (3) of this section:

(a) The policies of the State Environmental Policy Act, RCW 43.21C.020.

(b) Burien comprehensive plan, appendices and documents referenced therein.

(c) Burien shoreline master program.

(d) Burien Municipal Code, including but not limited to the zoning code, surface water management code and road design and construction standards.

(e) Des Moines Memorial Drive Corridor Management Plan, January 2005.

(f) Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan, May 2000.

(g) Seahurst Park Master Plan, July 2002.

(h) Eagle Landing Park Master Plan, August 2003.

(3) Substantive SEPA authority to condition or deny new development proposals or other actions shall be used only in cases where specific adverse environmental impacts are not addressed by the regulations applicable to the proposed action, or where unusual circumstances exist. Unusual circumstances related to a site or to a proposal, as well as environmental impacts not mitigated by applicable regulations, will be subject to site-specific or project-specific SEPA mitigation.

(4) Any decision to approve, deny, or approve with conditions pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 shall be contained in the responsible official’s decision document. The written decision shall contain facts and conclusions based on the proposal’s specific adverse environmental impacts (or lack thereof) as identified in an environmental checklist, EIS, threshold determination, other environmental document including a department’s staff report and recommendation to a decision maker, or findings made pursuant to a public hearing authorized or required by law or ordinance. The decision document shall state the specific plan, policy or regulation that supports the SEPA decision and, if mitigation beyond existing development regulations is required, the specific adverse environmental impacts and the reasons why additional mitigation is needed to comply with SEPA.

(5) This chapter shall not be construed as a limitation on the authority of the city to approve, deny, or condition a proposal for reasons based upon other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.100 SEPA/GMA integration.

The procedures and standards regarding the timing and content of environmental review specified in WAC 197-11-210 through 197-11-235 are hereby adopted. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.110 Appeals of threshold determinations and adequacy of a final EIS.

(1) An administrative appeal pursuant to WAC 197-680(3) is allowed only for a threshold determination or adequacy of a final environmental impact statement. All other appeals under this chapter shall be made to superior court.

(2) Appeals of actions under subsection (1) of this section are procedural SEPA appeals that are conducted by the hearing examiner pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 2.15 and 2.20 BMC, subject to the following:

(a) A procedural SEPA appeal is authorized only for an action classified as a Type 1, 2 or 3 land use decision in BMC 19.65.020; a preliminary short subdivision; a preliminary subdivision; a building permit or a clearing and grading permit.

(b) Only one appeal of each threshold determination shall be allowed on a proposal. Only one appeal of the adequacy of a final environmental impact statement shall be allowed on a proposal.

(c) An appeal of a DNS must be filed within 14 calendar days following issuance of the DNS. The appeal period for a DNS shall be extended for an additional seven calendar days if WAC 197-11-340(2)(a) applies.

(d) An appeal of the adequacy of a final EIS must be filed within 21 calendar days following issuance of the notice of availability of the final EIS.

(e) As provided in RCW 43.21C.075(3)(d), the decision of the responsible official shall be entitled to substantial weight.

(f) The hearing examiner shall make a final decision on all procedural SEPA determinations. The hearing examiner’s decision may be appealed to superior court as provided in Chapter 2.20 BMC.

(3) Except for appeal of a DS, the hearing examiner’s consideration of procedural SEPA appeals shall be consolidated with:

(a) Substantive SEPA appeals, if any, involving decisions to condition or deny an application pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060; and 

(b) With the public hearing or appeal, if any, on the proposal.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the department may adopt procedures under which an administrative appeal shall not be provided if the director finds that consideration of an appeal would be likely to cause the department to violate a compliance, enforcement, or other specific mandatory order or specific legal obligation. The director’s determination shall be included in the notice of the SEPA determination, and the director shall provide a written summary upon which the determination is based within five days of receiving a written request. Because there would be no administrative appeal in such situations, review may be sought before a court of competent jurisdiction under RCW 43.21C.075 and applicable regulations, in connection with an appeal of the underlying governmental action. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


14.10.120 Department procedural rules.

The department may prepare administrative procedural rules for the implementation of SEPA, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and this chapter. [Ord. 506 § 2 (Exh. A), 2009]


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Construction Administrative Code

15.10    Construction Codes

15.12    Aircraft Noise Reduction

15.15    Repealed

15.20    Fire Code

15.25    Repealed

15.30    Repealed

15.35    Repealed

15.40    Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code

15.50    Repealed

15.55    Flood Damage Prevention


Chapter 15.05 CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Sections:

15.05.010    Short title.

15.05.015    Scope.

15.05.020    Definitions.

15.05.025    Appendices.

15.05.030    Intent.

15.05.035    Referenced codes.

15.05.040    International Building Code – Scope.

15.05.045    International Residential Code – Scope.

15.05.050    International Mechanical Code – Scope.

15.05.055    Liquid Propane Gas Codes – Scope.

15.05.060    International Fuel Gas Code – Scope.

15.05.065    International Fire Code – Scope.

15.05.070    Uniform Plumbing Code – Scope.

15.05.075    Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code – Scope.

15.05.080    Washington State Energy Code – Scope.

15.05.082    International Existing Building Code – Scope.

15.05.085    Burien Electrical Code – Scope.

15.05.090    Applicability.

15.05.095    Other laws.

15.05.100    Application of references.

15.05.105    Referenced codes and standards.

15.05.110    Partial invalidity.

15.05.115    Existing structures.

15.05.120    Maintenance.

15.05.125    Added electrical wiring.

15.05.130    Requirements not covered by code.

15.05.135    Moved buildings.

15.05.140    Moved buildings – Electrical requirements.

15.05.145    Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

15.05.150    Building department – Established.

15.05.155    Building official designated.

15.05.160    Deputies.

15.05.165    Duties and power of the building official.

15.05.170    Applications and permits.

15.05.175    Notices and orders.

15.05.180    Inspections.

15.05.185    Identification.

15.05.190    Right of entry.

15.05.195    Department records.

15.05.200    Liability.

15.05.205    Approved materials and equipment.

15.05.210    Used materials and equipment.

15.05.215    Modifications.

15.05.220    Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

15.05.225    Research reports.

15.05.230    Tests.

15.05.235    Permits required.

15.05.240    Electrical permit required.

15.05.242    Annual permit.

15.05.245    Work exempt from permit.

15.05.250    Emergency repairs.

15.05.255    Ordinary repairs.

15.05.260    Public service agencies.

15.05.265    Application for permit.

15.05.270    Areas of flood hazard.

15.05.275    Action on permit application.

15.05.280    Time limitation on permit application.

15.05.285    Validity of permit.

15.05.290    Permit expiration.

15.05.295    Permit extensions and renewals.

15.05.300    Permit suspension or revocation.

15.05.305    Placement of permit.

15.05.310    Floor and roof design loads.

15.05.315    Submittal documents.

15.05.320    Construction documents.

15.05.325    Examination of documents.

15.05.330    Use of consultants.

15.05.335    Expedited plan review.

15.05.340    Approval of construction documents.

15.05.345    Phased approval.

15.05.350    Design professional in responsible charge.

15.05.355    Deferred submittals.

15.05.360    Amended construction documents.

15.05.365    Retention of construction documents.

15.05.370    Temporary structures and uses.

15.05.375    Fees.

15.05.380    Inspections.

15.05.385    Traffic management systems.

15.05.390    Certificate of occupancy.

15.05.395    Service utilities.

15.05.400    Appeals.

15.05.405    Unlawful acts.

15.05.410    Violations – Penalties.

15.05.415    Stop work order.

15.05.420    Unsafe structures and equipment.

15.05.425    Copies to be available.


15.05.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the construction administrative code of the city of Burien, hereinafter referred to as “this code.” [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.015 Scope.

The provisions of this code shall apply to the administration of the following construction codes:

(1) International Building Code – Chapter 51-50 WAC;

(2) International Residential Code – Chapter 51-51 WAC;

(3) International Mechanical Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(4) National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(5) Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(6) International Fuel Gas Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

(7) Uniform Plumbing Code – Chapter 51-56 WAC;

(8) International Energy Conservation Code – Chapters 51-11R, C, and A WAC;

(9) International Existing Building Code – WAC 51-50-480000; 

(10) Burien Electrical Code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, latest edition, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

“Action” means a specific response complying fully with a specific request by the city.

“Amended construction documents” means changes or revisions to the approved plans which do not alter the size, shape, height, location or orientation on property, major components of the structural load path, or exiting requirements.

“BMC” means the Burien Municipal Code.

“BPMC” means the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the city of Burien.

“Building official” means the person or persons designated by the city manager, or a duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of the adopted administrative and construction codes.

“Building service equipment” means and refers to the plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures, and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting, and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

“Code official” means the person or persons charged with the enforcement of the adopted administrative and construction codes, or any duly authorized representative. 

“Complete response” means a written submittal responding to all requests from city staff in sufficient detail to allow the application to proceed or be processed.

“Construction codes” means the construction codes listed in BMC 15.05.015.

“Energy code” means the latest edition of the International Energy Conservation Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the city.

“IBC” means the latest edition of the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the city.

“IEBC” means the latest edition of the International Existing Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the city.

“IMC” means the latest edition of the International Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the city.

“IPMC” means the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the city of Burien.

“IRC” means the latest edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by the city.

“NEC” means the latest edition of the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association as amended by the Washington Cities Electrical Code and adopted by the city.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

“Public service agency” means those agencies providing noncompetitive services and rates to the public for the purpose of delivering electrical, water, sewer or gas utilities. The equipment installed by a public service agency shall be owned, operated and maintained by that agency.

“Shall,” as used in this chapter, is mandatory.

“UPC” means the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials as adopted by the city.

“Valuation” or “value,” as applied to a building, structure, or building service equipment, shall mean the estimated cost to construct or replace the structure, building and its building service equipment in kind based on current construction or replacement costs. Current construction or replacement costs include fees for all architectural, engineering and construction management services, and include all structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical equipment and labor, including all contractors’ profits and all on-site preparation costs. The building official is authorized to utilize two methodologies to determine valuation. The greater of the two methods (the square footage method vs. the total valuation method) shall be used to determine the construction valuation for the purpose of computing permit fees.

The valuation for a permit renewal or reinstatement shall be based upon the value of all work not completed prior to the permit expiration date, with a minimum valuation of $4,000 for each required remaining inspection. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.025 Appendices.

Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.030 Intent.

The purpose of this code and the construction codes is to establish the minimum requirements to provide a reasonable level of safety, public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide a reasonable level of safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.035 Referenced codes.

The codes listed in BMC 15.05.040 through 15.05.085 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.040 International Building Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Building Code (IBC) shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

Exception:

(a) Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height, shall comply with the International Residential Code.

(b) Roads, bridges, sidewalks, drainage structures, retaining walls and similar structures regulated, approved and inspected by the city’s public works department.

(c) Electrical transmission towers and telephone poles (not including cell towers) under the control of a utility. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.045 International Residential Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC) shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height. 

Exceptions:

(a) Live/work units located in townhouses complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the International Building Code where constructed under the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings shall conform to Appendix Q of the International Residential Code.

(b) Owner-occupied lodging houses with one or two guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

(c) Owner-occupied lodging homes with three to five guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings where equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Appendix Q. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.050 International Mechanical Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) shall apply to the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings. This code shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment, and appliances specifically addressed herein.

Exceptions:

(a) The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) shall apply to all installations utilizing natural gas and gaseous hydrogen except those regulated by the IRC and those utilizing LPG.

(b) International Residential Code shall apply to all structures regulated by the IRC except LPG installations.

(c) NFPA 54 (National Fuel Gas Code) and NFPA 58 (Liquid Petroleum Gas Code) shall apply to all LPG installations for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) installations. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.055 Liquid Propane Gas Codes – Scope.

The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code and Liquid Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 54 and 58) shall apply to the installation of all materials and equipment utilizing liquid propane gas. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.060 International Fuel Gas Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) shall apply to the installation of all materials and equipment utilizing natural gas except those regulated by the International Residential Code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.065 International Fire Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Fire Code (IFC) shall apply to matters affecting or relating to the protection of structures, processes, premises and safeguards regarding all of the following: 

(1) The hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices.

(2) Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises.

(3) Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

(4) Matters related to the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression or alarm systems.

(5) Conditions affecting the safety of fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.070 Uniform Plumbing Code – Scope.

The provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.075 Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code – Scope.

The provisions of the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.080 Washington State Energy Code – Scope.

The provisions of the Washington State Energy Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 

(1) Chapter 51-11R WAC applies to residential buildings and the building sites and associated systems and equipment. This code shall be the maximum and minimum energy code for residential construction in each town, city and county.

(2) Chapter 51-11C WAC applies to commercial buildings and the building sites and associated systems and equipment. 

Exception: The provisions of this code do not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables, and fruits. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for the purposes of this code. 

However, the installation of other than listed, portable mechanical equipment or listed, portable lighting fixtures is not allowed. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.082 International Existing Building Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings not regulated under the International Residential Code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016]


15.05.085 Burien Electrical Code – Scope.

The provisions of the Burien Electrical Code apply to the installation of electric conductors, electric equipment and additions, alterations, modifications, or repairs to existing electrical installations for the following:

(1) Electric conductors, electric equipment, and electrical raceways installed within or on public and private buildings, property or other structures.

(2) Signaling and communications conductors and equipment, telecommunications conductors and equipment, fiber optic cables, and raceways installed within or on public and private buildings, property or other structures.

(3) Yards, lots, parking lots, and industrial substations.

(4) Temporary electrical installations for use during the construction of buildings.

(5) Temporary electrical installations for carnivals, conventions, festivals, fairs, traveling shows, the holding of religious services, temporary lighting of streets, or other approved uses.

(6) Installations of conductors and equipment that connect to a supply of electricity.

(7) All other outside electrical conductors on the premises.

(8) Optional standby systems derived from portable generators.

Exception: Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities for the purpose of communication, transmission, and distribution of electric energy located in buildings used exclusively by utilities for such purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by the utilities or on public highways, streets, roads, etc., or outdoors by established rights on private property.

It is the intent of this section that the Burien Electrical Code covers all premises’ wiring or wiring other than utility owned metering equipment, on the load side of the service point of buildings, structures, or any other premises not owned or leased by the utility. Also, it is the intent that the Burien Electrical Code covers installations in buildings used by the utility for purposes other than listed above, such as office buildings, warehouses, garages, machine shops, and recreational buildings which are not an integral part of a generating plant, substation, or control center. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.090 Applicability.

(1) General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern except that the hierarchy of the codes as specified in RCW 19.27.031 shall govern.

(2) New Installations. This code applies to new installations.

Exception: If an electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit application is received after this code has taken effect, but is identified with a building permit application received prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all applicable codes adopted and in force at the time of a complete building permit application will apply.

(3) Existing Installations. Lawfully installed existing installations that do not comply with the provisions of the adopted construction codes shall be permitted to be continued without change, except as is specifically covered in this chapter, the International Fire Code, the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. Where changes are required for correction of hazards, a reasonable amount of time shall be given for compliance, depending on the degree of the hazard.

(4) Maintenance. Buildings and structures, including their electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems, equipment, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe, hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by adopted construction codes shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the systems and equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require that the systems and equipment be reinspected.

(5) Additions, Alterations, Modifications or Repairs. Additions, alterations, modifications or repairs to a building or structure or to the electrical, plumbing or mechanical system(s) of any building, structure, or premises shall conform to the requirements of the adopted construction codes, without requiring those portions of the existing building or system not being altered or modified to comply with all the requirements of this code. Installations, additions, alterations, modifications, or repairs shall not cause an existing building to become unsafe or to adversely affect the performance of the building as determined by the building official or designated representative.

Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in force at the time the additions were made.

Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing mechanical systems shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is not hazardous, and is approved by the building official.

Exceptions:

(a) Additions constructed under the International Residential Code with less than 500 square feet of conditioned floor area are exempt from the requirements for Whole House Ventilation Systems, Section M1508.

(b) Additions or alterations to existing buildings constructed under the International Residential Code, which do not require the construction of foundations, crawlspaces, slabs or basements, shall not be required to meet the requirements for radon protection in Section R327.1 and Appendix F. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.095 Other laws.

The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.100 Application of references.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.105 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in the construction codes shall be considered part of the requirements of that code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

Where conflicts occur between provisions of the construction code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of the construction code shall apply.

Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of the construction codes listed in the Burien Municipal Code, the provisions of this title and the codes listed in BMC 15.05.015, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.110 Partial invalidity.

In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.115 Existing structures.

The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the construction codes, the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code, the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official or fire marshal for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 

(1) Buildings Not Previously Occupied. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the laws in existence at the time of its completion shall be permitted to comply with the provisions of the laws in existence at the time of its original permit unless such permit has expired. Subsequent permits shall comply with the International Building Code or International Residential Code, as applicable, for new construction.

(2) Buildings Previously Occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the International Existing Building Code, the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the code official to mitigate an unsafe building. For the purpose of this section, “unsafe building” is not to be construed as a mere lack of compliance with current code. 

(3) Modifications. Repair, alteration, change of occupancy or use, addition to and relocation of existing structures not regulated by the International Residential Code shall be performed in accordance with the International Existing Building Code. 

(4) Additions, Alterations or Repairs of Structures Regulated by the International Residential Code. Additions, alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to the requirements for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with the requirements of the International Residential Code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations, repairs and relocations shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building.

(5) Determination of Substantially Improved or Substantially Damaged Existing Buildings and Structures in Flood Hazard Areas. For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, addition or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in flood hazard areas, the building official shall determine where the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage. Where the building official determines that the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and where required by the International Existing Building Code, the building official shall require the building to meet the requirements of Section 1612 of the International Building Code.

(6) Preliminary Meeting. When requested by the permit applicant or the code official, the code official shall meet with the permit applicant prior to the application for a construction permit to discuss plans for the proposed work or change of occupancy in order to establish the specific applicability of the provisions of this code. 

Exception: Repairs and Level 1 alterations.

(7) Building Evaluation. The code official is authorized to require an existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional based on the circumstances agreed upon at the preliminary meeting. The design professional shall notify the code official if any potential nonconformance with the provisions of this code is identified. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.120 Maintenance.

Structures and installations, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe condition. Devices or safeguards shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were constructed or installed. The owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall be responsible for maintenance of structures and installations. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require an installation to be reinspected. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.125 Added electrical wiring.

Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in force at the time the additions were made. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.130 Requirements not covered by code.

Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed structure or installation, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.135 Moved buildings.

Buildings or structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of BMC 15.10.150(1). [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.140 Moved buildings – Electrical requirements.

Electrical requirements for moved buildings shall be in accordance with BMC 15.10.150(2). [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.145 Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

Buildings located in areas of special flood hazard shall be regulated under the International Building Code, the International Residential Code and the Burien Municipal Code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.150 Building department – Established.

There is established for the city the “building department” which shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager or his/her authorized representative. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.155 Building official designated.

The building official shall be appointed by the city manager. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.160 Deputies.

In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city of Burien and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.165 Duties and power of the building official.

The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code and this title. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and this title and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and this title. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code and this title. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.170 Applications and permits.

The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings, structures and building service equipment, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code and the construction codes. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.175 Notices and orders.

(1) The building official shall have the authority to issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

(2) Following a city of Burien issued formal declaration of emergency, the building official shall be authorized to evaluate and provide building safety evaluations. Evaluations shall generally follow standards from the Applied Technology Council ATC 20, ATC 20-1, or ATC 45 manuals. The procedure shall allow for the tagging of buildings as “inspected,” “limited entry” or “unsafe,” along with any associated penalties per BMC 15.05.405 and 15.05.410 for removal of building tags. Notice of orders pertaining to dangerous buildings and appeal procedures established under adopted building codes shall not apply under official declarations of emergency. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.180 Inspections.

The building official shall make all of the required inspections and shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, at the applicant’s expense. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.185 Identification.

Building department personnel shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.190 Right of entry.

Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, the owner’s authorized agent or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 

Where the code official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner, the owner’s authorized agent or occupant or person having charge, care or control of the building or premises shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the code official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the applicable construction code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.195 Department records.

The city shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.200 Liability.

This title shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation owning, building, altering, constructing, or moving any building or structure as defined in this title; nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of inspection authorized herein or a certificate of inspection issued by the city or any of its agencies.

The building official or employee charged with the enforcement of this code and this title, while acting for the city of Burien in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code and this title or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code and this title shall be defended by legal representative of the city of Burien until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code and this title. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.205 Approved materials and equipment.

Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.210 Used materials and equipment.

The use of used materials and building service equipment which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.215 Modifications.

Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department. The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed modification under the provisions of this section. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.220 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided, that any such alternative has been approved by the building official as provided herein. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved. The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed alternate material, design and/or method of construction and equipment under the provisions of this section. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.225 Research reports.

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.230 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the city of Burien. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the city for the period required for retention of public records. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.235 Permits required.

Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the city and obtain the required permit. A separate permit is required for each building or structure.

Exceptions:

(a) When deemed appropriate by the building official, accessory buildings and structures may be included under the permit of the main building or structure.

(b) A single demolition permit may be issued for the demolition of multiple structures on a single tax parcel. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.240 Electrical permit required.

In accordance with Chapter 19.28 RCW, an electrical permit is required for the following installations:

(1) The installation, alteration, repair, replacement, modification or maintenance of all electrical systems, wire and electrical equipment regardless of voltage.

(2) The installation and/or alteration of low voltage systems defined as:

(a) NEC, Class 1 power limited circuits at 30 volts maximum.

(b) NEC, Class 2 circuits powered by a Class 2 power supply as defined in NEC 725.41(A).

(c) NEC, Class 3 circuits powered by a Class 3 power supply as defined in NEC 725.41(A).

(3) Telecommunications Systems.

(a) Installation of telecommunications systems on the customer side of the network demarcation point for projects greater than 10 telecommunications outlets.

(b) All backbone installations, regardless of size, and all telecommunications cable or equipment installations involving penetrations of fire barriers or passing through hazardous locations.

(c) The installation of greater than 10 outlets and the associated cables along any horizontal pathway from a telecommunications closet to work areas during any continuous 90-day period requires a permit and inspection.

(d) Backbone installations in multifamily residential dwellings which require penetration of fire barriers or installation of more than 10 outlets in common areas.

(e) Definitions of telecommunications technical terms shall be as set forth in Chapter 19.28 RCW, EIA/TIA standards, and the Burien electrical code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.242 Annual permit.

Instead of an individual construction permit for each plumbing, mechanical or electrical alteration to an already approved system or equipment or application installation, the code official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application therefor to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified tradespersons in the building, structure or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for the permit.

The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The code official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall be filed with the code official as designated. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016]


15.05.245 Work exempt from permit.

Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the city of Burien. Permits shall not be required for the following except when located in a special flood hazard area or other areas within the city requiring critical area review or exemption by the zoning code:

(1) Building.

(a) One-story detached accessory structures which are accessory to residential buildings and constructed under the provisions of the IRC used as tool and storage sheds, tree supported play structures, playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet (18.58 m2) and the structure is located in accordance with all land use regulations.

(b) Fences six feet (1,829 mm) or less in height.

(c) Oil derricks.

(d) Retaining walls which are four feet (1,219 mm) or less in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

(e) Water tanks not utilized for fire protection water supplies which are supported directly on grade, if the capacity is 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) or less and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one.

(f) Sidewalks and driveways that are not part of an accessible route.

(g) Decks, associated platforms and steps accessory to buildings, which are 30 inches (762 mm) or less above adjacent grade and which are not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an accessible route.

(h) Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work; provided, that existing accessible features are not altered.

(i) Replacement of nonstructural siding on IRC structures, except for veneer, stucco or “Exterior Finish and Insulation Systems” (EFIS).

(j) In-kind re-roofing of one- and two-family dwellings provided the roof sheathing is not removed or replaced.

(k) Window replacement for IRC structures in Airport Noise Reduction Area 3, where no alteration of structural members is required, the window U-Values meet the prescriptive requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code, the window glazing is not required to be safety glass, and minimum dimensions and placement of any required egress window is not reduced.

(l) Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery.

(m) Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R-3 occupancy, which are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.

(n) Shade cloth structures constructed for garden, nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems.

(o) Swings, slides and other similar playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling or Group R-3 occupancy.

(p) Window awnings that are supported by an exterior wall of one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 occupancies, or Group U occupancies and that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

(q) Nonfixed and movable cases, counters and partitions five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) or less in height.

(r) Satellite earth station antennas six and one-half feet (two meters) or less in diameter or diagonal dimensions in zones other than residential zones.

(s) Satellite earth station antennas three and one-quarter feet (one meter) or less in diameter in residential zones.

(t) Video programming service antennas three and one-quarter feet (one meter) or less in diameter or diagonal dimension, regardless of zone.

(u) Job shacks that are placed at the job site during a construction project, for which a permit has been issued or applied, may be allowed on a temporary basis and shall be removed upon final approval of construction. A job shack is a portable structure for which the primary purpose is to house equipment and supplies and which may serve as a temporary office during construction for the purposes of the construction project.

(v) Electrical transmission towers and telephone poles, hydraulic flood control structures, and other structures under the control of a public utility or public agency which are located in a public right-of-way or public easement.

(2) Electrical.

(a) Portable motors or other portable appliances which are energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle, when that cord or cable is permitted by the National Electrical Code.

(b) Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, or fixed approved appliances or devices rated 50 amps or less and which are like-in-kind and in the same location.

(c) Temporary decorative lighting; when used for a period not to exceed 90 days and removed at the conclusion of the 90-day period.

(d) Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, conductor or control device, which are like-in-kind and in the same location.

(e) Repair or replacement of attachment plug(s) and associated receptacle(s) rated 50 amperes or less, which are like-in-kind in the same location.

(f) Repair or replacement of any over current device, which is like-in-kind and in the same location.

(g) Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.

(h) Removal of electrical wiring.

(i) Telecommunication outlet installations within individual dwelling units.

(j) Listed wireless security systems for which power is supplied by a listed Class 2 plug-in transformer and which are installed within dwelling units.

(k) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.

(l) Portable generators serving only cord and plug connected loads supplied through receptacles on the generator.

(m) Travel trailers.

(n) Like-in-kind replacement of one or more of the following: contactor, relay, timer, starter, circuit board, or similar control component; household appliance; circuit breaker; fuse; residential luminaire; lamp; snap switch; dimmer; receptacle outlet; thermostat; heating element; luminaire ballast with an exact same ballast; component(s) of electric signs, outline lighting, skeleton neon tubing, when replaced on site by an appropriate electrical contractor and when the sign, outline lighting or skeleton neon tubing electrical system is not modified; 10 horsepower or smaller motor; and induction detection loops that comply with WAC 296-46B-300(2) and are used to control gate access devices.

(o) All wiring for low voltage installations within a one-family dwelling unit or its accessory structure except wired security, fire or smoke alarm systems, provided the power is supplied by a listed Class 2 power supply and none of the wiring penetrates the wall or ceiling between the dwelling unit and an attached garage, or wall separating two dwelling units.

(3) Gas.

(a) Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.

(b) Replacement of any minor part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

(4) Mechanical.

(a) Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.

(b) Portable ventilation equipment.

(c) Portable cooling units.

(d) Steam, hot or chilled water piping that is within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

(e) Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

(f) Portable evaporative coolers.

(g) Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less.

(h) Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected.

(5) Plumbing.

(a) The stopping and/or repairing of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipes; provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

(b) The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

(c) Reinstallation or replacement of approved prefabricated fixtures that do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes.

(6) Grading.

(a) Grading that disturbs less than 7,000 square feet of land in an isolated, self-contained area; provided, that there is no danger to the public and such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties, as determined by the building official.

(b) Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.

(c) Cemetery graves.

(d) Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

(e) Excavations for wells and trenches for utilities.

(f) Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.

(g) Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.

(h) An excavation below existing finished grade for basements and footings of an existing building, retaining wall or other structure, for which the structure is authorized by a valid building permit.

(i) An excavation of less than 50 cubic yards of material, which is less than two feet in depth and which does not create a cut slope of a ratio steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

(j) A fill of less than 50 cubic yards of material, which is less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical. [Ord. 658 § 1, 2016; Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.250 Emergency repairs.

Where equipment replacements and equipment repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted to the city within the next working business day. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.255 Ordinary repairs.

Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement, or relocation of, any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.260 Public service agencies.

A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering, or other related equipment, which is under the ownership and control of public service agencies. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.265 Application for permit.

To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file a complete permit application in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. Such application shall include:

(1) A description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

(2) The legal description or tax parcel number, and the street address if available, which will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

(3) The property owner’s name, address, and phone number.

(4) The prime contractor’s business name, address, phone number, and current state contractor registration number.

(5) For building projects valued at over $5,000, either:

(a) The name, address, and phone number of the office of the lender administering the interim construction financing, if any; or

(b) The name and address of the firm that has issued a payment bond, if any, on behalf of the prime contractor for the protection of the owner, if the bond is for an amount not less than 50 percent of the total amount of the construction project.

(6) The use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

(7) Plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other information as required in BMC 15.05.315, 15.05.320 and 15.05.350.

(8) Valuation of the proposed work.

(9) Signature of the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.

(10) Such other data and information as required by the city.

The information required on the building permit application by subsections (2) through (5) of this section shall be set forth on the building permit document, which is issued to the owner, and on the inspection record card, which shall be posted at the construction site.

If the information required by subsection (5) of this section is not available at the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall so state, and the application shall be processed and the permit issued as if the information had been supplied, and the lack of the information shall not cause the application to be deemed incomplete for the purposes of vesting. However, the applicant shall provide such information as soon as the applicant can reasonably obtain such information. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.270 Areas of flood hazard.

Areas prone to flooding and designated in areas of flood hazard shall provide application information per Chapter 15.55 BMC. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.275 Action on permit application.

(1) City staff shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto, prior to acceptance of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire prevention or related permit application. If the application is incomplete or the construction documents or other submittal information lacks sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with applicable codes and standards, the application shall be returned to the applicant stating the reasons therefor. If city staff is satisfied that the application and construction documents are complete and provide sufficient information to proceed with review, the building official shall accept the permit application and collect the appropriate submittal fees.

Notwithstanding the language of this section or any other provision of this code, no building permit shall be issued until all other project permits related to the project action for which the building permit is sought have been approved and issued and all related fees, bonds, and approval conditions have been paid and/or satisfied, including but not limited to: SEPA approvals, subdivisions, building site plans, variances, shoreline permits, and frontage improvement requirements.

(2) Revisions to the submittal documents, not requested by the city, may be accepted by the city; however, the revisions may result in additional fees being assessed. Substantial revisions may require a new permit application to be submitted, as determined by the building official. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.280 Time limitation on permit application.

(1) Permit applications that are received on or after July 1, 2010, for which no permit is issued within 18 months following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with state law.

(2) Permit applications that were received on or before June 30, 2010, for which no permit has been issued shall be permitted to remain active until December 31, 2011. If at that time the permit is not issued, the application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with state law. Where the original permit application was received prior to July 1, 2007, the building official is authorized to require plans and other supporting information to be updated to current codes in order for the permit application to remain active in accordance with this section.

(3) Existing and new applications for which no permit has been issued may be canceled for inactivity, if an applicant fails to respond to the building official’s written request for revisions, corrections, actions or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. The building official may extend the response period beyond 90 days, if within the original 90-day time period the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information requested by the building official.

(4) The building official may extend the life of an application for an additional 180 days beyond the expiration period established in subsection (1) of this section, if any of the following conditions exist:

(a) Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act is in progress;

(b) Any other city review is in progress, provided the applicant has submitted a complete response to city requests for information or corrections;

(c) The building official determines that unique or unusual circumstances exist that warrant additional time for such response, and the building official determines that the review is proceeding in a timely manner toward the final city decision; or

(d) Litigation against the city or applicant is in progress, the outcome of which may affect the validity or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to such application.

(5) The building official may place a permit application on hold for up to one year, if requested to do so in writing by a permit applicant.

(6) Any balance owing for plan review or other review fees shall be paid prior to any approval for extension of the permit application. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.285 Validity of permit.

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the construction codes or of any other ordinance of the city. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or the construction codes or other ordinances of the city shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure when in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of the city. This section shall be applied, implemented and interpreted consistent with the statutes and court decisions of the state of Washington. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.290 Permit expiration.

(1) Every issued permit shall expire two years from the date of issuance. The building official may approve a request for an extended expiration date, when construction work is performed in phases extending beyond the two-year period due to the unique size and scope of project work and a construction schedule is provided by the applicant and approved prior to permit issuance.

(2) Permits issued for applications submitted prior to July 1, 2010, shall be valid for two years from the date of adoption of this code, unless a written request for extension is approved by the building official prior to permit expiration or the permit is renewed in accordance with BMC 15.05.295. Where new codes have been adopted or required to be enforced per Chapter 19.27 RCW since the time of permit issuance, the building official is authorized to require construction documents to be updated to current codes and submitted as a permit revision for review and approval by city staff.

(3) Mechanical, plumbing, electrical and other ancillary permits shall expire at the same time as the associated building permit, except that if no associated building permit is issued, the mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and/or other ancillary permit shall expire two years from the date of issuance. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.295 Permit extensions and renewals.

Permits may be extended, renewed or re-established by the building official in compliance with the terms and conditions of this section.

(1) Permit Extensions. A permit expiration date may be extended in accordance with the following:

(a) The written request for extension is received prior to the date of permit expiration.

(b) Upon written request from the owner, the building official or authorized representative is authorized to extend the expiration date up to 90 days with no additional fee, when all inspections except final inspection have been performed and approved. If all work is not completed within the 90-day extension period, the permit shall expire unless renewed under the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Permit Renewals. A permit may be renewed for a period of no more than one year from the date of original expiration in accordance with the following:

(a) A written request for renewal shall be received prior to the date of permit expiration.

(b) A permit may be renewed one time subject to approval by the building official, as long as no unauthorized changes have been made to the originally approved plans and the applicant continues to make regular requests for inspections.

(c) The applicant shall pay an additional fee based on the valuation of the work remaining to be inspected.

(3) Expired Permit Reestablishment. A permit that has expired may be reestablished one time in accordance with the following:

(a) A written request for reestablishment is received by the building official within six months after the date of permit expiration.

(b) No unauthorized changes have been made to the originally approved plans, and the applicant agrees to make regular requests for inspections.

(c) The applicant shall pay an additional fee based on the valuation of the work remaining to be inspected.

(d) The reestablished permit shall expire one year from the date of reestablishment and may not be further renewed or extended. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.300 Permit suspension or revocation.

The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code, whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or when the permit is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. This section shall be applied, implemented and interpreted consistent with the statutes and court decisions of the state of Washington. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.305 Placement of permit.

The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.310 Floor and roof design loads.

(1) Live Loads Posted. Where the live load for which each floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf (2.4 kN/m2), such design live load shall be conspicuously posted by the owner or owner’s authorized agent in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices.

(2) Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy required by BMC 15.05.390 shall not be issued until the floor load signs required by this section have been installed.

(3) Restrictions on Loading. It shall be unlawful to place, cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or room of a building structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.315 Submittal documents.

Submittal documents, consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspection, geotechnical reports, and other data, shall be submitted with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional when required by the state of Washington. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional, if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.320 Construction documents.

(1) Building.

(a) Information on Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon material acceptable to the building official. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed in the proper orientation and layout as it is to be constructed and shall show in detail that the work will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. The plans must include the relevant items listed in this section and any other information or documents as determined by the building official.

(b) Manufacturer’s Installation Instructions. Manufacturer’s installation instructions shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection as required by the code official.

(c) Braced Wall Lines. For buildings and structures utilizing braced wall design, braced wall lines shall be identified on the construction documents. All pertinent information, including, but not limited to, bracing methods, location and length of braced wall panels, and foundation requirements of braced wall panels at top and bottom, shall be provided.

(d) Fire Protection System Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9 of the IBC. Shop drawings shall be prepared by a certified individual as required by the state of Washington.

(e) Means of Egress. In occupancies within the scope of the International Residential Code the construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the International Residential Code. 

In occupancies within the scope of the International Building Code, the construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress including the path of the exit discharge to the public way in compliance with the International Building Code. In other than Group R-3 occupancies, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

The construction documents for Alterations—Level 2, Alterations—Level 3, additions and changes of occupancy shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. The construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated in every work area of every floor and in all affected rooms and spaces.

 (f) Exterior Wall Envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane, and details around openings. The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions, which provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, and where applicable, the test procedure used. In addition to these requirements, multi-unit structures as defined in RCW 64.55.010 shall comply with the submittal requirements listed in RCW 64.55.020.

Exception: Subject to the approval of the building official, R-3, one- and two-family dwellings, and their accessory structures may be exempted from the detailing requirements of this subsection.

(g) Site Plan. The construction documents submitted with the permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan, showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades, and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations. The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan, when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

(h) Design Flood Elevations. Where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1 of the IBC and Chapter 15.55 BMC.

(2) Electrical.

(a) Electrical Plans. Electrical plans for the following installations shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, an electrical engineer registered under Chapter 18.43 RCW and Chapters 392-344, 246-320, and 388-97 WAC. All electrical plans must bear the engineer’s stamp and signature:

(i) All educational facilities, hospitals, and nursing homes;

(ii) All services or feeders rated 1,600 amperes or larger;

(iii) All installations identified in the National Electrical Code as requiring engineering supervision; and

(iv) As required by the building official for installations which by their nature are complex, hazardous, or pose unique design problems.

(b) Construction Documents. Construction documents shall identify the name and classification of the facility and clearly show the electrical installation or alteration in floor plan view, include all switchboard and panelboard schedules, and, when a service or feeder is to be installed or altered, must include a riser diagram, load calculation, fault current calculation, and interrupting rating of equipment.

(c) Penetrations. Construction documents shall indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical systems and shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating, and fireblocking.

(d) Load Calculations. Where an addition or alteration is made to an existing electrical system, an electrical load calculation shall be prepared to determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the added load.

(e) Site Plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan, showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades, and the proposed finished grades. The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is permitted to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan, where the application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted.

(f) Plan Review Required. Electrical plan review is required for all new or altered electrical projects in the following occupancies and/or installations including but not limited to:

(i) Educational, institutional, or health care facilities/buildings as follows:

(A) Hospitals.

(B) Nursing home units or long-term care units.

(C) Boarding homes.

(D) Assisted living facilities.

(E) Private alcoholism hospitals.

(F) Alcoholism treatment facilities.

(G) Private psychiatric hospitals.

(H) Maternity homes.

(I) Ambulatory surgery facilities.

(J) Renal hemodialysis clinics.

(K) Residential treatment facilities for psychiatrically impaired children and youth.

(L) Adult residential rehabilitation centers.

(M) Educational facilities.

(N) Institutional facilities.

Exceptions: Electrical plan review is not required for the following types of installations in the above educational, institutional, or health care facilities buildings:

1. Lighting-specific projects that result in an electrical load reduction on each feeder involved in the project.

2. Low voltage systems.

3. Modification to existing electrical installations when all of the following conditions are met:

a. Service or distribution equipment involved is rated less than 100 amperes and does not exceed 250 volts;

b. Does not involve emergency systems other than listed unit equipment per NEC 700.12(F);

c. Does not involve branch circuits or feeders of an essential electrical system as defined in NEC 517.2; and

d. Service and feeder load calculations are increased by five percent or less.

4. Stand-alone utility fed services that do not exceed 250 volts, 100 amperes, where the project’s distribution system does not include:

a. Emergency systems other than listed unit equipment per NEC 700.12(F);

b. Critical branch circuits or feeders as defined in NEC 517.2; or

c. A required fire pump system.

(ii) Installations in occupancies except one- and two-family dwellings where a service or feeder rated 100 amperes or greater is installed or altered or if more than 100 amperes is added to the service or feeder.

(iii) All work on electrical systems operating at/over 600 volts.

(iv) All commercial generator installations or alterations.

(v) All work in areas classified as hazardous locations by the NEC.

(vi) If 60 percent or more of luminaires change.

(vii) Installations of switches or circuit breakers rated 400 amperes or over except for one- and two-family dwellings.

(viii) Wind-driven generators.

(ix) Solar photovoltaic systems.

(x) Any proposed installation which cannot be adequately described in the application form.

 (3) Plumbing. Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data shall be submitted in two sets with each application for a permit. When required by the building official, plans, computations, and specifications are to be prepared by, and the plumbing designed by, an engineer, an architect, or both, who shall be licensed by the state to practice as such. Plans must be submitted for review and approval whenever the scope of the work includes:

(a) New nonresidential or mixed use buildings.

(b) New multifamily projects with three or more dwelling units (except townhomes as defined in the IRC).

(c) Nonresidential or mixed-use addition or alteration projects with more than 10 fixtures added or altered.

(d) Roof drains/overflow systems.

(e) Tenant improvements involving medical gas piping, commercial kitchens, and food service installations.

(f) Oil/water separator or grease interceptor installation.

(g) Sumps for nonresidential use.

(h) All types of laboratories.

(i) Addition of washing machines in multifamily units.

Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for plumbing systems and the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking.

(4) Mechanical. Plans must be submitted for review and approval for all mechanical work. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for mechanical systems and the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking.

Exceptions:

(a) Work in one- and two-family dwellings and IRC townhouses.

(b) The addition or relocation of not more than 15 diffusers connected to existing HVAC equipment provided the work is limited to ducts and diffusers, the building does not have a smoke control system, and ducts do not penetrate a fire rated assembly.

(c) In-kind replacement of indoor or outdoor equipment. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.325 Examination of documents.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.330 Use of consultants.

Whenever review of a building permit application requires retention by the city for professional consulting services, the applicant shall reimburse the city the full cost of such professional consulting services. This fee shall be in addition to the normal plan review and building permit fees. The city may require the applicant to deposit an amount with the city estimated in the discretion of the building official to be sufficient to cover anticipated costs for retaining professional consultant services and to ensure reimbursement of such costs. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.335 Expedited plan review.

At the time of application, an applicant may request that plans be sent to city approved contract consultants, if the applicant believes that such review may expedite the plan review process. The request must be in writing and acknowledge that the applicant agrees to pay the full consultant fee, which is in addition to the normal plan review and building permit fees collected by the city. The city may require the applicant to deposit with the city an amount estimated by the city to be sufficient to cover anticipated costs for the expedited consultant review and to ensure reimbursement of such costs. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.340 Approval of construction documents.

When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing or by stamp. One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the city. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work, and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.345 Phased approval.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted; provided, that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. The city is authorized to require that a performance bond or other security acceptable to the city be posted with the city in an amount equal to 150 percent of the cost of demolition and removal of the work authorized under a phased approval. The security shall be rescindable or refundable upon issuance of a building permit for the complete building or structure and a request in writing for the refund. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request a refund within 180 days of the permit issuance. Failure to request a refund within the specified time period may result in forfeiture of the full amount. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.350 Design professional in responsible charge.

When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional to act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional to perform the duties required of the original registered design professional. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Where structural observation is required by Chapter 17 IBC, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704 of the IBC).

At least one set of documents prepared by a registered design professional shall bear the seal or stamp of the design professional and shall contain the original signature of the design professional.

Exceptions:

(a) Supporting documents such as engineering calculations, geotechnical reports, and specifications need only bear an original stamp and signature on the cover sheet of the supporting documents.

(b) With permission of the building official, a copy of the original stamp and original signature may be accepted on the documents. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.355 Deferred submittals.

For the purposes of this section, “deferred submittals” are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official.

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge, who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official. The city is authorized to charge an additional review fee to evaluate deferred submittals under the provisions of this section. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.360 Amended construction documents.

Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. The building official may authorize minor field changes subject to the approval of the field inspector. Where changes to the approved plans alter the size, shape, height, location or orientation on the property, major components of the structural load path, or exiting requirements, a new permit application shall be submitted and applicable fee paid. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.365 Retention of construction documents.

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the city for a period of not less than 180 days from date of final inspection approval or permit expiration or as required by state law. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.370 Temporary structures and uses.

(1) General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

Exception: The building official may authorize unheated tents and yurts less than 500 square feet accommodating an R-1 occupancy for recreational use as a temporary structure and allow them to be used indefinitely.

(2) Electrical. If the building official finds that the safety of life and property will not be jeopardized, permits may be issued for temporary electrical installations for use during the construction of buildings or for carnivals, conventions, festivals, fairs, the holding of religious services, temporary lighting of streets, or other approved uses. Permission to use such temporary installations shall not be granted for a length of time greater than 90 days, except that a permit for a temporary installation to be used for constructing a building may be issued for the period of construction. Where such temporary lighting is over the street area, the proper authorization for such use of the street must first be obtained.

All such temporary installations shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this code; provided, that the building official may permit deviations which will not permit hazards to life or property; and further provided, that whenever such hazards are deemed by the building official to exist, the building official may at once rescind or cancel the permit covering such installation and disconnect, or order the disconnection of, all energy to such equipment.

(3) Plumbing and Mechanical. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary equipment, systems and uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The code official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

(4) Utilities. The code official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply utilities before an installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the code.

(5) Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation, and sanitary requirements of this code, as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and welfare.

(6) Termination of Approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.375 Fees.

(1) Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be issued until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.

(2) Schedule of Permit Fees. For buildings, grading, demolitions and structures, and for electrical, gas, mechanical, fire protection, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with this code and the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council, as now or hereafter amended. In no case shall the building permit fee be less than the city’s hourly inspection fee multiplied by the number of inspections expected to be performed for work authorized by the permit. The city manager is authorized to establish fees for any permit activity not specifically set forth herein.

(3) Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the documents for plan review. The building official may have the option to charge a deposit in lieu of the full plan review fee, if the full amount is not known at the time. Any plan review deposit shall be applied toward the total plan review fee owed. The actual permit fees and related plan review fee shall be determined upon completion of the plan review, and the balance owing shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. The plan review fee shall be a separate fee from the permit fees specified in this section and shall be in addition to the permit fees. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee may be charged. Any balance owing for plan review shall be paid prior to any approval for extension of the permit application.

(4) Building Permit Valuations. The permit applicant shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. “Permit valuation” or “valuation” shall be as defined in BMC 15.05.020. The final determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the building official.

(5) Work Commencing before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building or structure or grading or on any gas, electrical, mechanical, fire protection or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a stop work order and a special investigation fee in an amount equal to twice the permit fee. The special investigation fee shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

When it is determined that construction has taken place that required a permit and construction is at such a stage that structural conformance cannot be visually assured by the building official, the owner shall comply with the following:

(a) As determined necessary by the building official, the owner shall hire a licensed registered design professional to submit a certified report as to the structural integrity of the structure erected and the compliance of the structure with applicable construction codes and regulations along with the building permit application. This document (certification) must state any deficiencies and the acceptable (code) corrective action.

(b) As determined necessary by the building official, the owner shall secure building, electrical, fire, plumbing and/or mechanical permits.

(c) As determined necessary by the building official, the owner shall remove construction materials in order to validate the systems have been installed correctly.

(d) As determined necessary by the building official, the owner shall substantiate and/or show proof of compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws pertaining to land use.

(e) As determined necessary by the building official, a site inspection and a life safety inspection shall be obtained, when temporary occupancy approval or use of the building or structure is needed prior to permit issuance and final inspection.

(6) Related Fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.

(7) Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid, when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this chapter. The building official may authorize refunding not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is done. The building official shall not authorize refunding any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.380 Inspections.

The building official is authorized to require construction or work for which a permit is required to be inspected, and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material as required to allow for inspection. Electrical systems and equipment regulated by the Burien Electrical Code shall not be connected to the energy source until authorized by the building official.

(1) Preliminary Inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

(2) Manufacturer’s Installation Instructions. Manufacturer’s installation instructions, as required by this code, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection.

(3) Required Inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the following inspections:

(a) Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Inspection. Temporary erosion and sediment control inspections shall be made after all required silt fencing, construction fencing, straw bales, storm drain catch basin inserts (socks), entrance rocking, and other required elements are in place and prior to commencement of construction and/or clearing the site.

(b) Footing and Foundation Inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after poles or piers are set, trenches or basement areas are excavated, or excavations for footings are complete, any forms erected, and all required hold-down anchor bolts, hold-down straps, and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment. Foundation inspections shall also include special requirements for wood foundations and for any setbacks required from a property line, building setback line, critical area buffer, and/or the ordinary high water mark on waterfront properties. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job except that where concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job.

(c) Concrete Slab and Under-Floor Inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, slab insulation, piping accessories, and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

(d) Underground Inspections. Underground inspections shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded and piping or conductors are installed and before backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks or other rubble that would damage or break the raceway, cable or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection shall be provided in the form of granular or selected material, approved running boards, sleeves, or other means.

Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with IMC Section 1210.10 shall be permitted to be backfilled prior to inspection.

(e) Lowest Floor Elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in IBC Section 1612.5 or IRC Section R322 and Chapter 15.55 BMC shall be submitted to the building official. FEMA flood elevation certificates shall contain an original stamp and signature of the surveyor, licensed by the state of Washington, and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, and other information required by the flood elevation certificate.

(f) Exterior Wall Sheathing Inspection. Exterior wall sheathing shall be inspected after all wall framing is complete and strapping and nailing is properly installed, but prior to being covered.

(g) Roof Sheathing Inspection. The roof sheathing shall be inspected after all roof framing is complete. No roof coverings shall be installed until inspections are made and approved and confirmation that the height of the structure is in conformance with the requirements of the city of Burien zoning code and/or the shoreline master program.

(h) IMC/UPC/Gas/Rough-In Inspection. Rough-in mechanical, gas piping, plumbing, and electrical shall be inspected after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all components to be concealed are complete and, if required, under test prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. No connections to primary utilities shall be made until the rough-in work is inspected, tested and approved. Joints and connections in the plumbing system shall be gastight and watertight for the pressures required by the test.

No test or inspection shall be required where a plumbing system, or part thereof, is set up for exhibition purposes and has no connection with a water or drainage system.

The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any heating equipment or appliances installed to replace existing heating equipment or appliances serving an occupied portion of a structure provided that a request for inspection of such heating equipment or appliances has been filed with the department not more than 48 hours after such replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment or appliances is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure.

(i) Electrical Rough-In Inspection. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete and  prior to covering or concealment, but before fixtures, equipment or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. All required equipment grounding conductors installed in concealed cable or flexible conduit systems must be completely installed and made up at the time of the rough-in cover inspection.

(j) Frame Inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck, exterior wall sheathing, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place, pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete, the rough electrical, plumbing, fire suppression piping, heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved, and the building is substantially dried in.

(k) Flashing and Exterior Weather Barrier Inspection. Flashing and exterior weather barrier inspections shall be made after flashing and weather barrier materials have been installed but prior to any of the work being covered. Subject to the approval of the building official, an approved special inspection agency may be utilized for these inspections during the course of construction. In addition to these requirements, multi-unit structures as defined in RCW 64.55.010 shall comply with the special inspection and documentation requirements of RCW 64.55.020.

Exception: Group R-3 and one- and two-family dwellings are exempt from this inspection.

(l) Exterior Finish and Insulation Systems (EFIS), Lath and Gypsum Board Inspection. EFIS, lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after backing, lathing or gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

Exception: Interior gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance rated assembly or a shear assembly and is not located in Aircraft Noise Reduction Zone 1 (35 dB).

(m) Fire-Resistance-Rated Construction Inspections. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required, an inspection of such construction shall be made after lathing or gypsum board or gypsum panel products are in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before board or panel joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 

Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers, and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

(n) Energy Efficiency Inspection. In addition to the inspections required in Chapter 51-11 WAC, the following inspections are also required:

(i) Envelope.

(A) Wall Insulation. To be made after all wall insulation and air vapor retarder sheet or film materials are in place, but before any wall covering is placed.

(B) Glazing. To be made after glazing materials are installed in the building.

(C) Exterior Roofing Insulation. To be made after the installation of the roof insulation, but before concealment.

(D) Slab/Floor Insulation. To be made after the installation of the slab/floor insulation, but before concealment.

(ii) Mechanical.

(A) Mechanical Equipment Efficiency and Economizer. To be made after all equipment and controls required by the construction codes are installed and prior to the concealment of such equipment or controls.

(B) Mechanical Pipe and Duct Insulation. To be made after all pipe, fire suppression piping, and duct insulation is in place, but before concealment.

(iii) Lighting and Motors.

(A) Lighting Equipment and Controls. To be made after the installation of all lighting equipment and controls required by the construction codes, but before concealment of the lighting equipment.

(B) Motors. To be made after installation of all equipment covered by the construction codes, but before concealment.

(iv) Water Heating Equipment.

(A) Water Heater Efficiency. To be made after water heater is on site, but prior to installation and connection to the water system.

(o) Other Inspections. In addition to the specified inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the building department.

(p) Final Inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the permit is completed. If located in a flood hazard area, documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor as required in IBC Section 1612.5 or IRC Section R322 and Chapter 15.55 BMC shall be submitted to the building official prior to the final inspection.

(4) Reinspection. The building official may require a structure or portions of work to be reinspected. A reinspection fee shall be permitted to be assessed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete; or when required corrections have not been made; or when the approved plans and permit are not on site in a conspicuous or preapproved location; or when the building is not accessible. This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for inspection or reinspection. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.

 (5) Special Inspections. In addition to the inspections noted above, the building official is authorized to require special inspections for any type of work related to the construction codes by an inspection agency approved by the building official at no cost to the city.

The building official may require special inspection of equipment or wiring methods, when the installation requires special training, equipment, expertise, or knowledge. When such special inspection is required, it shall be performed by an independent third party acceptable to the building official. The special inspection person/agency shall be designated and approved prior to beginning the installation of wiring or equipment. A written report from the designated special inspection agency indicating that the installation conforms to the appropriate codes and standards shall be received by the building official prior to that installation being approved. All costs for such testing and reporting shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.

Multi-unit structures as defined in RCW 64.55.010 shall comply with the special inspection requirements as listed in RCW 64.55.030. Upon completion of an inspection required by RCW 64.55.030, the qualified inspector shall prepare and submit to the appropriate building department a signed letter certifying that the building enclosure has been inspected during the course of construction or rehabilitative construction and that it has been constructed or reconstructed in substantial compliance with the building enclosure design documents, as updated pursuant to RCW 64.55.020. The building department shall not issue a final certificate of occupancy or other equivalent final acceptance until the letter required by this section has been submitted. The building department is not charged with and has no responsibility for determining whether the building enclosure inspection is adequate or appropriate to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

(6) Inspection Agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the applicable requirements as to qualifications and reliability.

(7) Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the holders of the permits or their duly authorized agent to notify the city when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holders to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code.

(8) Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or notify the permit holder or his or her agent that the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portions shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 

(9) Correction of Violations of Other Codes. Repairs or alterations mandated by any property, housing, or fire safety maintenance code or mandated by any licensing rule or ordinance adopted pursuant to law shall conform only to the requirements of that code, rule, or ordinance and shall not be required to conform to this code unless the code requiring such repair or alteration so provides. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.385 Traffic management systems.

(1) The city building official will perform the electrical inspection and acceptance of traffic management systems within its jurisdiction. A traffic management system includes:

(a) Traffic illumination systems;

(b) Traffic signal systems;

(c) Traffic monitoring systems;

(d) The electrical service cabinet and all related components and equipment installed on the load side of the service cabinet supplying electrical power to the traffic management system; and

(e) Signalization system(s) necessary for the operation of a light rail system. A traffic management system can provide signalization for controlling vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic, or rolling stock.

(2) The city recognizes that traffic signal conductors, pole and bracket cables, signal displays, traffic signal controllers/cabinets, and associated components used in traffic management systems are acceptable for the purpose of meeting the requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW, provided they conform with the following standards or are listed on the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) qualified products list:

(a) WSDOT/APWA Standard Specifications and Plans;

(b) WSDOT Design Manual;

(c) International Municipal Signal Association (IMSA);

(d) National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association (NEMA);

(e) Federal Standards 170/Controller Cabinets;

(f) Manual for Uniform Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction;

(g) Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE); or

(h) Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).

(3) Associated induction detection loop or similar circuits will be accepted by the city without inspection.

(4) For the licensing requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW, jurisdictions will be considered owners of traffic management systems when doing electrical work for another jurisdiction(s) under a valid interlocal agreement, as permitted by Chapter 39.34 RCW. Interlocal agreements for traffic management systems must be filed with the city prior to work being performed for this provision to apply.

(5) Jurisdictions with an established electrical inspection authority and WSDOT may perform electrical inspection on their rights-of-way for each other by interlocal agreement. They may not perform electrical inspection on other rights-of-way except as allowed in Chapter 19.28 or 39.34 RCW.

(6) Underground Installations.

(a) In other than open trenching, raceways will be considered “fished” according to the NEC and do not require visual inspection.

(b) The city will conduct inspections in open trenching within its jurisdiction upon request.

(7) Identification of Traffic Management System Components. Local government jurisdictions or WSDOT may act as the certifying authority for the safety evaluation of all components.

(a) An electrical service cabinet must contain only listed components. The electrical service cabinet enclosure is not required to be listed but will conform to the standards in subsection (8) of this section.

(b) The local government jurisdiction must identify, as acceptable, the controller cabinet or system component(s) with an identification plate. The identification plate must be located inside the cabinet and may be attached with adhesive.

(8) Conductors of Different Circuits in Same Cable, Enclosure, or Raceway. All traffic management system circuits will be permitted to occupy the same cable, enclosure, or raceway without regard to voltage characteristics, provided all conductors are insulated for the maximum voltage of any conductor in the cable, enclosure, or raceway. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.390 Certificate of occupancy.

(1) Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city.

Exception: Work exempt from permits per BMC 15.05.245.

(2) Certificate Issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the building department, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following information:

(a) The permit number.

(b) The address of the structure.

(c) The name and address of the owner.

(d) A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

(e) A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

(f) The name of the building official.

(g) The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

(h) The use and occupancy.

(i) The type of construction.

(j) The design occupant load.

(k) Whether an automatic sprinkler system is provided and whether the sprinkler system is required.

(l) Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

Exception: Single-family dwellings and their accessory structures approved under the International Residential Code and group U occupancies associated with single-family residences approved under the International Building Code may be issued a certificate of occupancy in the form of a signed off permit inspection card.

Where applicable, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the floor load signs required by BMC 15.05.310 have been installed. It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by the International Building Code or International Residential Code.

(3) Temporary or Phased Occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary or phased certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit; provided, that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official is authorized to require, in addition to the completion of life safety building components, the completion of any or all accessibility components prior to issuance of a temporary or phased certificate of occupancy. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary or phased certificate of occupancy is valid. The city is authorized to require that a performance bond or other security acceptable to the city be provided with the city in an amount equal to 150 percent of the value of incomplete work as determined by the design professional. The security shall be rescindable or refundable upon issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the complete building or structure and a request in writing for the refund. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request a refund within 180 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Failure to request a refund within the specified time period may result in forfeiture of the full amount.

(4) Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the owner or owner’s representatives, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. This section shall be applied, implemented and interpreted consistent with the statutes and court decisions of the state of Washington. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.395 Service utilities.

(1) Connection of Service Utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility or source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until authorized by the building official.

(2) Temporary Connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.

(3) Authority to Order Disconnect Service Utilities. The building official shall have the authority to order disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes and the referenced codes and standards set forth in this chapter in case of emergency, when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or when such utility connection has been made without the required approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner, owner’s authorized agent, and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner, the owner’s authorized agent or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 

(4) Connection after Order to Disconnect. A person shall not make energy source connections to mechanical, plumbing, or electrical systems regulated by the construction codes, which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such systems. Where a system is maintained in violation of the construction code, and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the code official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.400 Appeals.

(1) General. Appeals of final orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this title and the adopted codes may be appealed by the permit applicant, property owner or his/her agent to the hearing examiner, pursuant to Chapters 2.15 and 2.20 BMC, within 30 days of the issuance of the final order, decision or determination.

(2) Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this title or the rules adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this title do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have no authority to waive requirements of this title.

(3) Participation in the Appeal. Only those parties who have appealed the building official’s final order, decision or determination may participate in the appeal in either or both of the following ways:

(a) By submitting written comments or testimony to the hearing examiner prior to commencement of the hearing; or

(b) By appearing in person, or through a representative at the hearing. The hearing examiner may reasonably limit the extent of oral testimony or oral argument to facilitate the orderly and timely conduct of the hearing.

(4) Decision on the Appeal. The hearing examiner shall consider all information and material within the scope of the appeal submitted by persons entitled to participate in the appeal. Based on the hearing examiner’s findings and conclusions, the hearing examiner may affirm, reverse or modify the order, decision or determination being appealed. The hearing examiner’s decision on the appeal shall be issued within 90 days from the date the original appeal period closed, unless all parties to an appeal have agreed to an extended time period. Within four business days after it is issued, the hearing examiner’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to each person who has requested notice of the decision. The hearing examiner’s final decision shall be the final decision of the city on the appeal and shall be conclusive unless proceedings for review of the decision are properly commenced in superior court within the time period specified by state law.

(5) Judicial Review. Any judicial appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be reviewed in King County superior court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act (“LUPA”). The land use petition must be filed within 21 calendar days of the issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.405 Unlawful acts.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure, property or equipment regulated by this title, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this title. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the building official. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.410 Violations – Penalties.

The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and subject to enforcement as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.415 Stop work order.

(1) Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code, the construction codes, or other pertinent laws or ordinances that are violated during the course of work authorized by the permit, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. Issuance of a notice of violation, infraction or notice and order is not a condition precedent to the issuance of the stop work order.

(2) Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s authorized agent, or to the person doing the work and posted in plain sight on the premises, structure, fixture, or system as applicable. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.

(3) Effect.

(a) The building official is authorized to assess a special investigation fee for the issuance of a stop work order, when work has started without the issuance of a permit. The special investigation fee shall be determined in accordance with BMC 15.05.375(5), Work Commencing before Permit Issuance.

(b) A stop work order represents a determination that a code violation has occurred and that any work or activity that is causing or contributing to the violation on the property where the violation has occurred or is occurring must cease.

(c) A stop work order requires the immediate cessation of the specified work or activity on the named property. Work or activity may not resume unless specifically authorized by the building official or designee.

(d) A stop work order may be appealed to the city hearing examiner according to the procedures prescribed by BMC 15.05.400, Appeals.

(e) Failure to appeal the stop work order within the applicable time limits shall render the stop work order a final determination that a code violation occurred and that work was properly ordered to cease.

(f) Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order is declared to be unlawful and subject to enforcement as provided in BMC 1.15.110. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.420 Unsafe structures and equipment.

(1) Conditions. Structures or existing equipment which are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities or inadequate light and ventilation, which constitute a fire hazard, are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Additionally, a structure that is not secured against entry, or which has been abandoned for more than one year, or for which the applicant or owner fails to request the required inspection(s) prior to permit expiration or occupancy may be deemed unsafe by the building official.

(2) Evacuation. Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life and property, the building official is authorized to abate summarily such hazardous conditions that are in violation of the codes. The building official shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any unsafe occupied building when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the building official.

(3) Abatement. Where a structure has been deemed unsafe, the building official or designee shall first issue a civil notice of violation as prescribed in BMC 1.15.120. The notice of violation shall include a statement requiring the unsafe structure or equipment to be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in Chapter 15.40 BMC, Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code. 

(4) Restoration. Where the structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is restored to a safe condition, to the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions and change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of BMC 15.05.235 and the International Existing Building Code. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


15.05.425 Copies to be available.

(1) A copy of each code adopted by reference in this title shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk.

(2) The codes, standards, rules, and regulations adopted by this title are adopted by reference thereto as though fully set forth in this title. Not less than one copy of each such code, standards, rules, and regulations, in the form in which it was adopted and suitably marked to indicate amendments, additions, deletions, and exceptions as provided in this title, shall be filed in the building official’s office and be available for use and examination by the public. [Ord. 638 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 583 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013; Ord. 541 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010]


Chapter 15.10 CONSTRUCTION CODES

Sections:

15.10.010    Short title.

15.10.020    Purpose.

15.10.030    Sound and hours of construction.

15.10.040    Referenced codes.

15.10.050    Code conflicts resolution.

15.10.060    International Building Code adopted.

15.10.070    International Residential Code adopted.

15.10.080    International Mechanical Code adopted.

15.10.090    National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

15.10.100    Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

15.10.110    International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

15.10.120    Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

15.10.130    Washington State Energy Code adopted.

15.10.140    Washington Cities Electrical Code adopted.

15.10.150    International Existing Building Code adopted.


15.10.010 Short title.

This chapter is known as and may be referred to as the “city of Burien building and construction code” and may be cited as such. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the codes and regulations adopted by this title is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or users of buildings and structures and the general public by the provision of construction codes throughout the city, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected by the terms of these codes and regulations. More specifically, this chapter is designed to effectuate the following purposes, objectives and standards:

(1) To set forth minimum performance standards and requirements for construction and construction materials, consistent with nationally accepted standards of engineering and fire and life safety.

(2) To permit the use of current technical methods, devices and improvements.

(3) To eliminate restrictive, obsolete, conflicting, duplicative and unnecessary regulations and requirements which could unnecessarily increase construction costs or retard the use of new materials and methods of installation or provide unwarranted preferential treatment to types or classes of materials or products or methods of construction.

(4) To provide standards and specifications for making buildings and facilities accessible to and usable by physically challenged persons.

(5) To consolidate the administration and enforcement of building and construction codes. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.030 Sound and hours of construction.

Sounds originating from construction sites, including but not limited to sound from construction equipment, power tools and hammering, are prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on weekends, as regulated in BMC 9.105.400. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.040 Referenced codes.

Specific codes referenced in the general codes adopted by this chapter shall be as follows:

(1) Any and all reference to the International Plumbing Code shall be replaced with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted in BMC 15.10.120.

(2) Any and all reference to the International Property Maintenance Code shall be replaced with the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 15.40 BMC.

(3) Any and all reference to the International Electrical Code, National Electrical Code or NFPA 70 shall be replaced with the Burien Electrical Code as adopted in BMC 15.10.140. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.050 Code conflicts resolution.

(1) The codes enumerated in this title are adopted by the State Building Code Council as provided in RCW 19.27.074 and amended by the State Building Code Council from time to time, and are enacted by the State Legislature.

The State Legislature mandates, as provided in RCW 19.27.050, that all counties and cities throughout the state shall enforce the codes and all amendments thereto. Therefore, the city of Burien automatically adopts by reference these codes and their respective amendments as they are adopted and amended by the State Legislature.

(2) In case of conflict among the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Fire Code and the Uniform Plumbing Code, the first named code shall govern over those following.

(3) In case of conflict between other codes and provisions adopted by this chapter, the code or provision that is the most restrictive, as determined by the building official, shall apply. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.060 International Building Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code (IBC), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50 WAC, and including Appendix Chapter E (Accessibility), ICC A117.1-2009 (Accessible Standards), Appendix Chapter H (Signs), and Appendix Chapter J (Grading), excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by reference, together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of IBC Chapter 1, Administration.

(1) The provisions of this code do not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables, and fruits. “Temporary growing structure” means a structure that has the sides and roof covered with polyethylene, polyvinyl, or similar flexible synthetic material and is used to provide plants with either frost protection or increased heat retention. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for purposes of this code.

(2) The provisions of this code do not apply to the construction, alteration, or repair of temporary worker housing, except as provided by rule adopted under Chapter 70.114A RCW or Chapter 37, Laws of 1998 (SB 6168). “Temporary worker housing” means a place, area, or piece of land where sleeping places or housing sites are provided by an employer for his or her employees or by another person, including a temporary worker housing operator, who is providing such accommodations for employees, for temporary, seasonal occupancy, and includes “labor camps” under RCW 70.54.110.

(3) The provisions of this code do not apply to vendor carts. “Vendor cart” means a mobile, portable means of containing or transporting merchandise, vegetables, fruits, or other inventory for the purpose of retail sales. “Vendor cart” shall not mean a building or structure, as defined in this code. Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be required.

(4) Recyclable Materials, Compost, and Solid Waste Storage. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

“Compost” means biodegradable solid wastes that are separated for composting such as food waste, food soiled paper and yard waste.

“Recycled materials” means those solid wastes that are separated for recycling or reuse, such as papers, metals and glass.

All local jurisdictions shall require that space be provided for the storage of recycled materials, compost, and solid waste for all new buildings.

Exception: Group R-3 and Group U occupancies.

The storage area shall be designed to meet the needs of the occupancy and efficiency of pickup, and shall be available to occupants and haulers.

(5) Add new stand-alone section as follows:

Design Criteria shall be as follows:

GROUND AND ROOF SNOW LOAD: 25 PSF

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY: D

WIND SPEED: Risk category I: 100 mph; Risk category II: 110 mph; Risk category III and IV: 115 MPH

WIND EXPOSURE: Site Specific. See IBC Section 1609.4

SOIL BEARING: Site specific. See IBC Chapter 18

WEATHERING: Moderate

FROST LINE DEPTH: 12 inches

TERMITE: Slight to moderate

DECAY: Slight to moderate

WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 24°F

SUMMER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 83°F

ICE SHIELD UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED: No

FLOOD HAZARDS: See BMC 15.55

AIR FREEZING INDEX: 148°F- days

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE: 51.4°F.

(6) Amend IBC Section 403.4.8.1, Equipment room, to read as follows:

403.4.8.1 Equipment room. If the standby system is a generator set inside a building, the system shall be located in a separate room enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, and shall be in a separate room from the normal power source including transformers and distribution equipment. Power distribution from the emergency source to the emergency transfer switch shall be by an independent route from the normal power source. System supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the fire command center. Fuel-fired standby power generator sets and associated fuel storage, including optional landlord- or tenant-owned generator sets, located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access, require the approval of the fire code official.

(7) Add new IBC Section 403.4.8.1.1, Penetrations, to read as follows:

403.4.8.1.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a room containing a standby power system are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, or electrical raceway serving the standby power system or being served by the standby power system. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.

Exception: Metallic piping with no joints or openings where it passes through the standby power system room.

(8) Amend IBC Section 403.4.8.3, Standby power loads, to read as follows:

403.4.8.3 Standby power loads. The following are classified as standby power loads:

1. Power and lighting for the fire command center required by Section 403.4.6;

2. Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smoke proof enclosures;

3. Elevators;

4. Where elevators are provided in a high-rise buildings for accessible means of egress, fire service access or occupant self-evacuation, the standby power system shall also comply with IBC Section 1009.4, 3007 or 3008 as applicable;

5. Smoke control systems.

(9) Add new IBC Section 403.7, Smoke control, and amend to read as follows:

403.7 Smoke control. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 shall be provided in buildings having floors more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

(10) Amend IBC Section 405.8, Standby power, as follows: Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph:

405.8 Standby power. A standby power system complying with Chapter 27 shall be provided standby power loads specified in Section 405.8.1. An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 405.8.2. Fuel-fired emergency generator sets and associated fuel storage, including optional generator sets, located more than 30 feet below the lowest level of exit discharge require the approval of the fire code official.

(11) Amend IBC Table 508.4, Required Separation of Occupancies (Hours), as follows:

Add footnote reference superscript “f” to R Occupancy Classification row and column headings. Add footnote “f” to read: See Section 419 for Live/Work Unit separations.

(12) IBC Section 901.7, Fire Areas, is amended to include a second paragraph as follows:

901.7 Fire areas. Where buildings, or portions thereof, are divided into fire areas so as not to exceed the limits established for requiring a fire protection system in accordance with this chapter, such fire areas shall be separated by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the International Building Code, or both, having a fire-resistance rating of not less than that determined in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code.

For the purpose of this section, fire barriers shall not be used to reduce the calculation of floor areas in this chapter for newly constructed buildings with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or greater and existing buildings undergoing a modification or change of use with a cumulative work area of 5,000 square feet or greater.

(13) Amend IBC Section 903.2, Automatic sprinkler systems, to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, WAC 51-50-903 and in all new and substantially altered buildings with a gross work area of 5,000 square feet or greater, regardless of type or use.

Exceptions: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

(14) Amend IBC Section 907.1.3, Equipment, as follows: Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph:

907.1.3 Equipment. Systems and their components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All new alarm systems shall be addressable. Each device shall have its own address and shall annunciate individual addresses at the approved supervising station.

(15) Add new IBC Section 907.2.24, System Installation, to read as follows:

907.2.24 System installation. Fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this code by persons under the direct supervision of individuals that have factory training and certification on the system being installed. Plans submitted for Fire Alarm System permits shall be prepared under the supervision of individuals possessing a NICET (National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies) Level III certification in Fire Alarm Systems or shall be licensed by the State of Washington as a Professional Fire Protection or Electrical Engineer or certified by the State of Washington. Plans shall identify certification and/or licensing information.

(16) Add new IBC Section 911.1.2.1, Penetrations, to read as follows:

911.1.2.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a fire command center are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, electrical raceway for fire department communication and control, and electrical raceways serving the fire command center or being controlled from the fire command center. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 713.

Exception: Metallic piping with no joints or openings.

(17) Amend IBC Section 1503.4, Roof drainage, to revise reference to the Uniform Plumbing Code and add new Section 1503.4.4, Discharge and Disposal, to read as follows:

[P] 1503.4 Roof drainage. Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall comply with IBC Section 1503 and Chapter 11 of the Uniform Plumbing Code.

1503.4.4 Discharge and Disposal. Roof top drainage shall be disposed of by one of the following methods:

1. Tight line to a storm water system (private or public).

2. Tight line to a roof-runoff infiltration system.

3. Concrete splash blocks.

1503.4.4.1 Tight line. A tight line with direct discharge to an abutting property or the right-of-way is prohibited unless specifically approved by the building official on the construction plans/permit.

1503.4.4.2 Review Required. In all cases the method selected shall be subject to review and approval by the building official and/or the city Public Works Department, with consideration given to site, soil types, slope condition and the nature of the development.

1503.4.4.3 Standards. All drainage systems both public and private shall be designed in accordance with storm water standards adopted by the city of Burien.

1503.4.4.4 “Green Roof technology”. “Green roof” technology may be approved by the building official provided that any drainage coming off of the roof is collected and disposed of pursuant to Sec 1503.4.4.1.

(18) Amend IBC Section 1608.1, General, to read as follows:

1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall be not less than 25 PSF uniform roof snow load, nor less than that determined by IBC Section 1607.

(19) Amend IBC Section 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas, to read as follows:

1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County” dated September 2007, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.

(20) Amend IBC Section 1705.16, Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), to read as follows:

1705.16 Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS). Special inspections shall be required for all EIFS applications. All exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS) shall be certified by the manufacturer as having been installed per the manufacturer’s installation recommendations or other agency approved by the building official. The manufacturer’s certification shall serve as the special inspection requirement when approved by the building official.

Exception: Special inspections shall not be required for EIFS applications installed over masonry or concrete walls.

1705.16.1 Water-resistive barrier coating. A water-resistive barrier coating complying with ASTM E 2570 requires special inspection of the water-resistive barrier coating when installed over a sheathing substrate.

(21) Amend IBC Section 2701.1, Scope, to read as follows:

2701.1 Scope. This chapter governs the electrical components, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. Electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Burien Electrical Code as adopted in BMC 15.10.140.

(22) Add new IBC Section 2702.1.6, Location, to read as follows:

2702.1.6 Location. Location of stationary generators, fuel piping, and storage tanks are subject to the approval of the building official and/or fire code official.

(23) Amend IBC Section 3303, Demolition standards, to read as follows:

3303.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards by which demolition of existing structures is to be conducted. The proposed standards are intended to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare are protected when structures are removed. If demolition is proposed along with an application for a construction permit or reuse of a property, sections 3303.5 and 3303.11 do not apply. Following demolition of any structure the property shall be altered to a condition that will not create an attractive nuisance or be unsightly to neighboring properties, public streets and pedestrian facilities. This purpose statement shall be preeminent.

3303.2 Construction Documents. Construction documents and a schedule for demolition must be submitted when required by the Building Official. Where such information is required, no work shall be done until such construction documents or schedule, or both, are approved.

3303.3 Permit Required. A demolition permit is required for any structure to be removed. The demolition permit may be conditioned as necessary to mitigate adverse impacts associated with demolition activities and the aesthetic condition of the vacant site following demolition. All demolition work shall be completed within 30 days from commencement of demolition activity provided that site restoration work shall be completed as provided in section 3303.11.

3303.4 Nuisances. The activity shall not create or exacerbate a nuisance as defined by BMC 8.45.020.

3303.5 Foundation Removal and Surface Restoration. All foundations and/or related materials shall be removed from the site. Unless otherwise approved by the city, all man-made or processed surfaces including but not limited to driveways, asphalt, patios or sidewalks shall be removed, except in the public right-of-way.

3303.6 Pedestrian protection. The work of demolishing any building shall not be commenced until pedestrian protection is in place as required by this chapter.

3303.7 Means of egress. A party wall balcony or horizontal exit shall not be destroyed unless and until a substitute means of egress has been provided and approved.

3303.8 Vacant Lot. Where a structure has been demolished or removed, the vacant lot shall be filled and maintained to the existing grade or in accordance with the ordinances of the jurisdiction having authority. This requirement may be waived if grading would require the alteration of a critical area and/or its buffer. It may also be waived if grading activity could result in soil instability.

3303.9 Erosion Control. All areas that have been disturbed by demolition activity shall be stabilized to prevent erosion. Erosion control measures shall comply with adopted best management practices and shall be in place prior to and during any demolition activity.

3303.10 Water Accumulation. Provisions shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on the premises or the adjoining property.

3303.11 Site Restoration Required. Restoration of properties shall be completed within 4 months of the issuance of a demolition permit. The city may require a financial guarantee to ensure proper installation, establishment and maintenance of a restoration plan. Areas of a site that have been disturbed shall be re-vegetated with an approved hydro-seed mixture.

3303.12 Utility Connections. All service utilities shall be properly capped or terminated at property lines or at the service connection in the right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Building Official. Utilities Removal and/or decommissioning of utilities shall be completed in accordance with all applicable laws and procedures including but not limited to the IFC, IBC, WAC and RCW.

3303.13 Fire safety during demolition. Fire safety during demolition shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and the applicable provisions of Chapter 56 of the International Fire Code.

(24) IBC Section H104, Identification, is deleted.

(25) Amend IBC Section J103, Permits Required, by replacing Section J103.2, Exemptions, as follows:

J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:

1. Grading that disturbs less than 7,000 square feet of land in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.

2. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.

3. Cemetery graves.

4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

5. Excavations for wells or trenches for utilities.

6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, process or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.

7. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional. 

8. An excavation below existing finished grade for basements and footings of an existing building, retaining wall or other structure, for which the structure is authorized by a valid building permit.

9. An excavation of less than 50 cubic yards of material, which is less than two feet in depth and which does not create a cut slope of a ratio steeper than two horizontals to one vertical.

10. A fill of less than 50 cubic yards of material, which is less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical.

Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

(26) Amend IBC Section J104, Permit Application and Submittals, by replacing Section 104.1 with the following:

J104.1 Submittal requirements. In addition to submittals required by the provisions of Section 15.05.315 BMC, the applicant shall submit the following:

1. Statement estimating quantities of excavation and fill.

2. Statement of the area of land to be disturbed in square feet.

3. Temporary erosion and sediment control plan.

4. For sites subject to a drainage review in accordance with Chapter 13.10 BMC, drainage plans and documentation consistent with Chapter 13.10 BMC.

(27) Amend IBC Section J109, Drainage and Terracing, by replacing Section J109.1 with the following:

J109.1 General. Drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided where the ground slope is steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (33 percent) as follows:

1. For site that are subject to a drainage review in accordance with Chapter 13.10 BMC, drainage shall be provided in accordance with the provision of that Chapter and terracing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 

2. Other sites shall provide drainage and terracing in accordance with the requirements of this section unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional.

(28) Replace Section J110, Erosion Control, with the following:

Section J110, EROSION CONTROL AND SEASONAL LIMITATION

J110.1 General. The transport of sediment from the site to drainage facilities, water resources, and adjacent properties and rights-of-way shall be prevented to the maximum extent practicable as follows:

1. For sites that are subject to a drainage review in accordance with BMC 13.10, erosion and sediment controls shall be applied as specified by the temporary erosion and sediment control measures and performance criteria and implementation requirements in accordance with 13.10 BMC.

2. For other sites, the faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control shall be permitted to consist of effective planting. Erosion control shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

J110.2 Seasonal limitation. From October 1 through April 30, which is the seasonal limitation period, clearing and grading shall only be permitted if shown to the satisfaction of the code official that runoff leaving the construction site will comply with the erosion and sediment control measures and performance criteria and implementation requirements in 13.10 BMC and the Surface Water Design Manual through a combination of the following:

1. Site conditions including vegetative coverage, slope, soil type and proximity to receiving waters;

2. Proposed limitations on activities and the extent of disturbed areas; and

3. Proposed erosion and sedimentation control measures.

Exceptions:

1. If, during the course of construction activity or soil disturbance during the seasonal limitation period, silt-laden runoff violating standards of Chapter 13.10 BMC leaves the construction site, or if clearing and grading limits or erosion and sediment control measures shown in the approved plan are not maintained, the code official shall revoke the permit or shall issue a stop work order in accordance with Chapter 15.05 BMC.

2. The following activities are exempt from the seasonal limitations of this section:

2.1 Maintenance and necessary repair of erosion and sediment control facilities;

2.2 Routine maintenance of public facilities or existing utility structures that do not expose the soil or result in removal of the vegetative cover to the soil;

2.3 Activities where there is one hundred percent infiltration of surface water runoff within the site in approved and installed erosion and sedimentation control facilities;

2.4 Typical landscaping activities of existing single family residences that do not require a permit;

2.5 Response to emergencies that threaten the public health, safety or welfare, consistent with Section 15.60.090 BMC.

(29) Add a new IBC Section J112, Site Soil Protection and Restoration, as follows: 

J112.1 Soil protection. The duff layer and native topsoil shall be retained in an undisturbed state to the maximum extent practicable. Any duff layer or topsoil removed during grading shall be stockpiled on-site in a designated, controlled area not adjacent to public resources and critical areas. The material shall be reapplied to other portions of the site where feasible.

J112.2 Soil restoration. The soil moisture holding capacity of disturbed soils shall be restored as follows:

1. Areas that have been cleared and graded shall have the soil moisture holding capacity restored to that of the original undisturbed soil native to the site to the maximum extent practicable. The soil in any area that has been compacted or that has had some or all of the duff layer or underlying topsoil removed shall be amended to mitigate for lost moisture-holding capacity as follows:

1.1 The amendment shall take place between May 1 and October 1;

1.2 The topsoil layer shall be a minimum of eight inches thick, unless the applicant demonstrates that a different thickness will provide conditions equivalent to the soil moisture-holding capacity native to the site;

1.3 The topsoil layer shall have an organic matter content of between five to ten percent dry weight and a pH suitable for the proposed landscape plants;

1.4 When feasible, subsoils below the topsoil layer should be scarified at least four inches with some incorporation of the upper material to avoid stratified layers; and

1.5 Compost used to achieve the required soil organic matter content must meet the definition of “composted materials” in WAC 173-350-220.

Exception. This section does not apply to areas that at project completion are covered by an impervious surface, incorporated into a drainage facility or engineered as structural fill or slope.

[Ord. 658 § 2, 2016; Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.070 International Residential Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-51 WAC, including Appendix F, Radon Control Methods, Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures, WAC 51-51-60105 – Appendix Chapter Q, Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems, WAC 51-51-60106 – Appendix U, Solar-ready Provisions, WAC 51-51-60107 – Appendix V, Fire Sprinklers, and excluding 



Chapters 1, 11, and 25 through 43, is hereby adopted by reference, together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of IRC Chapter 1, Administration.

(1) Energy Code requirements are regulated by Chapter 51-11R WAC as adopted and amended in BMC 15.10.130.

(2) Plumbing Code requirements are regulated by Chapter 51-56 WAC (UPC) as adopted and amended in BMC 15.10.120.

(3) Electrical Code requirements are regulated by Burien Electrical Code (WCEC) as adopted in BMC 15.10.140.

(4) Except where required by the International Fire Code for access or fire flow, an automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system.

(5) Amend IRC Table R301.2, Climatic and geographic design criteria, to include local design values as follows:

R301.2 Climatic and Geographic design criteria. Buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code as limited by the provisions of this section. Additional criteria shall be established by the local jurisdiction and set forth in Table R301.2 (1). Design values for Table R-301.2(1) shall be as follows:

GROUND AND ROOF SNOW LOAD: 25 PSF

WIND SPEED: 110 mph

TOPOGRAPHIC EFFECTS: No

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY: D2

WEATHERING: Moderate

FROST LINE DEPTH: 12 inches

TERMITE: Slight to moderate

DECAY: Slight to moderate

WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 24°F.

SUMMER DESIGN TEMPERATURE: 83°F.

ICE SHIELD UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED: No

FLOOD HAZARDS: See BMC 15.55

AIR FREEZING INDEX: 148°F.- days

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE: 51.4°F.

SOIL BEARING (Assumed): 1500 PSF

(6) Amend IRC Appendix V, Fire Sprinklers, to read as follows:

AS107.1 Fire sprinklers. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in new one-family and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with Appendix P.

EXCEPTION: One-family and two-family dwellings and their attached accessory structures with a gross floor area less than 3600 square feet.

[Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.080 International Mechanical Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by reference together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of IMC Chapter 1, Administration. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.090 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

The 2015 Edition of ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code (NFGC), as published by National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used for the administration of the National Fuel Gas Code. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.100 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

The 2014 Edition of NFPA 58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (LPGC), as published by National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used for the administration of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.110 International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, excluding Chapter 1 “Administration,” is hereby adopted by reference together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of IFGC Chapter 1, Administration.

(1) Amend IFGC Section 614.4, Exhaust installation, to read as follows:

614.4 Exhaust installation. Exhaust ducts for clothes dryers shall terminate on the outside of the building and shall be equipped with a back-draft damper. Dryer exhaust ducts may terminate at approved exterior louvers with not less than 1/2" openings in any direction. Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination. Ducts shall not be connected or installed with sheet metal screws or other fasteners that will obstruct the flow. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not be connected to a vent connector, vent or chimney. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not extend into or through ducts or plenums.

[Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.120 Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and as adopted and amended by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-56 WAC, including Appendix A – Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System; Appendix B – Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems; Appendix I – Installation Standards; and, in addition, Appendix C, Alternate Plumbing Systems, excluding Sections C303.3, C304.0 through C601.9 of Appendix C, is hereby adopted by reference together with the additions, deletions, exceptions, and amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of UPC Chapter 1, Administration; Chapters 12 and 14 of the Uniform Plumbing Code are not adopted; and, those requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code relating to venting and combustion air of fuel-fired appliances as found in Chapter 5 and those portions of the code addressing building sewers as identified in Chapter 51-56 WAC are not adopted.

(1) Amend UPC Section 311.0, Independent Systems, as follows:

311.0 Independent Systems. The drainage system of each new building and of new work installed in any existing building shall be separate and independent from that of any other building, and, when available, every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer.

Exception: Where one (1) building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining court, yard, or driveway, the building drain from the front building shall be permitted to be extended to the rear building.

Swimming pools shall be provided with a separate and independent drainage system, which shall connect with a public or private sewer. The drainage pipe for the pool, floor drain, and similar fixtures shall be connected either to the side sewer downstream of the main building or structure, or to the building sewer downstream of the last plumbing fixture. The main building drain shall be equipped with an accessible backwater valve outside of the building or structure and upstream of the pool drain connection.

(2) Amend UPC Chapter 6, Table 610.3, Water Supply Fixture Units (WSFU) and Minimum Fixture Branch Pipe Sizes, as follows:

Delete “Lawn Sprinkler, each head” and “for Private Use” from the table.

(3) Amend UPC Section 708.0, Grade of Horizontal Drainage Piping, to read as follows:

708.0 Grade of Horizontal Drainage Piping. Horizontal drainage piping shall be run in practical alignment and a uniform slope of not less than one fourth (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) or two (2) percent toward the point of disposal provided that, where it is impractical due to the depth of the street sewer or to the structural features or to the arrangement of any building or structure to obtain a slope of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) or two (2) percent. Any such pipe or piping four (4) inches (100 mm) or larger in diameter may have a slope of not less than one-eighth (1/8) of an inch per foot (10.5 mm/m) or one (1) percent, only when first approved by the building official. Horizontal drainage piping connected to any dual flush gravity tank water closet shall slope a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.

(4) Amend UPC Section 1101.12.2.2.2, Combined System, to read as follows:

1101.12.2.2.2 Combined System. The secondary roof drains shall connect to the vertical piping of the primary storm drainage system conductor downstream of any horizontal offset below the roof. The primary storm drainage system shall connect to the building storm water that connects to an underground public storm sewer. The combined secondary and primary roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1103.0 based on double the rainfall for the local area. A relief drain shall be connected to the vertical drain piping, within 20 feet of grade, using a wye-type fitting piped to daylight on the exterior of the building. The piping shall be sized as required for a secondary drain with a 4 inch maximum.

[Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.130 Washington State Energy Code adopted.

The Washington State Energy Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC, is hereby adopted by reference. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used for the administration of the Washington State Energy Code.

(1) Sections R107, Fees; R108, Stop Work Order; R109, Board of appeals; R110, Violations; and R111, Liability, are not adopted.

(2) Sections C107, Fees; C108, Stop Work Order; C109, Board of appeals; C110, Violations; and C111, Liability, are not adopted. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.140 Washington Cities Electrical Code adopted.

(1) The most current edition of the Washington Cities Electrical Code (WCEC), Part One (Adoption) and Part Three (National Electrical Code amendments), as published by the Washington Association of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be known as the Burien Electrical Code. This includes Annex A, B and C of the National Electrical Code; Commercial Building Telecommunications Cabling Standard (ANSI/TIA-568-C series, February 2009); Commercial Building Standard for Telecommunications Pathway and Spaces (TIA-569-B, October 2004); Commercial Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications (ANSI/TIA-607-B, August 2011); Residential Telecommunications Cable Standard (ANSI/TIA/EIA 570-B-2004); and the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC C2-2012 excluding Appendixes A and B).

(2) The “Construction Administrative Code” as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC shall be used for the administration of the Burien Electrical Code.

(3) Conflicts.

(a) The requirements of Washington Cities Electrical Code will be observed where there is any conflict between this chapter and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), Centrifugal Fire Pumps (NFPA 20), the Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-B, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, or ANSI/TIA/EIA 570.

(b) The National Electrical Code will be followed when there is any conflict between standard for Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection (NFPA 20), standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-B, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, ANSI/TIA/EIA 570-B, and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70).

(c) In accordance with RCW 19.28.010(3), when the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries adopts a more current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), the most current edition shall be enforced. Provisions in the annex chapters of the National Electrical Code shall not apply unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. [Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016; Ord. 583 § 2 (Exh. B), 2013; Ord. 541 § 4 (Exh. B), 2010]


15.10.150 International Existing Building Code adopted.

The 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC) is as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50-48000 WAC, including Appendix A, Guidelines for the Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings, Appendix N, Solar Readiness, and excluding Chapter 1, Administration, is hereby adopted by reference together with the amendments set forth in this section. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.05 BMC, shall be used in place of IEBC Chapter 1, Administration. 

(1) Amend Section 409.1 to include state amendments and city requirements relocated from BMC 15.05.135 to read as follows:

409.1 Conformance. Buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this code, the International Residential Code (chapter 51-51 WAC), the International Mechanical Code (chapter 51-52 WAC), the International Fire Code (chapter 51-54A WAC), the Uniform Plumbing Code and Standards (chapters 51-56 and 51-57 WAC), the Washington State Energy Code (chapter 51-11 WAC) and the Washington State Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Code (chapter 51-13 WAC) for new buildings or structures.

EXCEPTION: Group R-3 buildings or structures are not required to comply if:

1. The original occupancy classification is not changed; and

2. The original building is not substantially remodeled or rehabilitated.

For the purposes of this section, a building shall be considered to be substantially remodeled when the costs of remodeling exceed 60 percent of the value of the building exclusive of the costs relating to preparation, construction, demolition or renovation of foundations.

Prior to relocation, a feasibility inspection shall be performed on the building or structure by a registered design professional to document any known structural deficiencies, examine existing plumbing and mechanical systems, inspect insulated areas of the structure and check for life safety deficiencies. A copy of the inspection reports shall be submitted along with a building permit application for relocation.

Structures which do not conform to minimum requirements at the time of initial construction, or current life safety regulations, or are found substantially deficient in structural integrity, shall be subject to correction.

See BMC 12.17.095 (Building moving) for additional permit requirements. 

(2) Add new Section 409.1, Moved building – Electrical Conformance, for the purpose of relocating the content of BMC 15.05.135 as follows:

409.1 Moved buildings – Electrical requirements.

(1) Nonresidential buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with current requirements of this chapter.

(2) Residential buildings or structures wired in the U.S. to NEC requirements and moved into the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with the NEC requirements in effect at the time and place the original wiring was made. The building or structure must be inspected to ensure compliance with all current requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW and the rules developed by the building department if:

(a) The original occupancy classification of the building or structure is changed as a result of the move; or

(b) The building or structure has been substantially remodeled or rehabilitated as a result of the move.

(3) Residential buildings or structures wired in Canada to Canadian Electrical Code (CEC) standards and moved into the jurisdiction must be inspected to ensure compliance with the following minimum safety requirements:

(a) Service, service grounding, and service bonding must comply with the Burien Electrical Code.

(b) Canadian Standards Association (CSA) listed Type NMD cable is allowed with the following qualifications:

(i) CSA listed Type NMD cable, American Wire Gauge No. 10 and smaller installed after 1964, utilizing an equipment grounding conductor smaller than the phase conductors, must be:

(A) Replaced with a cable utilizing a full-size equipment grounding conductor; or

(B) Protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device.

(ii) CSA listed Type NMD cable, No. 8 AWG and larger, must:

(A) Utilize an equipment grounding conductor sized according to the requirements of the NEC in effect at the time of the installation;

(B) Be protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device; or

(C) Be replaced.

(c) Other types of wiring and cable must be:

(i) Replaced with wiring listed or field evaluated in accordance with U.S. standards by a laboratory approved by the department; or

(ii) Protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter protection device and arc fault circuit protection device.

(d) Equipment, other than wiring or panelboards, manufactured and installed prior to 1997, must be listed and identified by laboratory labels approved by the department or CSA labels.

(e) All panelboards must be listed and identified by testing laboratory labels approved by the department with the following qualifications:

(i) CSA listed panelboards labeled “Suitable for Use as Service Equipment” will be considered to be approved as “Suitable for Use only as Service Equipment.”

(ii) CSA listed panelboards must be limited to a maximum of 42 circuits.

(iii) CSA listed panelboards used as lighting and appliance panelboards, as described in the NEC, must meet all current requirements of the NEC and this chapter.

(f) Any wiring or panelboards replaced or changed as a result of the move must meet current requirements of Chapter 19.28 RCW and this chapter.

(g) The location, type, and ground fault circuit interrupter protection of receptacles and equipment in a bathroom, kitchen, basement, garage, or outdoor area must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(h) Four 15-ampere, kitchen small appliance circuits will be accepted in lieu of two 20-ampere, kitchen small appliance circuits. Receptacles will not be required to be added on kitchen peninsular or island counters.

(i) Spacing requirements for all other receptacles must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(j) Receptacles installed above baseboard or fixed wall space heaters must be removed and the outlet box covered with a blank cover. The receptacle is required to be relocated as closely as possible to the existing location.

(k) Lighting outlet and switch locations must meet the Washington requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

(l) Dedicated 20-ampere small appliance circuits are not required in dining rooms.

(m) Electric water heater branch circuits must be adequate for the load.

(n) The location, type, and circuit protection of feeders must meet the Washington State requirements in effect at the time the wiring was installed.

[Ord. 638 § 2 (Exh. B), 2016]


Chapter 15.12 AIRCRAFT NOISE REDUCTION

Sections:

15.12.010    Short title.

15.12.020    Purpose.

15.12.030    Scope.

15.12.040    Application to existing buildings.

15.12.050    Details.

15.12.060    Definitions.

15.12.070    Design requirements.

15.12.080    Seattle-Tacoma International Airport noise reduction areas.

15.12.090    Thirty-five dB reduction area exterior envelope.

15.12.100    Thirty dB reduction area exterior envelope.

15.12.110    Twenty-five dB reduction area exterior envelope.


15.12.010 Short title.

This chapter is known as and may be referred to as “aircraft noise control.” [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.020 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare by establishing minimum requirements regulating the design, construction, and/or setting on site of buildings for human occupancy in the vicinity of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. This chapter is not intended to abridge any safety or health requirements required under any other applicable codes or ordinances. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.030 Scope.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings or structures constructed or placed in use for human occupancy on sites within the vicinity of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. 

(2) Exception.

(a) Additions under 500 square feet that are not used for sleeping rooms; and

(b) Remodels with a building department valuation less than $16,800 as of December 31, 2003.

New glazing in exempted additions and remodels must conform to the provisions of the Washington State Energy Code.

This chapter is intended to supplement the provisions of the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Mechanical Code, the Washington State Energy Code, and the Washington State Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Code. In the case of conflict between this chapter and any other applicable codes the more restrictive requirements, as determined by the building official, shall be met. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.040 Application to existing buildings. 

Additions may be made to existing buildings or structures without making the entire building or structure comply with all the requirements of this chapter for new construction. Additions on existing buildings shall be made to comply in the areas being added to the extent that it is deemed practical and effective by the building official in meeting the intent of this chapter.

A change in use or occupancy, or structures, or use of a building previously unapproved for human occupancy to human occupancy use or of one previously unused for sleeping purposes to sleeping use shall not be permitted unless the building or structure complies with this chapter. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.050 Details.

The plans and specifications shall show in sufficient detail all pertinent data and features of the building and the equipment and systems, as herein governed, including, but not limited to: exterior envelope component materials; STC ratings of applicable component assemblies; R-values of applicable insulation materials; size and type of apparatus and equipment; equipment and system controls and other pertinent data to indicate conformance with the requirements herein.

The building official shall develop public information to indicate optional ways of achieving compliance with the sound level reduction ratings designated in this chapter. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.060 Definitions.

“Noise reduction coefficient (NRC)” is the arithmetic average of the sound absorption coefficients of a material at 250, 500, 1,000, and 2,000 Hz.

“Sound transmission class (STC)” is a single number rating for describing sound transmission loss of a roof/ceiling, wall, partition, window, or door. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.070 Design requirements.

The criteria of these sections establish the minimum requirements for acoustic design of the exterior envelope of buildings and for heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems and its parts. These requirements shall apply to all buildings for human occupancy within the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport Noise Areas. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.080 Seattle-Tacoma International Airport noise reduction areas.

Noise determined construction requirements detailed in this chapter shall be applied to new construction and additions of all structures, except for not normally inhabited portions of warehouses, storage buildings, public and private garages, and similar structures as determined by the building official, within the following areas:

(1) Thirty-Five dB Reduction Area. Those portions of the city east of First Avenue South extended from the northern to the southern city limits and to the eastern city limits. All living and working areas must comply with BMC 15.12.090, which is designed to achieve a noise reduction level of 35 dB.

(2) Thirty dB Reduction Area. Those portions of the city between First Avenue South and 12th Avenue S.W. extending from the northern to the southern city limits are a 30 dB reduction area. All living and working areas must comply with BMC 15.12.100, which is designed to achieve a noise reduction level of 30 dB.

(3) Twenty-Five dB Reduction Area. All remaining areas of the city. All living and working areas must comply with BMC 15.12.110 that is designed to achieve a noise reduction level of 25 dB. [Ord. 541 § 5 (Exh. C), 2010; Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.090 Thirty-five dB reduction area exterior envelope.

The exterior envelope of buildings in the 35 dB area shall be designed to meet the following minimum criteria:

(1) Exterior walls shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-40.

(2) Exterior windows shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-38.

(3) Exterior doors shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33.

(4) Roof/ceiling assembly combined shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-49.

(5) Ventilation shall be provided to comply with Chapter 51-11 WAC, Energy Code, and the following:

(a) A ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior.

The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least twenty gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch thick coated glass fiber or approved material, and shall be at least 10 feet long, with one 90-degree bend.

(b) Gravity vent openings shall be as close to code minimum in number and size as practical. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least six feet in length containing internal one-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct lining or other approved material. Each duct shall have a lined 90-degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight from the exterior, through the duct, into the attic.

(c) Bathroom, laundry and similar exhaust ducts connecting interior space to the outside, shall contain at least a 10-foot length of internal sound absorbing duct lining. Exhaust ducts less than 10 feet in length shall be fully lined and shall also meet the provisions of proper sealing of air leakage from the structure with approved weather-stripping and caulking compounds. Each duct shall be provided with a lined 90-degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least one inch thick.

(d) Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self-closing baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The duct shall be provided with a 90-degree bend. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.100 Thirty dB reduction area exterior envelope.

The exterior envelope of buildings in the 30 dB area shall be designed to meet the following minimum criteria:

(1) Exterior walls shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-35.

(2) Exterior windows shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33.

(3) Exterior doors shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33.

(4) Roof/ceiling assembly combined shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-44.

(5) Ventilation shall be provided to comply with Chapter 51-11 WAC, Energy Code, and the following:

(a) A ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20-gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch thick coated glass fiber or other approved material, and shall be at least five feet long, with one 90-degree bend.

(b) Gravity vent openings shall be as close to code minimum in number and size, as practical. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least three feet in length containing internal one-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct lining or other approved material. Each duct shall have a lined 90-degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight from the exterior, through the duct, into the attic.

(c) Bathroom, laundry, and similar exhaust ducts connecting interior space to the outside, shall contain at least a 10-foot length of internal sound absorbing duct lining. Exhaust ducts less than 10 feet in length shall be fully lined and shall also meet the provisions of proper sealing of air leakage from the structure with approved weather-stripping and caulking compounds. Each duct shall be provided with a lined 90-degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least one-inch thick.

(d) Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self-closing baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The duct shall be provided with a 90-degree bend. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


15.12.110 Twenty-five dB reduction area exterior envelope.

The exterior envelope of buildings in the 25 dB area shall be designed to meet the following minimum criteria:

(1) Exterior walls shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-30.

(2) Exterior windows shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-28.

(3) Exterior doors shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-26.

(4) Roof/ceiling assembly combined shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-39.

(5) Ventilation shall be provided to comply with Chapter 51-11 WAC, Energy Code, and the following:

(a) A ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20-gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch thick coated glass fiber or other approved material, and shall be at least five feet long, with one 90-degree bend.

(b) Gravity vent openings shall be as close to code minimum in number and size as practical.

(c) Bathroom, laundry, and similar exhaust ducts connecting interior space to the outside shall contain at least a 10-foot length of internal sound absorbing duct lining. Exhaust ducts less than 10 feet in length shall be fully lined and shall also meet the provisions of proper sealing of air leakage from the structure with approved weather-stripping and caulking compounds. Each duct shall be provided with a lined 90-degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least one-inch thick.

(d) Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self-closing baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The duct shall be provided with a 90-degree bend. [Ord. 408 § 1, 2004]


Chapter 15.15 MECHANICAL CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 541)


Chapter 15.20 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.20.010    Short title.

15.20.020    Adoption of International Fire Code.

15.20.030    Section 104 amended – General authority and responsibility.

15.20.040    Section 105 amended – Permits.

15.20.050    Section 108 amended – Board of appeals.

15.20.060    Section 109 amended – Violations.

15.20.070    Section 111 amended – Stop work order.

15.20.080    Section 113 amended – Fees.

15.20.085    Section 202 amended – General definitions.

15.20.090    Section 308.3 amended – Group A occupancies – Exceptions.

15.20.100    Section 314.4 amended – Indoor displays – Vehicles.

15.20.110    Section 503 amended – Fire apparatus access roads.

15.20.120    Section 506 amended – Key boxes – Where required.

15.20.130    Section 507 amended – Fire protection water supplies.

15.20.140    Section 508.1 amended – Fire command center – Penetrations.

15.20.150    Section 602 amended – Building services and systems – Definitions.

15.20.160    Section 604.2.9 amended – Emergency and standby power systems – High rise buildings.

15.20.170    Section 901 amended – Fire protection systems.

15.20.180    Section 903.2 amended – Automatic sprinkler systems – Where required.

15.20.190    Section 907 amended – Fire alarm and detection systems.

15.20.200    Section 5704.2 amended – Flammable and combustible liquids – Storage.

15.20.210    Section 5706.2.4.4 amended – Special operations – Storage and dispensing of flammable and combustible liquids on farms and construction sites – Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.

15.20.220    Section 5806.2 amended – Flammable cryogenic fluids – Limitations.

15.20.230    Section 6104.2 amended – Location of LP gas containers – Maximum capacity within established limits.


15.20.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the “city of Burien fire code.” [Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.020 Adoption of International Fire Code.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code (IFC) as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-54A WAC, and including Appendix B (Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), Appendix C (Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution), Appendix D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), and Appendix H (Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions), is hereby adopted by reference, together with the amendments, additions, deletions, and exceptions as set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.030 Section 104 amended – General authority and responsibility.

(1) IFC Section 104.10.1, Assistance from other agencies, is amended to read as follows:

104.10.1 Assistance from other agencies. Police and other enforcement agencies shall have authority to render necessary assistance in the investigation of fires or the enforcement of this code when requested to do so by the fire code official.

(2) IFC Section 104.11.2, Obstructing operations, is amended to read as follows:

104.11.2 Obstructing operations. No person shall obstruct the operations of the fire department in connection with extinguishment, control, or investigation of any fire, or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a police officer assisting the fire department.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.040 Section 105 amended – Permits.

(1) IFC Section 105.2.3, Time limitation of application, is amended to read as follows:

105.2.3 Time limitation of application. An application for any operational permit shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the fire code official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

An application for any fire protection systems construction permit shall be subject to the time limitations as prescribed in BMC 15.05.280.

(2) IFC Section 105.3.1, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:

105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked or for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Fire protection systems construction permits expiration shall be as prescribed in BMC 15.05.290. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued.

(3) IFC Section 105.3.2, Extensions, is amended to read as follows:

105.3.2 Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired operational permit shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The fire code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of the time period of a permit for periods of not more than 180 days each. Such extensions shall be requested by the permit holder in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

Fire protection systems construction permits may be extended or renewed in accordance with BMC 15.05.295.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.050 Section 108 amended – Board of appeals.

(1) IFC Section 108, Board of Appeals, is not adopted and is replaced as follows:

Section 108 - Means of appeal

108.1 General. Appeals shall be heard by the Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 15.05.400.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.060 Section 109 amended – Violations.

(1) IFC Section 109.1, Unlawful acts, is amended to read as follows:

Section 109.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or utilize any building, occupancy, premises, structure, property, equipment, or system regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the code official.

(2) IFC Section 109.2, Notice of violation, is amended to read as follows:

Section 109.2 Violation enforcement. Violations shall be enforced as prescribed in BMC 15.05.410.

(3) IFC Section 109.3, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:

Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Violation penalties shall be as prescribed in BMC 15.05.410.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.070 Section 111 amended – Stop work order.

(1) IFC Section 111.4, Failure to comply, is amended to read as follows:

111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the effects and penalties in BMC 15.05.415(3).

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.080 Section 113 amended – Fees.

(1) IFC Section 113.2, Schedule of permit fees, is amended to read as follows:

113.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the city’s contract with King County Fire District #2 and BMC 15.05.375(2). Plan Review fees shall be in accordance with BMC 15.05.375(3). Permit Valuations shall be determined in accordance with BMC 15.05.375(4).

(2) IFC Section 113.3, Work commencing before permit issuance, is amended to read as follows:

113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalties and requirements of BMC 15.05.375(5).

(3) IFC Section 113.5, Refunds, is amended to read as follows:

113.5 Refunds. Refunds may be authorized by the building official in accordance with BMC 15.05.375(7).

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.085 Section 202 amended – General definitions.

(1) IFC Section 202, Definitions, is amended by addition of the following:

POWER TAP. A listed device for indoor use consisting of an attachment plug on one end of a flexible cord and two or more receptacles on the opposite end, and has overcurrent protection.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016]


15.20.090 Section 308.3 amended – Group A occupancies – Exceptions.

(1) IFC Section 308.3, Group A occupancies – Exceptions, is amended by addition of a fourth exception to read as follows:

4. Where approved by the fire code official (see also Section 308.1.8).

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.100 Section 314.4 amended – Indoor displays – Vehicles.

(1) IFC Section 314.4, Vehicles, is amended as follows:

314.4 Vehicles. Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, fueled equipment, boats or other motor craft shall not be located indoors except as follows:

1. Batteries are disconnected.

2. Fuel in fuel tanks does not exceed one-quarter tank or 5 gallons (19L) (whichever is least).

3. Fuel tanks and fill openings are closed and sealed to prevent tampering.

4. Vehicles, boats or other motorcraft equipment are not fueled or defueled within the building.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.110 Section 503 amended – Fire apparatus access roads.

(1) IFC Section 503, Fire apparatus access roads, is adopted along with the following amendments:

(2) IFC Section 503.2.2, Authority, is amended to read as follows:

503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to allow a decrease in minimum access widths or require an increase in minimum access widths where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations or where necessary to meet the public safety objectives of the jurisdiction.

(3) IFC Section 503.3, Marking, is amended to read as follows:

503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof.

Signs or notices shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. Marked fire apparatus access roads, or “fire lanes” as defined above may be established or relocated at the time of plan review, pre-construction site inspection, and/or post construction site inspection as well as any time during the life of the occupancy as needed to provide and maintain fire department access. The fire code official or his/her designee may require that areas specified for use as driveways or private thoroughfares shall be designated as fire lanes and be marked or identified as required by this Section. All designated fire lanes shall be clearly marked in the following manner:

(a) Vertical curbs (6 inch) shall be painted yellow on the top and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane. The pavement adjacent to the painted curbs shall be marked with minimum 18 inch in height block lettering with a minimum 3 inch brush stroke reading: “NO PARKING - FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be yellow and spaced at 50 foot intervals or portions thereof, or

(b) Rolled curbs or surfaces without curbs shall have a yellow 6 inch wide stripe painted extending the length of the designated fire lane. The surface adjacent to the stripe shall be marked with minimum 18 inch in height block lettering with a minimum 3 inch brush stroke reading: “NO PARKING - FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be in yellow and spaced at 50 foot intervals or portions thereof, or

(c) Curbs shall be painted and/or surfaces striped as noted above and fire lane signs shall be installed as follows:


[IMAGE]


(i) Reflective in nature.

(ii) Red letters on white background.

(iii) Signs shall be spaced at 50 foot intervals or portions thereof apart and posted on or immediately next to the curb.

(iv) Top of signs shall be not less than 4 feet or more than 6 feet from the ground.

(v) Signs may be placed on a building when approved by the fire code official.

(vi) When posts are required they shall be a minimum of 2 inch galvanized steel or 4 inch x 4 inch pressure treated wood. Signs shall be placed so they face the direction of the vehicular travel.

(d) Diagonal yellow striping across the width of the Fire Lane shall be used when required by the fire code official. They shall be used in conjunction with a 6 inch yellow stripe and lettering indicated in item “b.” They shall run at a 30 to 60 degree angle and shall be parallel with each other. The stripes shall be a minimum of 6 inches in width and a minimum of 24 inches apart.

(4) IFC Section 503.4, Obstruction of fire apparatus roads, is amended to read as follows:

503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus roads/fire lanes. Fire apparatus access roads/fire lanes shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 shall be maintained at all times.

(a) The obstruction of a designated fire lane by a parked vehicle or any other object is prohibited and shall constitute a traffic and fire hazard and be deemed an immediate hazard to life and property.

(b) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle whether occupied or not within a designated Fire Lane, except; momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers provided the driver does not leave the vehicle.

(c) No person shall allow continued violations of this section on private property which they own or manage.

(d) Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is hereby declared a traffic and fire hazard and may be immediately impounded pursuant to applicable state law, without prior notification to its owner. Pursuant to state law, the owner may be held responsible for all impound fees.

(e) The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall provide marking as required above and, shall prevent the parking of vehicles or placement of other obstructions in such fire lanes.

(f) Fire lane markings shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner(s) as often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a fire lane.

(g) Parking control officers, as defined in BMC 10.15.120, are authorized to issue notices of traffic infraction for violations of this section in accordance with BMC 10.15.120. Such notices also may be issued by any police officer.

(h) Penalties for infractions of this section shall be in accordance with BMC 10.15.140.

(i) Each day or part of a day during which the unlawful act or violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.120 Section 506 amended – Key boxes – Where required.

(1) IFC Section 506.1, Where required, is amended by the addition of a second paragraph and exception as follows:

506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type listed in accordance with UL 1037 and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official.

All occupancies equipped with an automatic sprinkler system or fire alarm system shall have a key box mounted in a location approved by the fire code official.

Exception: One and two family dwelling.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.130 Section 507 amended – Fire protection water supplies.

(1) IFC Section 507.2, Type of water supply, is amended to read as follows:

507.2 Type of water supply. The type of water supply shall be approved by the building official, fire chief, and the water purveyor. Existing substandard water supply mains and/or hydrant installations, which serve new constructions, shall be upgraded. Fire hydrants and their supplying mains shall be installed to the standard of the water purveyor and shall be dedicated along with repair easements, where needed, to the purveyor. This section shall not apply to conditions existing prior to the effective date of this chapter.

The type of hydrants shall be approved by the building official, fire chief, and the water purveyor. Existing substandard water supply mains and/or hydrant installations, which serve new constructions, shall be upgraded. Fire hydrants and their supplying mains shall be installed to the standard of the water purveyor and shall be dedicated along with repair easements, where needed, to the purveyor. This section shall not apply to conditions existing prior to the effective date of this chapter.

(2) IFC Section 507.3, Fire Flow, is amended to read as follows:

507.3 Fire flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be determined by use of Appendix B.

Exceptions: 

1. Fire flow is not required for structures under 500 square feet with a B, U or R-1 occupancy where structures are at least 30 feet from any other structure and are used only for recreation.

2. In rural and suburban areas in which adequate and reliable water supply systems do not exist, the fire code official is authorized to utilize NFPA 1142 or the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code. 

(3) IFC Section 507.5.1, Where required, is amended to read as follows:

507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 150 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. Fire hydrant locations and distribution shall be in accordance with Appendix C.

Exceptions:

1. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 350 feet.

2. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system the distance requirement may be modified by the fire code official.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.140 Section 508.1 amended – Fire command center – Penetrations.

(1) IFC Section 508.1, General, is amended by the addition of a new subsection 508.1.2.1, Penetrations, to read as follows:

508.1.2.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a fire command center are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, electrical raceway for fire department communication and control and electrical raceway serving the fire command center or being controlled from the fire command center. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714 of the International Building Code.

Exception: Metallic piping with no joints or openings.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.150 Section 602 amended – Building services and systems – Definitions.

(1) IFC Section 602.1, Definitions, is amended by addition of the following:

POWER TAP. 

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.160 Section 604.2.9 amended – Emergency and standby power systems – High rise buildings.

(1) IFC Section 604.2.9, High-rise buildings, is amended to include new subsection 604.2.9.1, Penetrations, as follows:

604.2.9.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a room containing a standby power system are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, or electrical raceway serving the standby power system or being controlled by the standby power system. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714 of the International Building Code.

Exception: Metallic piping with no joints or openings where it passes through the standby power system room.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.170 Section 901 amended – Fire protection systems.

(1) IFC Section 901.4.3, Fire Areas, is amended to include a second paragraph as follows:

901.4.3 Fire areas. Where buildings, or portions thereof, are divided into fire areas so as not to exceed the limits established for requiring a fire protection system in accordance with this chapter, such fire areas shall be separated by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the International Building Code, or both, having a fire-resistance rating of not less than that determined in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code.

For the purpose of this section, fire barriers shall not be used to reduce the calculation of floor areas in this chapter for newly constructed buildings with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or greater and existing buildings undergoing a modification or change of use with a cumulative work area of 5,000 square feet or greater.

(2) IFC Section 901.4, Installation, is amended by the addition of a new subsection 901.4.7, Additions, change of use, alterations and repairs to buildings, to read as follows:

901.4.7 Additions, change of use, alterations and repairs to buildings. Additions, change of use, alterations and repairs to buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.180 Section 903.2 amended – Automatic sprinkler systems – Where required.

(1) IFC Section 903.2, Where required, is amended to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, WAC 51-50-903, and in all new and substantially altered buildings with a gross work area of 5,000 square feet or greater, regardless of type or use.

Exceptions: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with IBC Section 707 Fire Barriers or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with IBC Section 711 Horizontal Assemblies, or both.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.190 Section 907 amended – Fire alarm and detection systems.

(1) IFC Section 907.1.3, Equipment, is amended to read as follows:

907.1.3 Equipment. Systems and their components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All new alarm systems shall be addressable. Each device shall have its own address and shall annunciate individual addresses at the approved supervising station.

(2) IFC Section 907.2, System installation, is amended by addition of the following section:

907.2.24 System installation. Fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this code by persons under the direct supervision of individuals that have factory training and certification on the system being installed. Plans submitted for Fire Alarm System permits shall be prepared under the supervision of individuals possessing a NICET (National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies) Level III certification in Fire Alarm Systems; or shall be licensed by the State of Washington as a Professional Fire Protection or Electrical Engineer or certified by the State of Washington. Plans shall identify certification and/or licensing information.

(3) IFC Section 907.8.5, Maintenance, inspection and testing, is amended by addition of a second paragraph to read as follows:

907.8.5 Maintenance, inspection and testing. The building owner shall be responsible to maintain the fire and life safety systems in an operable condition at all times. Service personnel shall meet the qualification requirements of NFPA 72 for maintaining, inspecting and testing such systems. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the fire code official.

It shall be the responsibility of an owner of the apartment building, upon every change in tenancy of a dwelling unit, to inspect the fire warning system within such dwelling unit to determine if the same is in operating condition. If the same is not in operating condition, the owner shall repair or replace the same and shall not allow occupancy of such dwelling unit until the fire warning system therein is operating properly. During the term of any tenancy of a dwelling unit in an apartment building, it shall be the responsibility of the tenant, and not the owner, to maintain the fire warning system therein in operating condition.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.200 Section 5704.2 amended – Flammable and combustible liquids – Storage.

(1) IFC Section 5704.2.9.6.1, Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited, is amended to read as follows:

5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are regulated. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.40 BMC - “Critical Areas.”

(2) IFC Section 5704.2.11.2, Locations, is amended to read as follows:

5704.2.11.2 Location. Flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks located underground, either outside or under buildings, shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Tanks shall be located with respect to existing foundations and supports such that the loads carried by the latter cannot be transmitted to the tank.

2. The distance from any part of a tank storing liquids to the nearest wall of a basement, pit, cellar, or lot line shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm).

3. A minimum distance of 1 foot (305 mm), shell to shell, shall be maintained between underground tanks.

4. Tank location shall be in accordance with the limitations of Chapter 19.40 BMC - “Critical areas.”

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.210 Section 5706.2.4.4 amended – Special operations – Storage and dispensing of flammable and combustible liquids on farms and construction sites – Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited.

(1) IFC Section 5706.2.4.4, Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited, is amended to read as follows:

5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are regulated. The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.40 BMC - “Critical Areas.”

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.220 Section 5806.2 amended – Flammable cryogenic fluids – Limitations.

(1) IFC Section 5806.2, Limitations, is amended to read as follows:

5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is subject to the requirements of Chapter 19.40 BMC - “Critical Areas.”

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]


15.20.230 Section 6104.2 amended – Location of LP gas containers – Maximum capacity within established limits.

(1) IFC Section 6104.2, Maximum capacity within established limits, is amended to read as follows:

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The aggregate capacity for the storage of Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) of any one installation shall not exceed 2,000 gallons water capacity, except that in particular installations this capacity limit may be altered at the discretion of the fire code official after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of the occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks, degree of private fire protection to be provided, and facilities of the fire department.

[Ord. 638 § 3 (Exh. C), 2016; Ord. 583 § 3 (Exh. C), 2013; Ord. 541 § 8 (Exh. D), 2010]






Chapter 15.25 PLUMBING CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 541)


Chapter 15.30 ELECTRICAL CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 541)


Chapter 15.35 SIGN CONSTRUCTION CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 408)


Chapter 15.40 BURIEN BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

15.40.010    Short title.

15.40.015    Scope.

15.40.020    Intent.

15.40.025    Severability.

15.40.030    Applicability.

15.40.035    Maintenance.

15.40.040    Application of other codes.

15.40.045    Existing remedies.

15.40.050    Workmanship.

15.40.055    Historic buildings.

15.40.060    Referenced codes and standards.

15.40.065    Requirements not covered by code.

15.40.070    Application of references.

15.40.075    Other laws.

15.40.080    Duties and power of the code official.

15.40.085    Fees.

15.40.090    Approvals.

15.40.095    Violations and penalties.

15.40.100    Repealed.

15.40.105    Repealed.

15.40.110    Unsafe structures and equipment.

15.40.115    Closing of vacant structures.

15.40.120    Standards for securing buildings.

15.40.125    Authority to disconnect service utilities.

15.40.130    Notice.

15.40.135    Placarding.

15.40.140    Placard removal.

15.40.145    Prohibited occupancy.

15.40.150    Abatement methods.

15.40.155    Record.

15.40.160    Emergency measures.

15.40.165    Demolition.

15.40.170    Means of appeal.

15.40.175    City performance of work of demolition or repair, and recovery of costs.

15.40.180    Stop work order.

15.40.185    Definitions.

15.40.190    General requirements.

15.40.195    Exterior property areas.

15.40.200    Motor vehicles.

15.40.205    Recreational vehicles or other vehicles.

15.40.210    Cargo containers and semi trailers.

15.40.215    Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.

15.40.220    Exterior structure.

15.40.225    Interior structure.

15.40.230    Component serviceability.

15.40.235    Handrails and guardrails.

15.40.240    Rubbish and garbage.

15.40.245    Pest elimination.

15.40.250    Light and ventilation.

15.40.255    Occupancy limitations.

15.40.260    Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.

15.40.265    Plumbing systems and fixtures.

15.40.270    Water system.

15.40.275    Sanitary drainage system.

15.40.280    Storm drainage.

15.40.285    Mechanical and electrical requirements.

15.40.290    Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.

15.40.295    Fire safety requirements.

15.40.300    Referenced standards.


15.40.010 Short title.

These regulations shall be known as the Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter referred to as “this code.” [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.015 Scope.

The provisions of this code shall be construed and shall be applied to be consistent with the authority and provisions of Chapter 35.80 RCW and shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for the safe and sanitary maintenance of such structures, premises, equipment, and facilities; for the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; for the occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.020 Intent.

This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.025 Severability.

If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.030 Applicability.

Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.035 Maintenance.

Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.040 Application of other codes.

Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Burien Municipal Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any other provisions of the Burien Municipal Code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.045 Existing remedies.

The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.050 Workmanship.

Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.055 Historic buildings.

The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings as defined in the International Existing Building Code when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.060 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.065 Requirements not covered by code.

Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.070 Application of references.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.075 Other laws.

The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.080 Duties and power of the code official.

(1) General. The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.

(2) Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.

(3) Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy(ies). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code official.

(4) Liability. The code official, hearing examiner, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.

The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.

(5) Inspections. The code official is authorized to make all of the required inspections, or accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.

(6) Initial Inspection and Enforcement. An initial enforcement determination shall be undertaken against buildings or properties whenever the code official has reason to believe that a violation of this code exists; or a complaint is filed with the department by any person; provided, that where complaints have been filed by tenants, the tenant first shall exhaust all remedies provided through the Washington State Landlord Tenant Act, unless circumstances exist that give evidence of an immediate life safety or health condition that warrants an immediate response by the department.

(7) Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(8) Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.

(9) Notices and Orders. The code official is authorized to issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

(10) Department Records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.085 Fees.

The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as adopted by the Burien city council. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.090 Approvals.

(1) Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.

(2) Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided, that any such alternative has been approved and complies with all other codes adopted by the city of Burien. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

(3) Required Testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.

(4) Test Methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.

(5) Test Reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records.

(6) Used Material and Equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code official.

(7) Approved Materials and Equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

(8) Research Reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.095 Violations and penalties.

(1) Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the code official.

(2) Enforcement. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be subject to enforcement as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.100 Voluntary correction.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.105 Notices and orders.

Repealed by Ord. 561. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.110 Unsafe structures and equipment.

(1) General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, the code official is authorized to condemn the structure pursuant to the provisions of this code.

(2) Unsafe Structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.

(3) Unsafe Equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.

(4) Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.

(5) Unlawful Structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.

(6) Dangerous Structure or Premises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:

(a) Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings.

(b) The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.

(c) Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged.

(d) Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, that is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value.

(e) The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way.

(f) The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy.

(g) The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, become a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enable persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.

(h) Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance, to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety.

(i) A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be insanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

(j) Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health.

(k) Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(7) Drug Properties and Structures. It is hereby declared that any building, structure and/or associated property wherein or upon which the manufacture, distribution, production or storage of illegal drugs or the precursors to create illegal drugs has taken place in a manner which could endanger the public, such building, structure and/or associated property is not only a dangerous property but is also of a classification of property calling for the special procedures set forth in this section. The building official is authorized to abate such dangerous buildings, structures and/or associated properties in accordance with the dangerous building procedures set forth in such code, with the following modifications:

(a) Due to public safety hazard in drug-production facilities, the utilities shall be disconnected;

(b) Building(s) and structures will be inspected to determine compliance with all city ordinances and codes;

(c) Building(s) and any entry gates to the property will be secured against entry.

(d) No reconnection of utilities or re-occupancy of the building(s), structures or property shall be allowed until all violations have been remedied, and all dangerous conditions abated to the satisfaction of the building official and a notice of release for re-occupancy has been received from the health department. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.115 Closing of vacant structures.

If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official is authorized to cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and such costs will be recoverable pursuant to BMC 1.15.200. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.120 Standards for securing buildings.

To secure a building, all doors, window openings, or other openings on floors accessible from grade shall be closed and locked, or shuttered to prevent third party entry. If openings are damaged so they cannot be secured using normal building amenities, they shall be secured by covering with 7/16 inch minimum thickness structural panel cut to fit over the building opening and secured with No. 10 wood screws with fender washers. The screws shall penetrate the wood framing by a minimum of 1-1/4 inches and the screws shall be spaced around the perimeter of the opening at no less than 12 inches on center. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.125 Authority to disconnect service utilities.

The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in BMC 15.40.060 in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.130 Notice.

Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice, and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with BMC 1.15.070. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in BMC 1.15.070. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.135 Placarding.

Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official is authorized to post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.140 Placard removal.

The code official is authorized to remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.145 Prohibited occupancy.

Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official is authorized to be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment, shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.150 Abatement methods.

The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action as determined by the code official. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.155 Record.

The code official shall have the authority to cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.160 Emergency measures.

(1) Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.

The code official is authorized to cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.

(2) Temporary Safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official is authorized to order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and is authorized to cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.

(3) Closing Streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official is authorized to temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

(4) Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official is authorized to employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

(5) Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction is authorized to institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.

(6) Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the hearing examiner, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.165 Demolition.

(1) General. The code official shall have the authority to order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official’s judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, the code official is authorized to order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official.

(2) Notices and Orders. All notices and orders shall comply with BMC 1.15.120.

(3) Failure to Comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall have the authority to cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

(4) Salvage Materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.170 Means of appeal.

(1) General. Appeals of final orders, decisions, or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of the city of Burien Building and Property Maintenance Code may be appealed by the property owner or his/her agent to the hearing examiner, pursuant to Chapters 2.15 and 2.20 BMC, within 30 days of the issuance of the final order, decision or determination.

(2) Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this title or the rules adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this title do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.

(3) Participation in the Appeal. Only those parties who have appealed the code official’s final order, decision or determination may participate in the appeal either or both of the following ways:

(a) By submitting written comments or testimony to the hearing examiner prior to commencement of the hearing; or

(b) By appearing in person or through a representative at the hearing. The hearing examiner may reasonably limit the extent of oral testimony or oral argument to facilitate the orderly and timely conduct of the hearing.

(4) Decision on the Appeal. The hearing examiner shall consider all information and material within the scope of the appeal submitted by persons entitled to participate in the appeal. Based on the hearing examiner’s findings and conclusions, the hearing examiner may affirm, reverse or modify the order, decision or determination being appealed. The hearing examiner’s decision on the appeal shall be issued within 90 days from the date the original appeal period closed, unless all parties to an appeal have agreed to an extended time period. Within four business days after it is issued, the hearing examiner’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to each person who has requested notice of the decision. The hearing examiner’s final decision shall be the final decision of the city on the appeal and shall be conclusive unless proceedings for review of the decision are properly commenced in superior court within the time period specified by state law.

(5) Judicial Review. Any judicial appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be reviewed in King County superior court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act (“LUPA”). The land use petition must be filed within 21 calendar days of the issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision.

(6) Records and Copies. The decision of the hearings examiner shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.

(7) Court Review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.

(8) Stays of Enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the hearings examiner. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.175 City performance of work of demolition or repair, and recovery of costs.

If the owner or party in interest, following exhaustion of the rights to appeal, fails to comply with the final order to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the code official may direct or cause such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed, or demolished.

The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the building official, is authorized to be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid. Upon certification by the city of the assessment amount being due and owing, the county treasurer shall enter the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as provided for in RCW 84.56.020, as now or hereafter amended, for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city. If the dwelling, building, structure, or premises is removed or demolished by the city, the city is authorized to, if possible, sell the materials of such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and if there be any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the city, after deducting the costs incident thereto.

The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county and municipal taxes. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.180 Stop work order.

(1) Authority. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. Issuance of a notice of violation, infraction or notice and order is not a condition precedent to the issuance of the stop work order.

(2) Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume.

(3) Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

(4) Effect.

(a) The code official is authorized to assess a special investigation fee for the issuance of a stop work order when work has started without the issuance of a permit. The special investigation fee shall be determined in accordance with BMC 15.05.375(5), Work Commencing before Permit Issuance.

(b) A stop work order represents a determination that a civil code violation has occurred and that any work or activity that is causing or contributing to the violation on the property where the violation has occurred or is occurring must cease.

(c) A stop work order requires the immediate cessation of the specified work or activity on the named property. Work or activity may not resume unless specifically authorized by the building official or designee.

(d) A stop work order may be appealed to the city of Burien hearings examiner according to the procedures prescribed by BMC 15.40.170, Means of appeal.

(e) Failure to appeal the stop work order within the applicable time limits renders the stop work order a final determination that the civil code violation occurred and that work was properly ordered to cease.

(f) Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order subjects the person responsible for code compliance to civil penalties and costs pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(5) Remedy – Civil Penalties. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(a) In addition to any other judicial or administrative remedy, the code official or designee may assess penalties for the violation of any stop work order as set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(b) Penalties for the violation of any stop work order shall begin to accrue on the first day the stop work order is violated and shall cease on the day the work is actually stopped.

(c) Violation of a stop work order shall be a separate violation from any other civil code violation. Civil penalties assessed create joint and several personal obligations in all persons responsible for code violation. The city of Burien may collect the civil penalties assessed by any appropriate legal means.

(d) In addition to all other remedies, a lien for the value of the civil penalties imposed may be filed against the real property that is subject to compliance with this title. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.185 Definitions.

(1) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown herein.

(2) Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

(3) Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code or NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.

(4) Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

(5) Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”

(6) General Definitions.

“Anchored” means secured in a manner that provides positive connection.

“Approved” means approved by the code official.

“Attractive nuisance” means any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in or on a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot, which is left in any place exposed or accessible to children. This includes unused or abandoned refrigerators, freezers, or other large appliances or equipment or any parts thereof; abandoned motor vehicles; any structurally unsound or unsafe fence or edifice; any unsecured or abandoned excavation, pit, well, cistern, storage tank or shaft; and any lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for minors.

“Basement” means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.

“Bathroom” means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.

“Bedroom” means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.

“Code official” means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.

“Condemn” means to adjudge unfit for occupancy.

“Detached” means when a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.

“Deterioration” means to weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.

“Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

“Easement” means that portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.

“Equipment support” means those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.

“Exterior property” means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

“Guard” means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

“Habitable space” means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

“Historic building” means any building or structure that is listed in the State or National Register of Historic Places; designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a contributing resource within a National Register listed or locally designated historic district; or with an opinion or certification that the property is eligible to be listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing building to a historic district by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places.

“Housekeeping unit” means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

“Imminent danger” means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

“Infestation” means the presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.

“Labeled” means equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

“Let for occupancy” or “let” means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.

“Neglect” means the lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

“Occupant” means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

“Openable area” means that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.

“Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

“Owner” means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

“Pest elimination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; or by other approved pest elimination methods.

“Potential vermin habitat or fire hazard” means any accumulation of material on a property including, but not limited to, animal matter, ashes, bottles, boxes, broken stone, building materials which are not properly stored or neatly piled, cans, cement, crates, empty barrels, dead animals or animal waste, glass, litter, mattresses or bedding, old appliances or equipment or any parts thereof, furniture, iron or other scrap metal, packing cases, packing material, plaster, plastic, rags, wire, yard waste or debris or other objects which endanger property or public safety, or constitute a fire hazard or vermin habitat; provided, that nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved, covered receptacles.

“Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.

“Public way” means any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.

“Recreational vehicle” means a portable structure such as a motor home, travel trailer, park model trailer, or equivalent facilities in or on an automotive vehicle, tent, or other short-term recreational shelter designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses.

“Refuse” means garbage, trash or any other item that is disregarded or thrown away, and shall also include recyclable materials and solid wastes.

“Rooming house” means a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.

“Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar materials.

“Sleeping unit” means a room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

“Strict liability offense” means an offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

“Tenant” means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

“Toilet room” means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

“Trash covered premises” means any premises containing trash or abandoned materials, except that kept in garbage cans or containers with lids maintained for regular collection/removal.

“Ultimate deformation” means the deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength.

“Ventilation” means the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

“Workmanlike” means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.

“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a structure. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.190 General requirements.

(1) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this code. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.

(2) Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.195 Exterior property areas.

(1) Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition in accordance with this code and the provisions of Chapter 8.45 BMC. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.

(2) Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.

Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.

(3) Sidewalks and Driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.

(4) Vegetation. Vegetation as defined in BMC 8.45.020 is regulated under Chapter 8.45 BMC.

(5) Potential Vermin Habitat. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from potential vermin habitat and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.

(6) Exhaust Vents. Clearances to property lines and openings into a building prescribed in the adopted codes and standards applicable to the installation of pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall be maintained.

(7) Accessory Structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

(8) Defacement of Property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.

It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. Graffiti removal shall be in accordance with Chapter 8.55 BMC. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.200 Motor vehicles.

The following city codes shall be applicable to motor vehicles on private property. Enforcement shall be in accordance with Chapter 1.15 BMC.

(1) Nuisance, Junk Vehicle(s). BMC 8.45.020(5)(c)(iv).

(2) Parking on Residential Property. Chapter 10.11 BMC.

(3) Off-Street Parking Design Standards. BMC 19.20.100(10)(B).

(4) Critical Area Aquifer Recharge Areas – Performance Standards, Vehicle repair and servicing. BMC 19.40.430(6)(G). [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.205 Recreational vehicles or other vehicles.

No recreational vehicle or other vehicles shall be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or any similar use while parked on public or private property except where permitted by the land use and zoning codes in an approved recreational vehicle park. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.210 Cargo containers and semi trailers.

(1) Except as permitted by city of Burien land use and zoning codes, cargo containers shall not be permitted to be used as storage buildings. Cargo containers which are permitted by the land use and zoning codes, to be used as storage buildings shall be provided with a foundation system that provides adequate clearance from the ground to prevent deterioration and shall be provided with an anchorage system to prevent sliding or overturning by wind or seismic forces prescribed by the building code.

(2) Semi trailers shall not be used as storage buildings. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.215 Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.

(1) Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair.

(2) Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth, shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.

Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.220 Exterior structure.

(1) General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

(2) Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

(d) Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight;

(e) Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;

(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(g) Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(h) Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration or fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(i) Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(j) Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(k) Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(l) Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or

(m) Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions:

(i) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

(ii) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.

(3) Protective Treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion.

(4) Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm).

Exception: Buildings constructed under the International Residential Code prior to July 1, 2010, are permitted to have an existing address number size be a minimum of three inches high.

(5) Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.

(6) Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.

(7) Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.

(8) Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be intentionally discharged directly onto any other private property, public right-of-way or in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

(9) Decorative Features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.

(10) Overhang Extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(11) Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(12) Chimneys and Towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(13) Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(14) Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Every window, skylight, and door frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.

(15) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.

(16) Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.

(17) Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with BMC 15.40.295(3)(c).

(18) Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.225 Interior structure.

(1) General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.

(2) Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code, the International Residential Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

(a) The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;

(b) The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;

(c) Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;

(d) Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;

(e) Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;

(f) Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.

Exceptions:

(i) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

(ii) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.

(3) Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(4) Interior Surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, mold and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.

(5) Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

(6) Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(7) Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.230 Component serviceability.

(1) General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.

(2) Unsafe Conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code as required for existing buildings:

(a) Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Collapse of footing or foundation system;

(ii) Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil expansion;

(iii) Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;

(iv) Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;

(v) Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or

(vi) Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to the ground water table.

(b) Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Deterioration;

(ii) Ultimate deformation;

(iii) Fractures;

(iv) Fissures;

(v) Spalling;

(vi) Exposed reinforcement; or

(vii) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

(c) Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Deterioration;

(ii) Corrosion;

(iii) Elastic deformation;

(iv) Ultimate deformation;

(v) Stress or strain cracks;

(vi) Joint fatigue; or

(vii) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

(d) Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Deterioration;

(ii) Ultimate deformation;

(iii) Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;

(iv) Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;

(v) Spalling;

(vi) Exposed reinforcement; or

(vii) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

(e) Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Deterioration;

(ii) Elastic deformation;

(iii) Ultimate deformation;

(iv) Metal fatigue; or

(v) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.

(f) Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:

(i) Ultimate deformation;

(ii) Deterioration;

(iii) Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;

(iv) Fire damage beyond charring;

(v) Significant splits and checks;

(vi) Horizontal shear cracks;

(vii) Vertical shear cracks;

(viii) Inadequate support;

(ix) Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or

(x) Excessive cutting and notching.

Exceptions:

(A) When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.

(B) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.235 Handrails and guardrails.

Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having four or more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches high or more than 38 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces.

Guards shall not be less than 36 inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface for one- or two-family residences and townhomes, and 42 inches high for all other occupancies.

Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.240 Rubbish and garbage.

(1) Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.

(2) Disposal of Refuse and Recyclable Materials. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of refuse and recyclable materials in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such materials in an approved disposal facility or approved containers maintained for regular collection.

(3) Containers. Containers for the purpose of collecting refuse shall provide adequate storage capacity to assure that all refuse is totally contained. All refuse shall be contained at all times. The number of refuse containers and the collection frequency of these containers shall be determined by the property owner, landlord or the individual(s) who are in control of the use of the property. The code official may require additional containers, larger containers or more frequent collection of all refuse if all refuse is not kept within the containers.

Any refuse that is not contained shall constitute a nuisance and the code official is authorized to abate the nuisance in accordance with Chapter 1.15 BMC.

The city is authorized to recover all costs and expenses from the property owner in accordance with BMC 1.15.200.

(4) Recyclable Materials and Solid Waste Storage. Space required by WAC 51-50-009 for the storage of recycled materials and solid waste shall be maintained to meet the needs of the occupancy and efficiency of pickup, and shall be available to occupants and haulers.

(5) Refrigerators. Refrigerators, freezers and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises and are defined as an attractive nuisance as set forth in BMC 8.45.020. [Ord. 561 § 2 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.245 Pest elimination.

(1) Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.

(2) Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.

(3) Single Occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.

(4) Multiple Occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for extermination.

(5) Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.

Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.250 Light and ventilation.

(1) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light and ventilation in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Burien construction codes shall be permitted.

(3) Light.

(a) Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.

Exceptions:

(i) Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.

(ii) The glazed areas need not be installed in rooms where an emergency rescue and escape opening is not required and artificial light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six foot-candles (65 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor level.

(b) Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination; provided, that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one foot-candle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.

(c) Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.

(4) Ventilation.

(a) Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in subsection (3) of this section.

Exceptions:

(i) Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.

(ii) The glazed areas need not be openable where an emergency rescue and escape opening is not required and an approved mechanical ventilation system capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the room is installed or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (78 L/s) per occupant, computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and one occupant for each additional bedroom.

(b) Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (4)(a) of this section, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.

(c) Cooking Facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.

Exceptions:

(i) Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.

(ii) Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances.

(d) Process Ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.

(e) Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.255 Occupancy limitations.

(1) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.

(3) Minimum Room Widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.

(4) Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).

Exceptions:

(a) In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.

(b) Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches (2,033 mm) with not less than six feet four inches (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.

(c) Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet (2,134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524 mm) or more shall be included.

(5) Bedroom and Living Room Requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Room Area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2).

(b) Access from Bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.

Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.

(c) Water Closet Accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.

(d) Prohibited Occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.

(e) Other Requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of BMC 15.40.260 and 15.40.265; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of BMC 15.40.285; and the smoke alarm and emergency escape requirements of BMC 15.40.295.

(6) Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall be in conformance with occupancy limits established in the adopted construction codes and land use/zoning codes and shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.

(7) Efficiency Unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:

(a) A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (7)(b) and (c) of this section.

(b) The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.

(c) The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

(d) The maximum number of occupants shall be three.

(8) Food Preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.260 Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements.

(1) Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided in existing structures.

(2) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this section.

(3) Number and Type of Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided and maintained in the quantity and location as required under the building and plumbing codes in existence at the time the occupancy was first approved by the jurisdiction unless subsequently approved to be relocated or removed under an approved permit.

(4) Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.

(5) Rooming Houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.

(6) Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each 10 occupants.

(7) Employees’ Facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.

(8) Drinking Facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.

(9) Public Toilet Facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted in BMC 15.10.120. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.

(10) Toilet Rooms. Toilet rooms shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.

(b) Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.

(c) Location of Employee Toilet Facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.

Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.

(d) Floor Surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.265 Plumbing systems and fixtures.

(1) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.

(2) Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.

(3) Plumbing System Hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back-siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.270 Water system.

(1) General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with Chapter 15.10 BMC.

(2) Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.

(3) Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.

(4) Water Heating Facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, except where allowed in Chapter 15.10 BMC. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.275 Sanitary drainage system.

(1) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.

(2) Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.

(3) Grease Interceptors. Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this code and the manufacturer’s instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation submitted to the code official. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.280 Storm drainage.

(1) General. Drainage of roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, and other open areas on the premises shall be discharged in a manner consistent with the requirements of the Burien Municipal Code and shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

(2) Private Property Drainage. Drainage from roof, paved areas, yards, or courts shall not be intentionally discharged directly onto any other private property or public right-of-way. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.285 Mechanical and electrical requirements.

(1) Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.

(2) Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Heating Facilities. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.

(a) Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.

(b) Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

(c) Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahreneit (20 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

(i) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.

(ii) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.

(d) Room Temperature Measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.

(4) Mechanical Equipment and Appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.

(a) Removal of Combustion Products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.

Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.

(b) Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.

(c) Safety Controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.

(d) Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.

(e) Energy Conservation Devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved by the city of Burien under an approved permit.

(5) Duct Systems. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.

(6) Electrical Facilities Required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section.

(a) Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with Chapter 15.10 BMC. Existing dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating as required by the Electrical Code in effect at the time of construction but in no case shall the service rating be less than 60 amperes.

(b) Electrical System Hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

(c) Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Water Exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water. Electrical equipment and wiring that have been submerged or exposed to water shall comply with the provisions of this title.

(d) Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Fire Exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15.10 BMC.

Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.

(e) Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.

(f) Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain receptacle outlets as required by the Electrical Code in effect at the time of installation or construction. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.

(g) Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.

(h) Extension Cords. Extension cords shall not be used for permanent wiring. Extension cords shall not extend from one room to another; be placed across a doorway; extend through a wall or partition; or be used in any area where such cord may be subject to physical damage. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.290 Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.

(1) General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries.

(2) Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.

Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.295 Fire safety requirements.

(1) Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.

(2) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Means of Egress.

(a) General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 15.20 BMC.

(b) Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 15.20 BMC shall be unobstructed.

(c) Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code as adopted in Chapter 15.10 BMC or has been maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, alteration, or change in use.

(d) Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

(4) Fire-Resistance Ratings.

(a) Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.

(b) Opening Protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.

(5) Fire Protection Systems.

(a) General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 15.20 BMC.

(b) Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.

(c) Smoke Alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 15.20 BMC. [Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


15.40.300 Referenced standards.

This section lists the standards that are referenced in this chapter. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in BMC 15.40.060.

	ASME

	American Society of Mechanical Engineers

	Three Park Avenue

	New York, NY 10016-5990

	Standard reference number: A17.1/CSA B44—2007

	Title: Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators

	Referenced in BMC 15.40.290

	 

	ASTM

	ASTM International

	100 Barr Harbor Drive

	West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959

	Standard reference number: F1346—91 (2003)

	Title: Performance Specifications for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs

	Referenced in BMC 15.40.215

	 

	NFPA

	National Fire Protection Association

	1 Batterymarch Park

	Quincy, MA 02269

	Standard reference number: 25—08 Inspection

	Title: Testing and Maintenance of Water-based Fire Protection Systems

	Referenced in BMC 15.40.295

[Ord. 541 § 11 (Exh. E), 2010]


Chapter 15.50 ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION CODES

(Repealed by Ord. 408)


Chapter 15.55 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION1

Sections:

15.55.010    Statutory authorization.

15.55.020    Findings of fact.

15.55.030    Statement of purpose.

15.55.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

15.55.050    Definitions.

15.55.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.55.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.55.080    Penalties for noncompliance.

15.55.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.55.100    Interpretation.

15.55.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.55.115    Development permitted when.

15.55.120    Development permits.

15.55.130    Local administrator – Designated.

15.55.140    Local administrator – Duties and responsibilities.

15.55.150    Appeal board.

15.55.160    Conditions for variances.

15.55.170    General standards.

15.55.180    Specific standards.

15.55.190    Floodways.

15.55.200    Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

15.55.210    Coastal high hazard areas.


15.55.010 Statutory authorization.

The Legislature of the State of Washington has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Burien, Washington, does find as set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.020 Findings of fact.

(1) The flood hazard areas of the city of Burien are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.030 Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(1) To protect human life and health;

(2) To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.050 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

(1) “Appeal” means a request for a review of the city manager’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

(2) “Area of shallow flooding” means designated AO or AH zones on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

(3) “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.

(4) “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

(5) “Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations that produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

(6) “Development” means any manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

(7) “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

(8) “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

(9) “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

(10) “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

(11) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at BMC 15.55.180(1)(b).

(12) “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

(13) “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

(14) “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(15) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

(16) “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued; provided, the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(17) “Structure” means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

(18) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(19) “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(b) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 

For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term can exclude:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct pre-cited existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

(20) “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

(21) “Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 417 § 1, 2004; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Burien. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report titled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas,” dated May 16, 1995, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated May 16, 1995, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file at Burien City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in BMC 15.55.140(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates data utilized under BMC 15.55.140(2). [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 417 § 1, 2004; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.080 Penalties for noncompliance.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city of Burien from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.100 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(1) Considered as minimum requirements;

(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Burien, any officer, or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made hereunder. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.115 Development permitted when.

(1) No development shall be permitted within any area of special flood hazard except:

(a) Where it can be shown that such development will cause no displacement or diversion of floodwaters; or

(b) When provision has been made on the subject property to balance the capacity to store floodwaters and accommodate potential surface flow in an amount equal to the amount of floodwater likely to be displaced or diverted by such development.

(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to the body of water known as Puget Sound, which is designated on flood insurance rate maps as an area of special flood hazard. [Ord. 328 § 1, 2001]


15.55.120 Development permits.

(1) Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in BMC 15.55.070. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in BMC 15.55.050, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in BMC 15.55.050.

(2) Application. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Burien and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in BMC 15.55.180(2); and

(d) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.130 Local administrator – Designated.

The building official or his designee shall administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.140 Local administrator – Duties and responsibilities.

Duties of the building official or his designee shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) Permit Review.

(a) Review all building development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(b) Review all building development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and

(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the provisions of BMC 15.55.190 are met.

(2) Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with BMC 15.55.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the city manager or his designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer BMC 15.55.180, Specific standards, and 15.55.190, Floodways.

(3) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or required as in subsection (2) of this section, obtain and record the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

(i) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

(ii) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in BMC 15.55.120(2)(c).

(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(4) Alteration of Watercourses.

(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Washington State Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

(5) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in BMC 15.55.150 and 15.55.160. [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.150 Appeal board.

(1) The hearing examiner and/or the building code board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The hearing examiner and/or the building code board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision, or determination made by the city in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal such decision to the King County superior court, by writ of review, within 20 calendar days of the hearing examiner’s decision.

(4) In passing upon such applications, the hearing examiner shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and:

(a) The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(5) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (4) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the hearing examiner may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(6) The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.160 Conditions for variances.

(1) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided BMC 15.55.150(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered.

(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(3) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(6) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property, they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.

(7) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (1) of this section, and otherwise complies with BMC 15.55.170(1) and (2).

(8) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest flood elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.170 General standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(1) Anchoring.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

(b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

(2) Construction Materials and Methods.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(3) Utilities.

(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;

(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and

(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(d) Water wells should be located on high ground that is not in the floodway.

(4) Subdivision Proposals.

(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(d) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments that contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(5) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either though the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (BMC 15.55.140(2)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

(6) Recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of BMC 15.55.200(1) and (3) and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes (subsection (1)(b) of this section). [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.180 Specific standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in BMC 15.55.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or BMC 15.55.140(2), Use of other base flood data, the following provisions are required:

(1) Residential Construction.

(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above base flood elevation.

(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exist of floodwaters.

(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(a) Be floodproofed so that below one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specification and plans. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in BMC 15.55.140(3)(b).

(d) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (1)(b) of this section.

(e) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to one foot above the base flood level will be rated as at the base flood level).

(3) Critical Facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the base floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the base floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the base floodplain shall have the lowest floor elevated to three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.

(4) Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot or more above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of BMC 15.55.170(1)(b).

(5) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of subsection (4) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

Nothing in this section shall allow placement and use of recreational vehicles in violation of any other city codes and ordinances. [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 417 § 1, 2004; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.190 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 15.55.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2) Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for (a) repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to structures which do not increase the ground floor area; and (b) repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the reconstruction or repair is started, or (ii) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to structures identified as historic places, may be excluded in the 50 percent.

(3) If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of BMC 15.55.170 through 15.55.210. [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 417 § 1, 2004; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.200 Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:

(1) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).

(2) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:

(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or

(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in BMC 15.55.180(2)(c).

(3) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. [Ord. 685 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]


15.55.210 Coastal high hazard areas.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 15.55.070 are coastal high hazard areas, designated as zones V1-V30, VE and/or V. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this chapter, the following provisions shall also apply:

(1) Due to the dynamic nature of coastal high hazard areas located along the Pacific Ocean, in areas with designated velocity zones (V zones) the following standards shall apply:

(a) Prohibit new or substantially improved construction in designated V zones; exceptions are for needed water-dependent structures or structures that facilitate public recreational access to the shore. Structures which require siting in the V zone should be sited landward of the primary dune if an active dune system is associated with the V zone.

(b) Prohibit any alteration of dunes in the above designated V zones which could increase potential flood damage; this restriction includes prohibiting any modifications or alteration or disturbance of vegetative cover associated with dunes located in designated V zones.

(2) All new allowable construction and substantial improvements in zones V1-V30 and VE (V if base flood elevation data is available) shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that:

(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated one foot or more above the base flood level; and

(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).

A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section.

(3) Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in zones V1-V30 and VE, and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The local administrator shall maintain a record of all such information.

(4) All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.

(5) Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the design proposed meets the following conditions:

(a) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

(b) The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).

(6) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation.

(7) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings.

(8) Prohibit manmade alteration of sand dunes that would increase potential flood damage. [Ord. 250 § 1, 1999]1

Prior legislation: Ord. 82. 


Title 16 (Reserved)


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS 

Chapters:

17.05    Administration

17.10    Definitions

17.15    General Principles of Acceptability 

17.20    Dimension and Layout Standards

17.25    Site Improvements

17.30    Private Street Plats

17.35    Short Subdivisions

17.40    Preliminary Plats

17.45    Final Plats

17.50    Residential Condominium Binding Site Plan Review Process

17.55    Subdivision Procedure

17.60    Parks and Open Space – Fee in Lieu

17.65    Alteration or Vacation of Recorded Subdivisions

17.70    Violations – Penalties


Chapter 17.05 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

17.05.010    Declaration of need – Purpose of provisions.

17.05.020    Approval required.

17.05.030    Enforcement.


17.05.010 Declaration of need – Purpose of provisions.

(1) The city council of Burien declares and finds that the city of Burien has a need for regulation of new plats and condominiums.

(2) These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes:

(a) To set forth the rules and regulations for the division of real property into subdivisions;

(b) To provide for the proper location and width of streets, building lines, open spaces, safety and recreation facilities, utilities, and drainage;

(c) To provide for the avoidance of congestion of population through requirements of minimum lot width, depth and area and the compatibility of design;

(d) To require and fix the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded and improved, and water, sewer, drainage, and other utility mains and piping or connections of other physical improvements shall be installed; and

(e) To provide for and secure the actual construction of such physical improvements. [Ord. 29 § 1(1), 1993]


17.05.020 Approval required.

It shall be mandatory that all new plats and condominiums and any amendments thereto being processed for approval by the legally constituted approving bodies concerned therewith shall be audited and approved by the office of the assessor. [Ord. 29 § 1(2), 1993]


17.05.030 Enforcement.

The director of the department of community development is authorized to enforce the provisions of this title, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. [Ord. 29 § 1(108), 1993]


Chapter 17.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.10.010    Construction of provisions.

17.10.020    Access panhandle.

17.10.030    Access tract.

17.10.040    Acreage.

17.10.050    Active recreation.

17.10.060    Alley.

17.10.070    Alteration.

17.10.080    Binding site plan.

17.10.090    Bond.

17.10.100    Buffer strip.

17.10.110    Crosswalkway.

17.10.120    Cul-de-sac.

17.10.130    Department.

17.10.140    Dedication.

17.10.150    Developer.

17.10.160    Development engineer.

17.10.170    Easement.

17.10.180    Final plat.

17.10.190    Homeowners’ association.

17.10.200    Improvements.

17.10.210    Land surveyor.

17.10.220    Major street.

17.10.230    Manager.

17.10.240    Master plan.

17.10.250    Material error.

17.10.260    Minor street.

17.10.270    Neighborhood park.

17.10.280    Owner.

17.10.290    Ownership interest.

17.10.300    Park service area.

17.10.310    Plat, preliminary.

17.10.320    Primary highway.

17.10.330    Private road.

17.10.340    Reservation.

17.10.350    Secondary highway.

17.10.360    Separate lot.

17.10.370    Shall.

17.10.380    Short plat, final.

17.10.390    Short plat, nonbuilding.

17.10.400    Short plat, preliminary.

17.10.410    Short subdivision.

17.10.420    Street.

17.10.430    Subdivider.

17.10.440    Subdivision.

17.10.450    Tract.


17.10.010 Construction of provisions.

(1) The definitions described in this chapter shall be used in the interpretation of this title.

(2) Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future.

(3) Singular Words. Words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.020 Access panhandle.

“Access panhandle” means a strip of land having a width narrower than that of the lot, tract, or parcel to be served thereby and designed for the purpose of providing access to a lot, tract or parcel. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.030 Access tract.

“Access tract” means a piece of real property with dimensions less than the minimum zone requirement, jointly owned by the fee owners of more than one lot which abuts the tract and which is intended to provide ingress, egress or utility access. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.040 Acreage.

(1) “Five acres” means five acres or one-hundred-twenty-eighth of the section in which the property is located, including, in addition, up to 30 feet, but no more than one-half of the right-of-way of any perimeter public street.

(2) “Ten acres” means 10 acres or one-sixty-fourth of the section in which the property is located, including, in addition, up to 30 feet, but no more than one-half of the right-of-way of any perimeter public street.

(3) “Twenty acres” means 20 acres or one one-thirty-second of the section in which the property is located, including, in addition, up to 30 feet, but not more than one-half of any perimeter public street. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.050 Active recreation.

“Active recreation” means and includes all outdoor recreational activities which involve field and court games, such as, but not limited to football, soccer, rugby, tennis, baseball and softball. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.060 Alley.

An “alley” means a strip of land dedicated to public use, less than 21 feet wide, between property lines, which provides access to adjacent properties. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.070 Alteration.

“Alteration” means the modification of a previously recorded plat or short plat, or any portion thereof, which results in the revision of interior lot lines, the addition of new lots or more land, deletion of existing lots or the removal of plat or lot restrictions or dedications. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.080 Binding site plan.

“Binding site plan” means a plan of a residential condominium project drawn to scale processed in accordance with the provisions of this title, which:

(1) Identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, open spaces, parking areas, landscaped areas and building envelopes;

(2) Contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the city of Burien;

(3) Contains provisions requiring any development or division of land to be in conformity with the approved site plan. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.090 Bond.

“Bond” means a surety bond, cash deposit, escrow account assignment of savings, irrevocable letter of credit or other means acceptable to, or required by, the city to guarantee work is in compliance with all applicable requirements. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.100 Buffer strip.

“Buffer strip” means an area or strip of land located and planted with trees and shrubs to provide a screen between residential areas and business, commercial and industrial areas. Parks, playground and the sites of public buildings are sometimes used as buffers. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.110 Crosswalkway.

“Crosswalkway” means a right-of-way dedicated to public use, 10 feet or more in width, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.120 Cul-de-sac.

“Cul-de-sac” means a short street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.130 Department.

“Department” means the city of Burien department of community development. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.140 Dedication.

“Dedication” means a conveyance of land to the city of Burien or another municipal corporation or public agency where the owner of the land transfers it to some public use through a clause or covenant in a deed or some other instrument of conveyance or on a duly filed plat. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.150 Developer.

“Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or corporation or any other entity or combination of entities or successors thereto who undertakes to subdivide for the purpose of resale and commercial profit. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.160 Development engineer.

“Development engineer” means the city of Burien designated individual authorized to oversee the review, conditioning, inspection and acceptance of right-of-way use permits, road and drainage projects constructed pursuant to permits administered by the department. The development engineer or designee shall be a professional civil engineer registered and licensed under the laws of the state of Washington. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.170 Easement.

“Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, corporation or persons for specific purposes. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.180 Final plat.

“Final plat” means a map or chart of a subdivision of land which has been accurately surveyed, and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions thereof can be identified, and which has been approved in accordance with this title. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.190 Homeowners’ association.

“Homeowners’ association” means any combination or grouping of persons or any association, corporation or other entity which represents homeowners residing in a short subdivision or subdivision; provided, that a homeowners’ association need not have any official status as a separate legal entity under the laws of the state of Washington. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.200 Improvements.

“Improvements” refers to streets, with or without curbs or gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street trees and other appropriate items. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.210 Land surveyor.

“Land surveyor” means an individual licensed as a land surveyor pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW, Professional Engineers Registration Act. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.220 Major street.

“Major street” means a street of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.230 Manager.

“Manager” means the director of the city of Burien department of community development. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.240 Master plan.

“Master plan” means the comprehensive plan made and adopted by the planning commission, indicating the general locations recommended for streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts, and all other pubic improvements. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.250 Material error.

“Material error” means an error in fact or an omission of substantive information in preliminary subdivision or short subdivision application, or supplementary studies, supplied to the county, which would constitute the basis for a decision. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.260 Minor street.

“Minor street” means a street supplementary to a major street, such as side streets, loop streets and cul-de-sacs. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.270 Neighborhood park.

“Neighborhood park” means a small park of five to 10 acres in size which is designed to serve the open space and recreational needs of the immediately surrounding residents within a radius of approximately one-half to one mile. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.280 Owner.

“Owner” means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of any of them. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.290 Ownership interest.

“Ownership interest” means having property rights as a fee owner, contract purchaser, mortgagee, or deed of trust beneficiary or grantor. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.300 Park service area.

“Park service area” means an area roughly approximate to elementary school boundaries, to be established by the city of Burien, within which reservation or dedication of land and fees are received from new residential developments and utilized for the creation and enhancement of parks, open spaces and recreational facilities for the benefit of residents within the service area. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.310 Plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary plat” means an accurate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, tracts and other elements of a subdivision consistent with the requirements of this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW, Plats – Subdivisions – Dedications. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the subdivision’s general layout. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.320 Primary highway.

“Primary highway” means a street or section line road of great continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major trafficway within the county and is designated in the master plan as a limited access highway, major thoroughfare, parkway or other equivalent term to identify those highways comprising that basin structure of the highway plan. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.330 Private road.

“Private road” means a private vehicular access provided for by an access tract, easement or other legal means, which serves two or more lots. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.340 Reservation.

“Reservation” means the act by which the grantor of land creates and reserves to a homeowners’ association, through a clause or covenant in a deed or some other instrument of conveyance or on a duly filed plat map, some right or interest which had no previous existence as such. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.350 Secondary highway.

“Secondary highway” means a highway or street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as the principal traffic between large and separated areas or districts and which is the main means of access to the primary street or road system. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.360 Separate lot.

“Separate lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created through one of the following processes:

(1) The lot was created in compliance with the subdivision or short subdivision laws in effect at the time of creation of the lot;

(2) The lot has been recognized as a lot pursuant to BMC 17.15.130, lots created in violation of this title; or

(3) The lot is a portion of a lot created through the processes cited in subsections (1) or (2) of this section that is separated from the remainder of the lot by one of the following:

(a) A public road right-of-way, or

(b) Shorelines, or

(c) Another separate lot, or a tract, including railroad or public utility owned rights-of-way, publicly owned property or other parcels recognized by the department pursuant to BMC 17.15.010. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.370 Shall.

“Shall” is mandatory and not directory. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.380 Short plat, final.

“Final short plat” means an accurate map of a short subdivision. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.390 Short plat, nonbuilding.

“Nonbuilding short plat” means a short plat or lot(s) within a short plat for which a declaration of covenant prohibits improvements upon the land for the purpose of human habitation. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.400 Short plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary short plat” means a map indicating a proposed short subdivision of land. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.410 Short subdivision.

“Short subdivision” means the administrative approval of the division or redivision of land into four or fewer lots for the purpose of sale or transfer of ownership pursuant to Chapter 17.35 BMC. A short subdivision also may include any number of tracts for ingress, egress, utilities, open space preservation or other approved public purpose. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.420 Street.

“Street” means a right-of-way dedicated to the public use, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.430 Subdivider.

“Subdivider” means a person who undertakes the subdividing or the resubdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or other divisions of land for the purpose, immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or development including all changes in street or lot lines. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.440 Subdivision.

“Subdivision” means the division or redivision of land into two or more lots for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership, except as provided by the short subdivision of two to four lots. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


17.10.450 Tract.

“Tract” means land reserved for special uses such as open space, surface water retention, utilities or access. Tracts are not counted as lots nor considered as residential building sites except as allowed under the lot clustering provisions of the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(3), 1993]


Chapter 17.15 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ACCEPTABILITY 

Sections:

17.15.010    Applicability.

17.15.020    Conformance to code.

17.15.030    Streets – Conformance to master plan.

17.15.040    Streets – Conformance to suggested plan.

17.15.050    Public welfare interest.

17.15.060    Encroachment on future public areas.

17.15.070    Frontage on high volume trafficways.

17.15.080    Buffer strips – Railroads.

17.15.090    Buffer strips – Residential and commercial areas.

17.15.100    Subdivisions bordering municipalities.

17.15.110    Large subdivisions.

17.15.120    Boundary line adjustments. 

17.15.130    Lots created in violation of this title.

17.15.140    Street/highway connections.

17.15.150    Ditches – Drainage.

17.15.160    Trees – Placement.

17.15.170    Sidewalks, walkways.

17.15.180    New streets, rights-of-way.

17.15.190    Cemeteries.

17.15.200    Parks, playgrounds, open public spaces.

17.15.210    Waterfront plats.

17.15.220    Dedication for recreational purposes.

17.15.230    Conformance to zoning code.

17.15.240    Variances and exceptions.

17.15.250    Future use of streets – Intersection angles and grades.

17.15.260    Playfields, parks, etc. – Preservation of features.

17.15.270    Public sewer, water supply systems – Prior approval.

17.15.280    Sewage disposal.

17.15.290    Water supply.


17.15.010 Applicability.

This title shall apply to all divisions of land into two or more lots or tracts, for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. Except as provided herein the provisions of this title shall not apply to:

(1) Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

(2) Any division of land into lots or tracts each one of which is 20 acres or larger, or in the case of zone classifications requiring a minimum lot area greater than 20 acres, each of which complies with the lot area requirements of that classification.

(3) Any division of land made by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent. Lots created by this means which do not meet current zoning will be treated the same as legal substandard lots as provided in the bulk regulations of the city of Burien zoning code.

(4) Any division of land into lots or tracts consistent with RCW 58.17.040(7) for which a residential condominium binding site plan has been recorded in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.50 BMC, Residential Condominium Binding Site Plan.

(5) Any transfer of land to a public body, or any division of land solely for the installation of electric power, telephone, water supply, sewer service or other utility facilities of a similar or related nature; provided, that no more than four lots are created; and provided further, that any remaining lot or lots which are not consistent with the city of Burien zoning, access, or health requirements shall not be considered as building sites by the city of Burien.

(6) A division made for the purpose of alteration by adjusting boundary lines, between platted or unplatted lots or both, which does not create any lot, tract, parcel, site, or division which contains insufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for width and area for a building site, provided the adjustment is reviewed and approved as set forth in BMC 17.15.120.

(7) Any conveyance of land by a partial fulfillment deed pursuant to a real estate contract; provided that the entire lot within the original real estate contract shall be recognized as a single legal building site until the property is subdivided in compliance with this title, and that there shall be no retransfer of any lot created by partial fulfillment deed without compliance with this title.

(8) Any division of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than mobile homes are permitted to be placed upon the land and for which a binding plan for the use of the land as a mobile home part has been approved by the city of Burien in accordance with applicable codes, regulations and ordinances. [Ord. 29 § 1(4), 1993]


17.15.020 Conformance to code.

The subdivision shall conform to this chapter and Chapter 17.20 BMC. [Ord. 29 § 1(5), 1993]


17.15.030 Streets – Conformance to master plan.

Streets shall conform in effect to the master plan as adopted and/or to the general pattern of the highway system of the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 §1(6), 1993]


17.15.040 Streets – Conformance to suggested plan.

If a preliminary or suggested plan or plat for the area has been made by the city of Burien, the street layout shall be in general conformance thereto. [Ord. 29 § 1(7), 1993]


17.15.050 Public welfare interest.

The proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in the best interests of the public welfare and the neighborhood development of the area and the subdivider shall present evidence to this effort when requested by the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(8), 1993]


17.15.060 Encroachment on future public areas.

The tract to be subdivided should not be a part of or encroach upon an area or areas designated in the master plan for future public facilities. [Ord. 29 § 1(9), 1993]


17.15.070 Frontage on high volume trafficways.

Frontage on high volume trafficways shall be provided with parallel service streets or such other medium of access as may be appropriate to the conditions. [Ord. 29 § 1(10), 1993]


17.15.080 Buffer strips – Railroads.

Where railroads are involved, provision of grade separations, buffer strips and other protective treatment shall be required to the extent and type as may be practicable. [Ord. 29 § 1(11), 1993]


17.15.090 Buffer strips – Residential and commercial areas.

Where residential subdivisions are to be developed adjacent to the business, commercial or industrial land use districts, buffer strips or other protective treatment should be provided to the extent and type as may be practicable. [Ord. 29 § 1(12), 1993]


17.15.100 Subdivisions bordering municipalities.

Subdivisions adjacent to municipalities shall be considered with respect to the special subdivision standards of the municipality as well as the requirements of the planning commission. [Ord. 29 § 1(13), 1993]


17.15.110 Large subdivisions.

Where a tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the Burien department of community development may require an arrangement of lots and streets such as to permit a later resubdivision in conformity with the street and lot requirements specified in these regulations. [Ord. 29 § 1(14), 1993]


17.15.120 Boundary line adjustments. 

(1) Any proposed adjustment of boundary lines must be reviewed and approved by the manager prior to the transfer of property ownership of land between adjacent separate lots. The purpose of the manager’s review is to determine if the proposed division meets the exemption requirements of BMC 17.15.010. In order to determine if the boundary line adjustment is exempt, the manager shall examine the city of Burien zoning code, shoreline management program, applicable board of health rules and regulations, and, in addition for developed lots, International Fire and Building Codes.

(2) Initial adjustment approvals shall expire if the authorized deeds transferring property ownership, together with a copy of the approved boundary adjustment, are not recorded within one year of adjustment approval.

(3) Revisions of approved boundary line adjustments may be permitted within the one-year approval period without a new application only if the authorized adjustment and the deeds transferring ownership have not been recorded. Modifications of recorded adjustments will require the review and approval of a new application package. [Ord. 652 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 29 § 1(15), 1993]


17.15.130 Lots created in violation of this title.

(1) For purposes of this title, an innocent purchaser shall mean an individual who has purchased real property for value, has not received actual notice that the lot has not been legally created as provided in this code, and has not previously been granted innocent purchaser status by the city of Burien. All contiguous lots created in violation of this title and which are under the same ownership at the time of application for innocent purchaser status shall be recognized only as a single lot.

(2) An innocent purchaser of a lot created in violation of the city of Burien subdivision requirements, who files a notarized affidavit of innocent purchase with the department on forms satisfactory to the manager shall be treated as follows for purposes of determining zoning compliance, and for establishing eligibility for building permits and future subdivisions:

(a) A lot recognized pursuant to this innocent purchaser provision will be treated the same as a legally subdivided lot if the parcel meets current zoning requirements for access, lot area and lot width;

(b) Innocent purchaser lots which do not meet current zoning requirements, but which did meet zoning requirements in effect at the time that they were created, will be treated the same as legally created substandard lots as provided in the bulk regulations section of the Burien zoning code; and

(c) Innocent purchaser lots which do not meet current zoning requirements and which did not meet the zoning requirements in effect at the time of their creation will be treated the same as legally created lots for purpose of conveyance, but will not be eligible for building permits. [Ord. 29 § 1(16), 1993]


17.15.140 Street/highway connections.

No plan for the replatting, subdivision or dedication of any area shall be approved by the city of Burien unless the streets shown therein are connected by a surfaced road or street (according to city specifications) to an existing dedicated highway of the city. [Ord. 29 § 1(17), 1993]


17.15.150 Ditches – Drainage.

Proper facilities, as required by the city engineer, shall be provided for the drainage of road ditches on steep grades in order to minimize the damage of erosion. [Ord. 29 § 1(18), 1993]


17.15.160 Trees – Placement.

If street trees are to be used, it is preferred to have them planted outside the right-of-way. [Ord. 29 § 1(19), 1993]


17.15.170 Sidewalks, walkways.

Sidewalks or walkways shall be required for all existing and proposed streets including perimeter streets in business and residential subdivisions as specified in Chapter 17.20 BMC. [Ord. 29 § 1(20), 1993]


17.15.180 New streets, rights-of-way.

Where the master plan and/or the city street plan indicates the necessity of a new right-of-way of a required width or portion thereof for street purposes, in order to complete the articulation of the city street pattern, whether within a new plat, new subdivision, or along the boundaries of a new plat, new subdivision of new lot, such required right-of-way or portion thereof shall be dedicated to the city of Burien by the filing of a plat. [Ord. 29 § 1(21), 1993]


17.15.190 Cemeteries.

The area of a cemetery in one unit shall be not more than 80 acres which may or can be surrounded by streets and highways. If the area of a cemetery is intersected or cut by dedicated or platted streets or highways, the areas on opposite sides of said streets or highways shall form and be considered separate units. In the matter of marginal streets, cemeteries shall be governed by the general platting regulations. [Ord. 29 § 1(22), 1993]


17.15.200 Parks, playgrounds, open public spaces.

If required by the department of community development, all plats must provide by dedication, areas for park, playground, or open public spaces to the extent determined as required on the basis of density of population. [Ord. 29 § 1(23), 1993]


17.15.210 Waterfront plats.

Plats contiguous to lakes, streams or bodies of water must have lots or tracts larger than minimum if necessary, in order to allow for septic tanks, with their drainage fields to be built not closer than 100 feet to such lake, stream, or body of water, unless connection can be had to an approved sewerage system or unless a different arrangement is approved by the Seattle-King County department of health and the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(24), 1993]


17.15.220 Dedication for recreational purposes.

Unless topography and ground conditions prevent, the department of community development may require the dedication of a reasonable amount of property to the state of Washington for recreational and fishing purposes forever, and may also require such dedication of the approaches to such areas as may be required by the State Department of Game. [Ord. 29 § 1(25), 1993]


17.15.230 Conformance to zoning code.

No lot or portion of a lot in this plat shall be divided and sold or resold or ownership changed or transferred whereby the ownership of any portion of this plat shall be less than the area required for the use (zone) district in which located.

(1) All final plats shall have their areas divided into use (zone) districts in accordance with and to become governed by the restrictions, rules and regulations of the zoning code, which said restrictions are applicable in that they govern the use (zoning) of the plat.

(2) Covenants, as to use and resale binding all future owners of lots, more severe than the requirements of the zoning code, may be shown on the plat. [Ord. 29 § 1(26), 1993]


17.15.240 Variances and exceptions.

Variations and exceptions from the dimensional standards and improvement requirements, as set forth in this title, may be made by the hearing examiner in those instances where it is deemed that hardship, topography or other factual deterrent conditions prevail, and in such manner as it considers necessary to maintain the intent and purpose of these regulations and requirements. [Ord. 61, 1993; Ord. 29 § 1(27), 1993]


17.15.250 Future use of streets – Intersection angles and grades.

Due regard should be given in every case to the topography of the area, the use of the street for utility purposes and its future use for rapid traffic purposes.

(1) When any streets or alleys intersect with high volume traffic routes or at angles that may prove dangerous, the grades shall be given special approval requirements.

(2) Streets shall be required to intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as is practicable in each specific case. [Ord. 29 § 1(28), 1993]


17.15.260 Playfields, parks, etc. – Preservation of features.

(1) The department of community development shall specify to the extent required, the allocation of playfields, parks and other open public spaces that may be essential to a proper development of the areas or neighborhood.

(2) Due regard shall be shown for the preservation of outstanding natural and cultural features such as scenic spots, watercourses and historic sites. [Ord. 29 § 1(29), 1993]


17.15.270 Public sewer, water supply systems – Prior approval.

(1) For preliminary plats approved by the council prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, public sewer or water to serve such plats are adequate and such plats are eligible for final plat approval if:

(a) The plat is within a local service area identified in the sewerage general plan or served by existing installed facilities as described in subsection (3) of this section; or within an area identified in a community plan approved by the Burien city council as an area to be served by public sewer or water systems; and

(b) The plat is served by a district, municipality or water purveyor which has certified its ability and intent to serve the proposed plat; and

(c) Public sewer and/or water facilities to serve the plat have been installed or a bond, contract or other secure method provides for and assures the construction of such facilities.

(2) The Burien department of community development and the Seattle/King County department of public health shall review all such plats previously approved and recommend to the council for disposition of such plats consistent with the criteria of this section.

(3) A plat is deemed to be served by existing installed sewer or water facilities when the plat:

(a) Can be served by connection to a public sewer facility or connection to a water facility and such facilities were installed or under construction prior to December 1, 1977; or

(b) Is contained within a utility local improvement district formed with facilities funded under contract prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. [Ord. 29 § 1(30), 1993]


17.15.280 Sewage disposal.

All lots must be served by or provision made for an adequate public sewage disposal system either as set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section or an on-site sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (3) of this section, before the plat may be recorded.

(1) A public sewage disposal system is adequate for the purpose of preliminary subdivision approval if:

(a) The disposal system is consistent with the sewerage general plan and any subsequent amendments; and

(b) The disposal system has been approved by the city of Burien as being consistent with applicable state and local design and operating guidelines.

(2) Prior to recording the final plat, either the approved public sewage system set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot, or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the city of Burien and may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of such facilities within two years of the date of plat recording.

(3) On-site sewage disposal systems to serve individual lots are adequate for the purpose of preliminary and final approval if the city of Burien and Seattle-King County department of public health has approved the lot size, soils, and proposed type of disposal system in accordance with the Seattle-King County board of health rules and regulations. Installation of the on-site sewage disposal system is not required for final approval. [Ord. 29 § 1(31), 1993]


17.15.290 Water supply.

All lots must have an adequate water supply as set forth in this section before the plat may be recorded.

(1) A water supply system shall be deemed adequate for the purpose of preliminary approval if the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that:

(a) The existing water supply system complies with the applicable planning, operating and design requirements of Chapter 248-54 WAC; Chapters 14.42 and 14.44 KCC and KCC Title 17; Coordinated Water System Plan; Title 12, Title 13 and other applicable provisions of the codes of the King County board of health; and any limitation or condition imposed by the county approved comprehensive plan of the water purveyor; and

(b) The water system improvements proposed to be constructed to serve the subdivision have been reviewed by the city and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section.

(2) Where applicable, the city shall incorporate the requirements of the Seattle-King County department of public health and the Washington State Department of Health in determining compliance with subsections (1)(a), (b) and (c) of this section.

(3) Prior to recording the final plat, the approved public water system authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot unless a bond or similar security has been deposited with the city of Burien in a form and amount, and with conditions satisfactory to the city of Burien to provide for the construction of required water facilities in Group A systems as defined by board of health regulations, within two years of the date of plat recording. The city may assign rights to enforce the bond to the purveyor.

(4) The proposed use of on-site private individual water systems to serve individual lots is adequate and the subdivision may receive preliminary and final approval if the city of Burien and Seattle-King County department of public health has approved this proposed method of water supply in accordance with the applicable Seattle-King County board of health rules and regulations and this section. The applicant shall provide appropriate information to demonstrate to the city of Burien and Seattle-King County department of public health that adequate water can be made available. The Seattle-King County department of public health may require installation of private individual water systems prior to final approval of the subdivision where information is insufficient to show an adequate water supply can be made available. [Ord. 29 § 1(32), 1993]


Chapter 17.20 DIMENSION AND LAYOUT STANDARDS

Sections:

17.20.010    Dimensions of lots.


17.20.010 Dimensions of lots.

The minimum dimensions for lots shall conform to the dimensions established in the zoning code and shall not be less than the requirements for the use district in which located. [Ord. 29 § 1(34), 1993]


Chapter 17.25 SITE IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

17.25.010    Plat approval requirements – Exception – Bond.


17.25.010 Plat approval requirements – Exception – Bond.

No plat shall be approved by the city until each and all of the proposed streets, avenues, boulevards and highways shown thereon shall first be so improved by grading, surface and drainage in full compliance with and pursuant to a construction permit issued by the city, issued exclusively for those improvements and in anticipation of a subsequent subdivision of the site. Said improved streets, avenues, boulevards, and highways will give unobstructed access to all separate lots, tracts and subdivisions of such plat, all at the expense of the plattor in accordance with the current city of Burien standard specifications for private work on city rights-of-way and approved by the development engineer; provided, however, that in lieu of the full compliance herewith prior to the acceptance of the plat, the plattor may deposit a performance bond with the city in an amount equal to the cost estimated from current city bonding schedules as a guarantee that the plattor will, within one year from the date of acceptance of the plat, fully comply with all the requirements herein set forth to the satisfaction of the development engineer; or, in the alternative to this above required bond, the city may accept other secure methods providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a one-year period and on the terms identical to the herein described bond. [Ord. 29 § 1(35), 1993]


Chapter 17.30 PRIVATE STREET PLATS

Sections:

17.30.010    Permitted conditions.

17.30.020    Conformance with code – Exception.

17.30.030    Modification by department of community development.

17.30.040    Improvements – Right of city to enter and install – Bond.

17.30.050    Maintenance – Organization – Costs assessment.


17.30.010 Permitted conditions.

Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the Burien city council determines that the most logical development of land requires that the lots be served by private streets or easements, and that the land cannot be adequately served by streets dedicated to the public, private streets or easements may be approved upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 29 § 1(36), 1993]


17.30.020 Conformance with code – Exception.

Plats with private streets shall conform in all ways to this title and follow the procedures outlined herein unless greater or lesser requirements are explicitly specified in this chapter or by the department of community development. [Ord. 29 § 1(37), 1993]


17.30.030 Modification by department of community development.

In addition to other standards required by this title, the department of community development may require such additional standards and conditions or it may modify the standards and conditions in such a manner as is necessary to:

(1) Maintain the intent and purpose of this title;

(2) Assure that a degree of compatibility shall be maintained with respect to properties and existing or potential uses within the general area;

(3) Preserve the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; and

(4) Such modifications are approved by the city council. [Ord. 29 § 1(38), 1993]


17.30.040 Improvements – Right of city to enter and install – Bond.

All pavements, sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts, grading, planting, fencing and any other improvements which are made a part of the approval of the plat shall be completed at the expense of the plattor prior to the recording of the plat; provided, that in the event the plattor shall be unable to install said improvements prior to the time of the recording of the plat, the plat may be recorded without such improvements being installed provided the following conditions are complied with:

(1) The plattor shall grant to the city by proper instrument duly recorded the right to enter upon the property to be platted and install said improvements;

(2) The plattor shall furnish to the city a good and sufficient performance bond to cover the cost of installing said improvements. This bond shall provide that the plattor agrees to faithfully perform the conditions thereof, which conditions shall include an agreement to construct and install all said improvements within the time specified by this title, and further that upon the failure of the plattor to do so, such bond shall be forfeited in favor of the city or in the alternative to the above required bond, the city may accept other secure methods providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a one-year period and on the terms identical to the herein described bond. [Ord. 29 § 1(39), 1993]


17.30.050 Maintenance – Organization – Costs assessment.

All private streets, easements, community utilities and properties shall be maintained by the owners of property served by them and kept in good repair at all times. In order to insure the continued good repair, it must be demonstrated to the department of community development prior to the recording of the plat that:

(1) There is a workable organization to guarantee maintenance with a committee or group to administer the organization functions;

(2) There is a means for assessing maintenance costs equitably to property owners served by the private streets, easements, community utilities and properties. [Ord. 29 § 1(40), 1993]


Chapter 17.35 SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.35.010    Purpose.

17.35.020    Application – Contents.

17.35.030    Changes to proposed or approved short plats.

17.35.040    Application – Agency review.

17.35.050    Material errors.

17.35.060    General limitations.

17.35.070    Application – Notice posting.

17.35.080    Access.

17.35.090    Water supply.

17.35.100    Sewage disposal.

17.35.110    Existing nonbuilding lots.

17.35.120    Preliminary decision.

17.35.130    Final approval and recording.

17.35.140    Short plat alterations and vacations.

17.35.150    Administration.


17.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the division of land into four or fewer lots in accordance with applicable Washington State and the city of Burien laws, rules, and regulations; to provide the public with clear administrative procedures for the short subdivision of land; to assure the orderly conveyance of land; and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. [Ord. 29 § 1(41), 1993]


17.35.020 Application – Contents.

(1) Applications shall be on forms prescribed by the city, and shall include such information as deemed necessary by the city to establish compliance with subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Applications for preliminary short subdivision approval shall be considered fully complete as of the date of application pursuant to RCW 58.17.033 once the city determines that the application contains the following materials and information:

(a) A completed short subdivision application form which contains sufficient information to determine compliance with the rules and regulations set forth in BMC 17.35.120 (2);

(b) Verification of pre-application approval of proposed water supply and sewage disposal by the city of Burien and Seattle-King County department of public health;

(c) Fire district receipt;

(d) Copies of all easements, deed restrictions or other encumbrances restricting the use of the subject property;

(e) Documentation of the date and method of segregation for the subject property verifying that the lot or lots were not created in violation of the short subdivision or subdivision laws in effect at the time of creation;

(f) A completed environmental checklist, if required;

(g) Payment of any application fees; and

(h) Completed applications for other applicable permits if the permits are to be processed with the short subdivision, or copies of issued permits if they have been previously approved. [Ord. 29 § 1(42), 1993]


17.35.030 Changes to proposed or approved short plats.

(1) Applicant-generated modifications or requests for revision(s) which are not made in response to staff review or public appeal which result in substantial changes as determined by the city that may include creation of additional lots or elimination of open space requirements shall be treated as new applications for purposes of vesting.

(2) Applicant-generated proposals to create additional lots, eliminate open space or change conditions of approval on an approved preliminary short plat shall also be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting.

(3) Proposals to amend an approved final short plat shall be treated as an alteration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter regarding alterations. [Ord. 29 § 1(43), 1993]


17.35.040 Application – Agency review.

(1) Upon receipt of a completed application for short subdivision approval, the city shall distribute copies to public agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction, for their review and comment.

(2) Non-city agencies receiving short subdivision applications for review shall have 21 calendar days to respond in writing with findings or recommendations. If an agency does not respond, the city may extend the deadline or conclude that the reviewing agency has no interest in the application. [Ord. 29 § 1(44), 1993]


17.35.050 Material errors.

Applications found to contain and be based on material errors shall be deemed withdrawn and subsequent resubmittals shall be treated as new applications. [Ord. 29 § 1(45), 1993]


17.35.060 General limitations.

The following general limitations shall apply to all short subdivision applications:

(1) Only a separate lot, as defined in this code, or a combination of two or more contiguous separate lots may be short subdivided;

(2) A maximum of four lots may be created by any single application;

(3) A maximum of eight lots may be created from two or more contiguous parcels with any common ownership interest; and

(4) Except as provided in BMC 17.35.150, if the lot to be subdivided was created through a prior short subdivision, at least five years must have passed since the recording of such prior short subdivision. [Ord. 29 § 1(46), 1993]


17.35.070 Application – Notice posting.

(1) Upon acceptance of a complete short subdivision application the city shall cause notice of such application to be given within 20 days of the filing of such application.

(2) Notice required pursuant to this section shall be as follows:

(a) By posting a notice board on or adjacent to the subject property at a place conspicuous and likely to be seen by persons passing the property. The city may require additional notice boards when a site does not abut a public road or in another instance when the city deems additional boards to be necessary. Posting shall occur for at least 30 days. Notice shall include but not be limited to:

(i) The file number of the short plat, the total area of the short plat, the number of lots, the typical lot size, the proposed use, and the name of the applicant;

(ii) A vicinity map or general location description in non-legal language;

(iii) A statement indicating that written material may be submitted to the city within 30 days after notice is posted;

(iv) A form to request the preliminary and final short subdivisions as approved by the city;

(v) Identification of the responsible city official; and

(vi) A description of the appeal procedure.

Posting of the required notice, including the expenses thereof, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and an affidavit of posting shall be submitted by the applicant to the city prior to the final date in a form approved by the city.

(b) By first class mail to owners of property within 500 feet of any boundary of the subject property. The area within which mailed notice is required shall be expanded to include at least 20 different property owners in rural or lightly inhabited areas or in other appropriate cases to the extent the city determines is necessary. Notice shall contain:

(i) The file number of the short plat, the total area of the short plat, the number and typical lot size, the proposed use and the name of the applicant;

(ii) A vicinity map or general location description in non-legal language;

(iii) A statement that written materials may be submitted to the city within 30 days after notice is sent;

(iv) A form to request the preliminary and final short subdivisions as approved by the city; and

(v) A statement of city appeal procedures.

(c) By first class mail sent to:

(i) Any city located within one-half mile of any boundary of the subject property (and the county if unincorporated land is within one-half mile);

(ii) Any city which has a utility which is proposed to serve the short subdivision; and

(iii) The State Department of Transportation where the short plat or part thereof adjoins a state right-of-way.

The content of notice shall be as approved in subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(d) By any other method if the city deems it appropriate for the purposed of giving notice to interested parties, including but not limited to providing notification of the proposed action to local or community newspapers. [Ord. 29 § 1(47), 1993]


17.35.080 Access.

(1) Each lot within the short subdivision or short subdivision alteration shall have acceptable access to a street conforming to city road standards or to a lower level of improvement acceptable to the road engineer. Individual lots may be served by access panhandles, established either by fee ownership or easement, subject to approval of the city. In order to assure safe and adequate access, the city:

(a) May approve private streets, provided the private street requirements contained in Chapter 17.30 BMC, Private Streets, of the city street standards, as adopted, are met;

(b) May limit direct access to certain streets and require on-site public or private streets in lieu of individual driveways or access panhandles, in accordance with the city street standards;

(c) Shall require off-site improvements to public or private streets needed to provide access from the short subdivision to a street acceptable to the road engineer; and

(d) Shall assure that the number of lots to be served by the street system complies with the street standards.

(2) Right-of-Way Use Permits. Short subdivisions involving construction within city right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way use permit pursuant to the codes, rules, laws and regulations of the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(48), 1993]


17.35.090 Water supply.

All lots must have an adequate water supply as set forth in this section before the short plat may be recorded:

(1) A water supply system shall be deemed adequate for the purpose of preliminary approval if the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that:

(a) The existing water supply system complies with the applicable planning, operating and design requirements of Chapter 248-54 WAC, Chapters 14.42 and 14.44 KCC and KCC Title 17; Coordinated Water System plans; Title 12, Title 13 and other applicable provisions of the codes of the King County board of health; and any limitation or condition imposed by the city or county approved comprehensive plan of the water purveyor; and

(b) The water system improvements proposed to be constructed to serve the short subdivision have been reviewed by the city and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section; or

(c) The new water supply system proposed to be constructed to serve the short subdivision has been reviewed by the city and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (1)(a) of this section.

(2) Where applicable, the city will incorporate the requirements of the Seattle-King County department of public health and the Washington State Department of Health in determining compliance with subsections (1)(a), (b) and (c) of this section.

(3) Prior to recording the final short plat, the approved public water system authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot unless a bond or similar security has been deposited with the city of Burien in a form and amount and with conditions satisfactory to the city of Burien to provide for the construction of required water facilities in Group A systems as defined by board of health regulations, within two years of the date of short plat recording. The city may assign rights to enforce the bond to the purveyor.

(4) The proposed use of on-site private individual water systems to serve individual lots is adequate and the short subdivision may receive preliminary and final approval if the Seattle-King County department of public health and city of Burien has approved this proposed method of water supply in accordance with the applicable King County department of public health rules and regulations and this section. The applicant shall provide appropriate information to demonstrate to the city of Burien and Seattle-King County department of public health that adequate water can be made available. The Seattle-King County department of public health may require installation of private individual water systems prior to final approval of the short subdivision where information is insufficient to show an adequate water supply can be made available. [Ord. 29 § 1(49), 1993]


17.35.100 Sewage disposal.

All lots must be served by or provisions made for an adequate public sewage disposal system as set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section or an on-site sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (3) of this section, before the short plat may be recorded:

(1) A public sewage disposal system is adequate and the short subdivision may receive preliminary approval if:

(a) The disposal system is consistent with the sewerage general plan and any subsequent amendments; and

(b) The disposal system has been approved by the city as being consistent with applicable state and local design and operating guidelines.

(2) Prior to recording the final short plat, either the approved public sewage system set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot, or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the city of Burien and may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of such facilities within two years of the date of short plat recording.

(3) On-site sewage disposal systems to serve individual lots are adequate for the purpose of preliminary and final approval if the city of Burien and the Seattle-King County department of public health has approved the lot size, soils and proposed type of disposal system in accordance with the King County board of health rules and regulations. Installation of the on-site sewage disposal system is not required for final approval unless otherwise required by Seattle-King County department of public health and the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(50), 1993]


17.35.110 Existing nonbuilding lots.

An owner of an existing nonbuilding lot may seek to have that lot recognized by the city of Burien as a legal building site by either of the following procedures:

(1) Short subdivision or alteration as provided in this chapter; or

(2) Subdivision as provided in Chapter 17.55 BMC, Subdivision Procedure. [Ord. 29 § 1(51), 1993]


17.35.120 Preliminary decision.

(1) Following the acceptance of a complete application, or following the conclusion of any applicable SEPA review and appeal period. The city shall:

(a) Approve the application with conditions;

(b) Deny the application; or

(c) Return the application to the applicant if additional information or modifications are necessary to further process the application.

The city shall make written findings regarding compliance with subsection (2) of this section and notify applicants of any such decision in writing within five days of the decision being made. For applications returned to the applicant for additional information or modifications, the city shall specify a deadline for the submittal of such information or modifications. Applications shall be deemed withdrawn or cancelled if requested information or modifications are not submitted within the time period specified in the written findings. Unexpended portions of application review fees shall be returned with the notice of cancellation. The city shall not approve any short subdivision unless the city makes written findings that appropriate provision are made for the factors set forth in RCW 58.17.110.

(2) The preliminary decision shall be based on the following factors:

(a) Conformance with adopted city and state rules and regulations in effect on the date the complete application was received. Such rules and regulations include, but are not limited to: Chapter 58.17 RCW; SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW); the city of Burien zoning code; Chapter 14.42 KCC, Road Standards; Chapter 9.04 KCC, Surface Water Runoff; KCC Title 25, Shoreline Management; Fire Code; the Seattle-King County board of health rules and regulations; and city approved utility comprehensive plans; and conformance with applicable private restrictions and covenants;

(b) Consideration of the recommendations or comments of those agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction.

(3) The preliminary decision shall become effective 10 calendar days after the decision has been mailed, or upon completion of appeals filed pursuant to city of Burien laws, rules, codes, or regulations.

(4) Short subdivision preliminary approvals shall be valid for 36 months. If any condition is not satisfied and the final short plat is not recorded within the approval period the short subdivision approval shall be null and void. If all conditions have been satisfied and all required documents have been submitted within the approval period, the city may grant a single extension of up to 90 days to obtain additional information or for the processing and recording of final short plat documents. Applicants will have a maximum of 30 days to comply with requests for additional information made within the extension period.

(5) All construction and site development activities related to the short subdivision are prohibited until the preliminary decision becomes effective or until authorized by any required plan approval required as a condition of preliminary short subdivision approval. [Ord. 29 § 1(52), 1993]


17.35.130 Final approval and recording.

(1) All short subdivisions shall meet the following provisions prior to recording:

(a) All final short subdivisions shall be surveyed and the final recording forms shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor;

(b) Surveys shall include those items prescribed by RCW 58.09.060, Records of Survey, Contents – Record of Corner, Information;

(c) Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for land registered pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW, Registration of Land Titles, shall be obtained and provided by the owners of any approved short subdivision;

(d) A supplemental plat certificate shall be provided if the final short plat is not recorded within 30 days of the original certificate or supplemental certificate date;

(e) All required improvements must be installed and approved, or bonded as specified for plats in Chapter 17.55 BMC, Subdivision Procedure, and in BMC 17.35.090(2) and 17.35.100(2);

(f) The requirements for a deposit to cover anticipated taxes as required for plats in Chapter 58.08 RCW, Plats – Recording, is waived for the filing of short plats. However, the applicant shall be required to provide certification from the city of Burien office of the city clerk and King County office of finance that property taxes for the subject property are not delinquent prior to issuance of a final approval; and

(g) All applicable final approval fees, and any civil penalties assessed, have been paid.

(2) Final short plat recording forms shall contain the following signatures, approvals or information in the format prescribed by the manager:

(a) Lots shall be designated by number on the short plat within the area of the lot. Tracts shall be similarly designated by letter and each tract shall be clearly identified with the ownership and purpose;

(b) Signature and stamp of the land surveyor who prepared the final short plat;

(c) All required dedications;

(d) Reference to the recording number of the completed survey as required by this section if the boundaries have been previously surveyed;

(e) Reference to all agreements or covenants required as a condition of approval;

(f) Notarized signatures of all persons having an ownership or security interest in the land being subdivided;

(g) Approval of the city of Burien development engineer;

(h) Approval of the county assessor; and

(i) Approval of the director of the department of community development.

(3) The city shall examine and sign the final short plat if it and the short subdivision it represents conform to all conditions of preliminary and final approval. Short plats shall be recorded with the city of Burien and the King County division of records and elections. A copy of the documents stamped with the recording number shall be provided to the office of the city clerk and to the applicant by the department of community development. Final short plats shall become effective upon recording. [Ord. 29 § 1(54), 1993]


17.35.140 Short plat alterations and vacations.

(1) Within five years of the recording date, any recorded short plat may be altered provided no more than a total of four lots result within the boundaries of the original short plat. After five years from the recording date, the short plat may be altered or the land may be subdivided further in accordance with this chapter. An alteration may include adjacent separate lots provided no more than four lots result within the boundaries of the original short plat together with such additional property. The following requirements apply to all short plat alterations:

(a) All persons having any ownership or security interest in the lots or tracts of the original recorded short plat being altered must sign the final altered short plat forms.

(b) Any features contained on the original short plat which have been relied upon in subsequent land development or city planning decisions shall be incorporated on the short plat alteration.

(c) Lot lines of lots which are non-conforming only by reason of insufficient square footage may be altered without regard to current square footage requirements as long as they are not made more non-conforming and as long as no additional lots are created, and the proposed lots are consistent with the other dimensional requirements of the zoning in effect at the time of the original short plat approval. Any newly created additional lots must meet original short plat approval. Any newly created additional lots must meet current zoning requirements and the County board of health rules and regulations regarding minimum lot size.

(d) The criteria cited in BMC 17.35.120 shall be used as the basis to approve or deny any proposed alteration. Seattle-King County department of public health approval shall be required.

(2) Any short plat alteration which deleted all interior boundaries shall constitute a vacation of the original short plat, effective at the time the altered short plat is recorded.

(3) Short plat alterations or vacations involving public dedications shall be processed in the manner provided by law for alteration or vacation of subdivisions. All other short plat alternations or vacations shall be processed as set forth in BMC 17.35.030 and 17.35.140.

(4) Approved alterations and vacations shall be recorded with the city of Burien city clerk and the King County division of records and elections. [Ord. 29 § 1(55), 1993]


17.35.150 Administration.

The department of community development is authorized to develop and adopt administrative rules and policies for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Rules adopted under this section are subject to council approval. [Ord. 29 § 1(56), 1993]


Chapter 17.40 PRELIMINARY PLATS

Sections:

17.40.010    Unrecorded plats, dedications – Utility provisions.

17.40.020    Application – Contents.

17.40.030    Hearings.

17.40.040    Qualifications governing approval.

17.40.050    Plats with preliminary approval.

17.40.060    Additional requirements.


17.40.010 Unrecorded plats, dedications – Utility provisions.

(1) Unrecorded Plats. An existing unrecorded plat shall be treated as a preliminary plat with due regard for the legal rights of any persons who may have purchased lots therein.

(2) Dedications, Explanations. Plattors are notified that dedications are absolute, and no reservations or exceptions for any purpose whatsoever will be permitted, whether in dedication or upon the face of the plat.

(3) Water Supply. The plattor of every proposed plat must show that the area to be platted is provided with a public domestic supply and distribution system within or without the plat installed according to plans approved by the city of Burien and the county department of health. If there is no established water supply system in the district to which the pieces or parcels of land in the plat may be connected, the plattor must set aside a favorable park or other area of suitable size upon which shall be located a community deep well or wells which shall be set aside for community use, or the plattor must show that there is a potential water supply accessible to and provided for each lot or tract in the plat or subdivision. Such water supply and distribution system, community well or wells or water supply shall be constructed on such areas of such depth and design as to amply protect the water supply and all plans to be approved by the city of Burien and King County department of health.

(4) Sources of Water Supply (or note stating source).

(5) Method of Sewage Disposal (with letter of approval from the King County health department). [Ord. 29 § 1(58), 1993]


17.40.020 Application – Contents.

(1) Identification and Description.

(a) Proposed name of the subdivision;

(b) Location by section, township and range, or by other legal description;

(c) Name and address of developer;

(d) Name, address and seal of registered engineer or of registered land surveyor;

(e) Scale of plat, date and northpoint;

(f) Contours of topography;

(g) Certificate of water availability from public purveyor or health department approval of adequate on-site supply;

(h) Letter of approval of on-site sewage disposal method from Seattle-King County health department, if on-site sewage treatment is proposed, or a certificate of sewer availability from the public purveyor if the site is in the local service area of the sewerage general plan and public sewers are proposed to be used;

(i) Land use zoning classification;

(j) Tree planting (if any).

(2) Delineation of Existing Conditions.

(a) Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line;

(b) Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, and section and municipal corporation lines, within or adjacent to the tract;

(c) In case of a replat, the lots, blocks, streets, alleys, easements, parks and building lines (if any) of the original plat being vacated shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the new arrangement of the plat; the new plat being clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid ambiguity;

(d) Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract, indicating pipe size, grades and exact location, as obtained from public records;

(e) Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided and subdivided land, showing owners, indicated by dotted lines for a distance of 100 feet;

(f) Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts in zoned area;

(g) Contours at five-foot intervals, or established in reference to coast geodetic upland datum (aerial survey datum) if available.

(3) Delineation of Proposed Conditions.

(a) Layout of streets, their names and widths and also the widths of alleys, crosswalkways and easements. The names of the several streets, avenues and highways shall conform as far as practicable to the names of corresponding streets, avenues and highways in the abutting or adjacent city, town or subdivision and to the general system of naming in use by said city, town or subdivision or city;

(b) Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots;

(c) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision;

(d) Building setback lines, showing dimensions. [Ord. 29 § 1(59), 1993]


17.40.030 Hearings.

Hearings on preliminary plats shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established by the city of Burien. [Ord. 29 § 1(60), 1993]


17.40.040 Qualifications governing approval.

(1) Preliminary Approval. Council approval of the preliminary plat shall furnish a firm basis upon which the applicant may proceed with development of the subdivision and preparation of the final plat subject only to all the conditions of preliminary approval imposed on the preliminary plat.

(2) Revisions. The director of the department of community development may approve minor changes or revisions as are deemed necessary to the interests and needs of the community, consistent with the adopted policies and standards of the city.

(3) Engineering Details. Subsequent approval of the engineering details of the proposed streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewer and water systems and other proposed public facilities by the city engineer and the King County department of public health will be required prior to the approval of the final plat.

(4) Approval Time. Preliminary approval shall be effective for a period 36 months. If an applicant files a written request with the Burien city council at least 30 days before expiration of the 36 months, an extension for up to 12 months may be granted by motion by the city council if the council determines that the applicant has acted in good faith and made substantial progress in complying with the conditions of preliminary plat and that it would be inequitable to require the applicant to reapply for a new preliminary plat approval. If, prior to the expiration of 48 months after preliminary approval, all required plat improvements have been diligently pursued and have been substantially constructed, and the plat developer has applied for a further extension, the city may grant an extension for an additional period of up to six months from the application date for recording of the final plat. If the final plat is being developed in divisions and final plats for all of the divisions have not been recorded within the time limits provided in this section, preliminary plat approval for all unrecorded divisions shall become void.

The preliminary plat for any unrecorded divisions must again be submitted to the department of community development with a new application.

(5) In granting administrative extensions authorized pursuant to subsection (4), the city may impose administratively additional conditions for final approval, consistent with then current city adopted standards and policies.

(6) Conditions imposed administratively on divisions for which extensions have been approved may be appealed to the city council, or if assigned by the city council, the zoning and subdivision examiner. [Ord. 29 § 1(61), 1993]


17.40.050 Plats with preliminary approval.

BMC 17.40.040(4) shall be retroactive for plats given preliminary approval after January 1, 1982. As to plats for which preliminary approval expired prior to the effective date of this code, such preliminary approval shall again be valid if within one month of the effective date of this code application for the administrative extension of up to six months provided for in BMC 17.40.040 is submitted and is subsequently granted. [Ord. 29 § 1(62), 1993]


17.40.060 Additional requirements.

The city may require the submittal of additional information, including but not limited to soil and geological studies, wetland assessments or traffic studies, prior to processing a preliminary subdivision application if the city determines that such information is necessary for the accurate review of such applications. The city may also set reasonable deadlines for the supplemental submittal of such information if it is found to be necessary subsequent to the initial application submittal. Failure to meet such deadlines shall cause the application to be deemed withdrawn, and plans or other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant together with any unexpended portion of the preliminary application review fee. In no case shall an application be processed until it is complete in terms of the type or amount of information necessary for accurate review. [Ord. 29 § 1(63), 1993]


Chapter 17.45 FINAL PLATS

Sections:

17.45.010    Approval, drawing and recording.

17.45.020    Information required – Compliance with county health requirements.

17.45.030    Meander lines – Monuments – Property descriptions – Signatures.

17.45.040    Protective deed covenant – Forms.


17.45.010 Approval, drawing and recording.

(1) Approval and Drawing. After approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and any other requirements specified by the city, two tracings of the final plat of the subdivision, on tracing cloth, 12 paper prints, 18 inches by 22 inches in size, and two 11-inch by 17-inch paper copies, allowing one-half inch for a border, shall be submitted to the director for approval.

A final plat shall be drawn with india ink on the best grade of tracing cloth. If more than one sheet is required, each sheet, including the index sheet, shall be of the above specified size. The index sheet must show the entire subdivision with street and highway names and block numbers.

(2) Recording. Upon approval by the city council, the final plat shall be recorded with the city clerk and the county records and elections division auditor. [Ord. 29 § 1(64), 1993]


17.45.020 Information required – Compliance with county health requirements.

(1) Identification and Description.

(a) Name of subdivision;

(b) Location by section, township and range, or by other legal description;

(c) The name and seal of the registered engineer or the registered land surveyor;

(d) Scale (same as preliminary plat) shown graphically, date and northpoint. The scale of the final plat shall be such that all distances and bearings can be clearly and legibly shown thereon in their proper proportions. Plats unduly cramped and whose essential data cannot be clearly read will not be approved.

(2) Delineation.

(a) Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions;

(b) Exact location, width, and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat, the exact location and widths of all alleys and crosswalks. The name of a street shall not duplicate that of any existing street in the city of Burien or King County. Proposed street names shall be checked with the proper city and county officials;

(c) True courses and distances to the nearest established street lines of official monuments which shall accurately describe the location of the plat;

(d) Municipal, township, city or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and courses;

(e) Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and lengths of all areas;

(f) All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities;

(g) All lot and block numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths. Blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name may be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions;

(h) Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be concrete and four inches by four inches at top, six inches by six inches at bottom and 24 inches long, with a metal marker cast in the center. One such monument shall be placed at each street intersection, and at locations to complete a continuous line of sight and at such other locations as required by the city engineer;

(i) All plat meander lines or reference lines along bodies of water shall be established above the high water line of such water;

(j) Accurate outlines and legal description of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon and in the dedication; and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners;

(k) Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions.

(3) Sanitary Conditions. All rules, regulations or orders of the city of Burien and the Seattle-King County health department applicable to the property shall be effective. [Ord. 29 § 1(65), 1993]


17.45.030 Meander lines – Monuments – Property descriptions – Signatures.

(1) Plat Meander Lines. When a subdivision borders on a body of water a plat meander line shall be established along the shore not more than 20 feet back from the ordinary high water mark of such body of water.

(2) Monuments. It is intended that all monuments shall be set after the grading of the streets. In case the plat be approved before the grading is complete, the grading shall be done and the monuments shall be set before the release of the road guarantee bond.

(3) Property Description. A description of property platted shall be the same as that recorded in preceding transfer of said property or that portion of said transfer covered by plat. Should this description be cumbersome and not technically correct, a true and exact description shall be shown upon plat together with original description. The correct description shall follow: “The intent of the above description is to embrace all the following described property.”

(4) Signatures. All signatures shall be in india ink or other ink of equal density. No interlineations will be permitted. [Ord. 29 § 1(66), 1993]


17.45.040 Protective deed covenant – Forms.

(1) A typewritten copy of the protective deed covenants shall accompany the final plat.

(2) Forms. (See sample plat filed in records and election division).

(a) Dedication with notarized acknowledgment, by owner or owners, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public acres. In case of corporation, proper acknowledgment shall be used;

(b) Restrictions;

(c) Certification by registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that the monuments shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct;

(d) Proper forms for the approvals of city engineer, of the department of community development, and of the city council with space for signatures;

(e) Approval by signature of the city clerk and county records and elections division, as to filing for record.

Each and all of the above forms including the description shall be printed with india ink in distinct, legible lettering and shall be substantially in the form of the sample plat filed in the records and election division. [Ord. 29 § 1(67), 1993]


Chapter 17.50 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM BINDING SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS

Sections:

17.50.010    Applicability.

17.50.020    Planned unit developments.

17.50.030    Building permits.

17.50.040    Conceptual plans.

17.50.050    Recording.

17.50.060    Amendments and rescindment.


17.50.010 Applicability.

(1) This process may be used to divide land by the owner of any legal lot which is to be developed for residential condominiums pursuant to Chapter 64.32 RCW. A binding site plan for a residential condominium project shall be based on either a recorded final planned unit development, a building permit issued for the entire project, or a conceptual site plan as set forth in BMC 17.50.040.

(2) This process is separate from other site plan review processes including the P-Suffix provisions of zoning code, the mobile home park plan provisions, the planned unit development provisions, and the manufacturing park site plan provisions, and shall not be construed to substitute for the requirements of such processes. [Ord. 29 § 1(68), 1993]


17.50.020 Planned unit developments.

Whenever a binding site plan for a residential condominium development is proposed on a parcel for which a final planned unit development has been recorded, a copy of the planned unit development site plan shall be recorded as the binding site plan upon verification by the director of the department of community development that the binding site plan is the same as or contains the relevant details of the planned unit development site plan. [Ord. 29 § 1(69), 1993]


17.50.030 Building permits.

Whenever a binding site plan for a residential condominium development is proposed on a parcel of land for which a building permit has been issued for the entire project, the following must be satisfied prior to recording:

(1) A plan shall be prepared in a form prescribed by the city which is adequate for permanent retention by the city clerk and the King County records and elections division.

(2) The plan must be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer.

(3) The plan must substantially reflect the site plan approved for the building permit. Specific details not relevant to the division of land may be omitted.

(4) The plan must be verified by the director of the department of community development for compliance with the approved building permit. The city may require dedication of additional right-of-way for public streets.

(5) The legal description and map must be verified by the city engineer. [Ord. 29 § 1(70), 1993]


17.50.040 Conceptual plans.

Whenever a binding site plan for a residential condominium project is proposed on a parcel of land for which neither a planned unit development nor a building permit has been approved for the entire parcel, the following must be satisfied prior to recording:

(1) A conceptual site plan shall be prepared in a form prescribed by the city which includes the following information:

(a) Maximum number of dwelling units permitted;

(b) Approximate size and location of all proposed buildings;

(c) Approximate layout of an internal vehicular circulation system, including proposed ingress and egress;

(d) Approximate location of proposed open space, including required landscaped areas, if any;

(e) Approximate location of proposed parking areas;

(f) Location and size of utility trunk lines serving the site;

(g) Topography detailed to five-foot contours.

(2) Upon application the city shall distribute copies to public agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction for review and comment.

(3) The planning commission (city council until a planning commission can be appointed) shall consider, and base their decision to approve with or without conditions, deny or return the application on the following:

(a) Conformance of the proposed site plan with any approved building permit or planned unit development and any conditions on a portion of the site, and with any applicable codes and ordinances, of the state of Washington and the city of Burien. The planning commission shall identify, to the extent feasible, conditions likely to be imposed on building permits related to dedication of right-of-way or open space, and tracts, easements or limitations which may be proposed or required for utilities, access, drainage controls, sanitation, water supply, protection of sensitive areas or other unique conditions or features which may warrant protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Such preliminary conditions shall not be binding at the time of building permit approval;

(b) The recommendations and comments of agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction;

(c) The planning commission may require dedication of additional road right-of-way.

(4) Additional documents shall be submitted as necessary for review and approval which may include a plat certificate, boundary survey, agreements, easements an covenants.

(5) The plan must be approved and signed by the city engineer.

(6) Prior to recording, the director of the department of community development shall verify the final plan and any attachments to determine whether the binding site plan is accurate and complete and complies with any conditions or approval.

Approval of a conceptual plan does not give the applicant a vested right to build without regard to subsequent changes in zoning or building codes or other applicable land use regulations prior to application for a building permit on the subject property. [Ord. 29 § 1(71), 1993]


17.50.050 Recording.

The proposed binding site plan approved by the planning commission shall be recorded with the city clerk and county records and elections division within 30 days of approval. Upon recording, the site plan shall be binding on the owner, his heirs and assigns, and shall permit the division of land within the site. Divisions shall only be permitted upon the filing of a declaration under the Horizontal Regimes Act, Chapter 64.32 RCW, provided the structure or structures, road and parking systems and related facilities substantially conform to the recorded binding site plan. [Ord. 29 § 1(73), 1993]


17.50.060 Amendments and rescindment.

(1) Amendment of a recorded residential condominium binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same process as required for a new application as set forth in this chapter.

(2) Upon the request of the owner or owners of a legal lot or lots subject to a recorded binding site plan the planning commission shall rescind all or a portion of a binding site plan, provided that any portion of a binding site plan which is rescinded shall be considered to be one lot unless divided by an approved subdivision or short division.

(3) Signatures of owners of portions of a binding site plan which are not altered by an amendment or rescission are not required on the amended binding site plan or application for rescission. [Ord. 29 § 1(74), 1993]


Chapter 17.55 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE

Sections:

17.55.010    Discussion with department.

17.55.020    Plat – Preparation by surveyor.

17.55.030    Plat – Discussion and submission.

17.55.040    Plat – Review, approval, changes.

17.55.050    Complete application.

17.55.060    Notice of public hearing.

17.55.070    Final plat to conform to preliminary plat – Improvements – Bond.

17.55.080    Status of current bonds.

17.55.090    Submission to final plat – Fees – Certificates of title, tax payment.

17.55.100    Filing plat for record.

17.55.110    Changes to proposed or approved plats.

17.55.120    Material errors.

17.55.130    Errors, omissions, corrections to final plats – Council proceedings.


17.55.010 Discussion with department.

The proposed layout shall first be discussed with the department of community development before subdivision can begin. [Ord. 29 § 1(75), 1993]


17.55.020 Plat – Preparation by surveyor.

The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer. [Ord. 29 § 1(76), 1993]


17.55.030 Plat – Discussion and submission.

The surveyors should discuss the preliminary plat with the department of community development staff to eliminate features which do not conform to the regulations, and submit the preliminary plat for approval by the planning commission. [Ord. 29 § 1(77), 1993]


17.55.040 Plat – Review, approval, changes.

(1) Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, the department of community development shall submit copies to the department of public works and the King County health department for review and comment concerning the acceptability of the plat and conformance with the regulations.

(2) The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct a public hearing, prepare a record thereof and enter findings of fact and conclusions, based upon those facts together with a recommendation to the city council for preliminary plat applications.

(3) The examiner’s recommendation may be to grant or deny the application, or the examiner may recommend or require of the applicant such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the examiner finds necessary to make the application consistent with the objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, zoning code, subdivision code and other codes and ordinances of the city of Burien.

(4) The examiner’s findings, conclusions and recommendations shall be submitted to the city council, which shall have the final authority. The hearing by the examiner shall constitute the public hearing by the city council unless the council chooses to hold one or more additional public hearings.

(5) Any matter requiring action by the city council shall be taken by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance by the council. When taking any such final action, the council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and conclusions which support its action. The city council may adopt all or portions of the examiner’s findings and conclusions. The city council is expressly authorized to condition its approval of any matter, including but not limited to conditions requiring the dedications of land, public improvements, and payment of impact fees authorized by Chapter 82.020 RCW or any other law or agreement.

(6) The department director will indicate the city council’s approval on the print of the preliminary plat which will be returned to the surveyor. Any changes required by the city will be marked on this print. [Ord. 61, 1993; Ord. 29 § 1(78), 1993]


17.55.050 Complete application.

Applications for preliminary subdivision approval shall be considered fully complete as of date of application pursuant to RCW 58.17.033 once the city determines that the application contains the following materials and information:

(1) A completed subdivision application form with supporting documents as required by BMC 17.40.020, and which contains sufficient information to determine compliance with adopted rules and regulations including, but not limited to RCW 58.17.110, Chapter 43.21C RCW, SEPA; the city of Burien zoning code; Chapter 14.42 KCC, Road Standards; Chapter 9.04 KCC, Surface Water Runoff; KCC Title 25, Shoreline Management; the city of Burien subdivision regulations; the Fire Code; King County board of health rules and regulations; county or city approved utility comprehensive plans; and conformance with applicable private restrictions and covenants which are in effect at the time of application;

(2) Verification of pre-application approval of proposed water supply and sewage disposal by the Seattle-King County department of public health;

(3) Fire district receipt;

(4) Copies of all easements, deed restrictions or other encumbrances restricting the use of the subject property;

(5) Documentation of the date and method of segregation for the subject property certifying that the lot or lots were not created in violation of the short subdivision or subdivision laws in effect at the time of creation;

(6) A completed environmental checklist;

(7) Payment of any application fees; and

(8) Completed applications for other required permits if the permits are to be processed with the subdivision, or copies of issued permits if they have been previously approved. [Ord. 29 § 1(79), 1993]


17.55.060 Notice of public hearing.

The department of community development shall cause notice to be given of the time and place of the public hearing on a proposed preliminary plat as follows:

(1) By first class mail sent 30 days prior to the date of hearing, to owners, including applicant, of property located within 500 feet of any boundary of the subject property. The area within which mailed notice is required shall be expanded to include at least 20 different property owners in rural or lightly inhabited areas of in other appropriate cases to the extent the city determines is necessary. Notice shall contain:

(a) The name and total area of the proposed plat, the number of proposed lots and typical lot sizes, the proposed use and the name of the plat applicant;

(b) A legal description of the subject location description in non-legal language;

(c) The time and place of hearing at which interested parties may be heard;

(d) A form to request a copy of the city report; and

(e) Identification of the responsible city official. Mailed notice as provided in this subsection is supplementary to official hearing notification by publication and posting and the failures of one or more owners to receive mailed notice shall not affect the scheduling or validity of the hearing if notice was given pursuant to subsections (3) and (4) of this section.

(2) By first class mail sent 30 days prior to the date of the hearing to:

(a) Any city located within one-half mile, or the county if unincorporated land is within one-half mile, of any boundary of the subject property;

(b) Any city which has a utility which is proposed to serve the plat; and

(c) The State Department of Transportation where the plat or part thereof adjoins a state right-of-way. The content of the notice shall be as provided in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) By publication at least 20 days prior to the date of hearing in the official city newspaper and another newspaper of general circulation in the affected community.

(4) By posting a notice board on or adjacent to the subject property at a place conspicuous and likely to be seen by persons passing the property. The city may require additional notice boards when a site does not abut a public road, when a large site abuts more than one public road or in any other instance when the city deems additional boards to be necessary. Posting shall occur for at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice shall include but not be limited to:

(a) The name and total area of the proposed plat, the number of proposed lots and typical lot sizes, the proposed use, the name of the plat applicant and the file number;

(b) A legal description of the subject location in non-legal language;

(c) The time and place of the hearing at which interested parties may testify;

(d) A form to request a copy of the city report;

(e) Identification of the responsible city official; and

(f) A description of the appeal procedure.

The form and content of the notice shall be approved by the city. Posting, including the expenses thereof, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and an affidavit of posting shall be submitted prior to the hearing by the applicant to the city in a form approved by the city.

(5) By any other method, if the city determines it appropriate for the purpose of proposed preliminary plat, including but not limited to providing notification of the proposed action and hearing to local or community newspapers. [Ord. 29 § 1(80), 1993]


17.55.070 Final plat to conform to preliminary plat – Improvements – Bond.

(1) After the return of the approved print of the preliminary plat to the surveyor, the developer is in position to go ahead with the improvement with the assurance that the final plat will be approved, provided that:

(a) The final plat strictly conforms with the approved preliminary plat;

(b) The improvements have been installed in accordance with the current city of Burien specifications for private work on city rights-of-way with the approval of the development engineer or that the plattor has deposited a performance bond with the manager in an amount equal to the city’s estimate for such improvements, based on current city bonding schedules, as a guarantee that the plattor will, within one year from date of acceptance of the final plat, complete the improvements in accordance with the requirements and to the satisfaction of the development engineer or in the alternative to the above required bond, the city may accept other secure methods providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a one-year period on the terms identical to the herein described bond.

(2) A bond or other satisfactory security to secure the successful operation of improvements for a period of 12 months in an amount and form satisfactory to the city. Such bond or security shall cover workmanship and materials, damage from reasonable expected usage and damage due to construction activities.

(a) The bond shall be deposited by the plattor with the department of community development either:

(i) Prior to the recording of the final plat when the plattor constructed improvements in accordance with the city of Burien specifications and with the approval of the development engineer; or

(ii) Prior to release of the performance bond or the acceptance by the city of Burien of streets and street drainage facilities for maintenance following final construction inspection.

(b) The bond shall be in effect for a period of not less than 12 months commencing upon the date of:

(i) Final plat recording; or

(ii) Release of performance bond; or

(iii) Acceptance by the city of Burien of streets and street drainage facilities for maintenance following final construction inspection, whichever occurs last. [Ord. 29 § 1(81), 1993]


17.55.080 Status of current bonds.

(1) The city council recognizes the longstanding policy and administrative practice by the city of Burien of requiring bonds for subdivision improvements to ensure their successful operation.

(2) All bonds or other satisfactory security required by the city and posted by the plattor prior to the effective date of this section shall continue to be in force until released by the city following satisfactory inspection. [Ord. 29 § 1(82), 1993]


17.55.090 Submission to final plat – Fees – Certificates of title, tax payment.

On completion of the improvements required by the city engineer, or upon the receipt of the bond guaranteeing the completion of the improvement, the final plat shall be submitted to the department of community development accompanied by the following:

(1) The plattor shall deposit a check payable to the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city clerk according to the legal requirement, which is $0.25 for every enclosure; $7.00 for description; one dedication, one acknowledgment, etc.; $1.00 for each additional dedication or acknowledgment made upon such plat; $5.00 for each additional sheet if plat is to be recorded on more than one sheet; $0.25 for every enclosure on both original plat and replat, in case of replat; $0.10 for each lot or cemetery plat. If the property is registered under the Torrens Act, an additional charge of $1.50 shall be charged for each numeral entered on this register. Title shall be obtained from the registrar of the Torrens Act;

(2) The plattor shall be prepared to make a deposit equal to the estimated cost (to be determined by the city engineer) of checking the plat. The deposit shall be made with the city clerk to be credited to the road district fund. All work done by the city engineer in connection with checking, computing and correcting such plat, either in the field or in the office, shall be charged to such deposit.

If, during the process of checking, the city engineer finds that the cost of checking will exceed the estimated cost, the city engineer shall notify the plattor to deposit an additional amount to cover the cost of the checking. After the city engineer has completed the checking of the plat, he shall forward to the city clerk a statement of the checking charges incurred. The city clerk, upon receipt of the statement, shall refund to the plattors the difference between the checking charges and amount deposited or shall require the plattor to pay the difference if the checking charges are greater than the amount deposited;

(3) A certificate of title from a reputable abstractor, showing the ownership and title of all the interested parties in the plat, subdivision or dedication. The certificate shall be dated not to exceed 30 days prior to the time of submitting the plat for final approval;

(4) A certificate by the city clerk and county comptroller showing that taxes have been paid in accordance with RCW 58.08.030 and 58.08.040, and that deposit has been made to the city clerk and/or county comptroller for the taxes for the following year. Also, a certificate by the city clerk and county comptroller showing that all taxes and assessments levied and chargeable against the property in the plat, replat or subdivision have been paid in accordance with RCW 58.08.030. [Ord. 29 § 1(83), 1993]


17.55.100 Filing plat for record.

(1) Approval. After the city engineer has completed the checking of the plat, he shall affix his signature into the space provided and send the plat to the director of the department of community development with a letter stating that all requirements of this resolution have been fully complied with, with the exception of the certification by the city clerk and county office of finance.

The department of community development shall, following planning commission approval of the plat, forward the tracing to the city of Burien clerk for certification which is required by law. The the city of Burien clerk immediately following certification shall forward the tracing to the council for its approval.

(2) Filing. All plats shall be filed for record at the request of the city council. After the plat has been recorded, the one original tracing shall be returned to the city engineer and filed for record as the property of city of Burien and one tracing shall be sent to King County, Washington. [Ord. 29 § 1(84), 1993]


17.55.110 Changes to proposed or approved plats.

(1) Applicant-generated modifications or requests for revision(s) which are not made in response to technical staff review throughout the public process or from the planning commission conditions which result in any substantial changes as determined by the department of community development including the creation of additional lots or elimination of open space requirements shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting.

(2) Applicant-generated proposals to create additional lots, elimination of open space or changed conditions of approval on an approved preliminary plat shall also be treated as new application for purposes of vesting.

(3) Proposals to amend an approved final plat shall be treated as an alteration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter regarding alterations. [Ord. 29 § 1(85), 1993]


17.55.120 Material errors.

Applications found to contain and be based on material errors shall be deemed withdrawn and subsequent resubmittals shall be treated as new applications. [Ord. 29 § 1(85), 1993]


17.55.130 Errors, omissions, corrections to final plats – Council proceedings.

Final plats approved, signed and submitted to the city clerk for adoption by the city council shall be placed on the council agenda and acted upon no later than 10 days after receipt by the clerk. Upon signature of the mayor and city clerk accompanied by a recommendation for approval, said final plat shall be approved. Errors found during the review process that are considered willful and deliberate misrepresentations shall result in the plat being withdrawn and subsequent resubmittals shall be treated as new final plat applications. [Ord. 29 § 1(86), 1993]


Chapter 17.60 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE – FEE IN LIEU

Sections:

17.60.010    Applicability.

17.60.020    Findings and purpose.

17.60.030    Reservation, dedication or fee required.

17.60.040    Criteria for reservation or dedication of land.

17.60.050    Storm water runoff detention ponds.

17.60.060    Responsibilities of a developer.

17.60.070    Amount to be dedicated or reserved.

17.60.080    Park development fee in lieu of open space.

17.60.090    Computation of fee.

17.60.100    Equivalent facilities.

17.60.110    Administration.


17.60.010 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to subdivisions which will receive preliminary approval after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that for subdivisions which have received preliminary approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and for which an open space assessment was established, the developer may choose to pay a fee in lieu of dedication or reservation of land in accordance with BMC 17.60.070 and 17.60.080. [Ord. 29 § 1(99), 1993]


17.60.020 Findings and purpose.

(1) The city council finds that:

(a) There exists in the city of Burien a general and increasing need for parks, open spaces and recreational facilities to serve the expanding population of the city.

(b) The need for parks, open space and recreational facilities is acute at the neighborhood level due to population.

(c) RCW 58.17.110 requires that local governments make appropriate provision for the establishment of parks, open spaces and playgrounds at the time it considers approval of proposed subdivisions.

(d) A system of requiring dedication or reservation of suitable land for neighborhood parks, open space and recreational facilities or payment of a fee in lieu of such dedication or reservation, will more equitably and directly address the need.

(e) The establishment of park service areas, roughly equivalent to elementary school boundaries, is necessary for the purpose of defining areas within which land and fees will be accepted and utilized in meeting neighborhood park, open space and recreational needs.

(2) Consistent with the findings above, the purposes of this chapter are:

(a) To insure the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Burien when considering the approval of new subdivisions;

(b) To establish a means of creating and enhancing neighborhood parks, open spaces and recreational facilities correspondent with the needs created by residential development;

(c) To distribute equitably the cost of providing such parks, open spaces and recreational development;

(d) To mitigate any adverse impacts on neighborhoods without adequate parks, open spaces and recreational facilities when approving new residential development. [Ord. 29 § 1(88), 1993]


17.60.030 Reservation, dedication or fee required.

Every subdivision final approval within any zone designated as residential by the city of Burien zoning code, shall be contingent upon reservation or dedication of land for the open space and recreational needs of its residents or payment of a fee in lieu thereof. The developer may either reserve or dedicate land, or make payment of a fee in lieu thereof pursuant to this chapter. This requirement is separate and apart from any open space requirement resulting from the lot averaging provisions of the city of Burien zoning code. This chapter shall not apply to lots of 35,000 square feet and over in size, shall not apply to planned unit developments, and shall not apply to subdivisions of less than 10 acres. [Ord. 29 § 1(89), 1993]


17.60.040 Criteria for reservation or dedication of land.

The following criteria shall serve as a basis for determining whether a piece of land proposed for dedication or reservation is of sufficient size, character and quality to meet the intent of this chapter;

(1) The proposed area for dedication or reservation shall be located either within or outside of the subdivision for which it is required, but must be within the same park service area in which the subdivision is located, or within a reasonable number of feet of the subject subdivision.

(2) All lots within the related subdivision must have legal and convenient access to the proposed area for dedication or reservation, at the time of final plat approval.

(3) The area proposed by the developer for dedication or reservation must consist of an amount equal or greater than the percentages set in BMC 17.60.070.

(4) The area of proposed dedication or reservation must have a street frontage equal to at least 20 percent of its perimeter to allow for regular observation of play areas by residents of the subdivision. Alternative design measures that accomplish the same purpose of security may be approved by the department of planning and community development.

(5) When new areas are proposed for dedication or reservation it may be required that they be located adjacent to or contiguous with any other established or approved open spaces or recreational areas in adjacent subdivisions in order to increase the overall benefits to the neighborhood.

(6) The topography, soils, hydrography and other physical characteristics of the area proposed for dedication or reservation shall be of such quality as to create a flat, dry, obstacle-free space on at least 50 percent of the total required area in a configuration which allows for active recreation. The remainder of the required area may include sensitive environmental features, preservation of which is consistent with the comprehensive plan.

(7) In case of the site being reserved, responsibility for maintenance and operation of the recreational facilities shall be assumed by separate entity, such as a homeowners’ association or other competent private organization, which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city of Burien that it has the capability for long-term maintenance and operation of such facilities.

(8) In the case of the site being dedicated to the city of Burien, the following additional criteria shall be met:

(a) The site shall be adjacent to an existing or proposed city park site and shall be consistent with the park program for the site; or

(b) The characteristics and location of the site make it suitable for future inclusion into the city of Burien park system as a local park; or

(c) The site is being preserved for valuable or sensitive environmental features which require management expertise beyond the capacity of a homeowners’ association or other private organization; or

(d) The department of planning and community development concludes that dedication of the site for the selected purpose furthers one or more comprehensive plan policies. [Ord. 29 § 1(90), 1993]


17.60.050 Storm water runoff detention ponds.

Storm water runoff detention ponds may be allowed by the city, as part of dedicated or reserved open spaces, subject to the following criteria;

(1) Fifty percent of the required area of dedication or reservation shall be usable for active recreation pursuant to BMC 17.60.040 (6), excluding the detention facility and the access to it; and

(2) The detention pond shall be constructed so as to drain fully when precipitation is not occurring (i.e., no standing water may be left) and shall meet the following conditions:

(a) Oil separators shall be installed in the road drainage system to prevent oil-contaminated runoff from reaching the detention pond;

(b) The side slope of the detention pond shall not exceed 33 percent unless slopes are existing, natural and covered with vegetation;

(c) A bypass system shall be installed so as to prevent water from passing through the open basin except during peak design flows, i.e., during the five-year or 10-year peak storm.

(d) If detention facilities are located adjacent to or near a natural, year-round stream or wetland, these systems shall be left in natural or near-natural condition.

(e) The detention area shall be covered with a type of vegetation which is both aesthetic and able to withstand the inundation expected;

(f) Use of a reserved or dedicated open space area for storm water detention shall not be acceptable if the detention area must be fenced or otherwise rendered unsuitable or unavailable for recreation use during dry weather;

(g) In the case of joint use of open space for detention and recreation, the city of Burien department of public works shall be responsible for maintenance of the detention facilities only and may require an access easement for that purpose. [Ord. 29 § 1(91), 1993]


17.60.060 Responsibilities of a developer.

If the developer reserves or dedicates land within a proposed subdivision, the developer shall, in addition to any other responsibilities imposed by this chapter, be responsible for removal of all construction debris and hazards such as dead trees. The developer may be required to rough grade a portion of the site suitable for a playing field, should such an area exist; place such signs as directed by the department of community development; and/or establish or improve such trails as directed by the city. [Ord. 29 § 1(92), 1993]


17.60.070 Amount to be dedicated or reserved.

Within any zone designated as RS, RD, RT, RM, or SR by the city of Burien zoning code, developers who dedicate or reserve open space shall set aside property being subdivided, according to the following percentages of gross land area:

    RD/RT/TM	5.5%

    RS/SR 5,000	5.5%

    RS/SR 7,200	5.25%

    RS/SR 9,600	5.00%

    RS/SR 15,000	5.00%

In the event the subdivision encompasses land having more than one zone classification, the percentage to be applied to the subdivision shall be the area weighted average of the percentages required for the applicable zone classifications. [Ord. 29 § 1(93), 1993]


17.60.080 Park development fee in lieu of open space.

Unless land within a proposed subdivision is dedicated or reserved in accordance with BMC 17.60.040 through 17.60.070, final approval of the subdivision shall be contingent upon payment of a park development fee from the developer to the city of Burien. The fee so collected shall be appropriated only for acquisition and development of open space, park sites and recreational facilities within the park service area wherein the proposed subdivision is located. Such acquisition and development shall be consistent with any applicable comprehensive plan. Expenditure of such fees shall only be through capital budget and program appropriations by the city council. Fees collected within a park service area must be allocated to a specific neighborhood park, open space or recreational project within three years of fee acceptance. [Ord. 29 § 1(94), 1993]


17.60.090 Computation of fee.

The fee in lieu of reservation or dedication for open space and parks in subdivisions shall be determined by multiplying the following two factors:

(1) One hundred fifty percent of the average assessed value per unit of land within the boundaries of the subdivision;

(2) The gross land area within the subdivision multiplied by percentages set forth in BMC 17.40.070.

The average assessed value shall be that for the year in which the subdivision is granted preliminary approval. Computations shall be based on city of Burien and King County assessor information. [Ord. 29 § 1(95), 1993]


17.60.100 Equivalent facilities.

Whenever a developer chooses to set aside land within a subdivision, which in whole or part does not meet all the criteria for reservation or dedication in BMC 17.60.040 the developer may propose to improve such land by grading, filling, landscaping or with installation of recreation equipment so as to be equivalent in result to the intent of this chapter. The determination as to whether a developer’s proposal to improve a piece of land is equivalent to the open space requirements or fee in lieu of such requirement, shall be made solely by the department of community development according to the following guidelines:

(1) The proposed land and improvement should be generally equivalent to or greater than the value of the land or fee otherwise required.

(2) The proposed land and improvements must create recreational opportunities for the residents within the subdivision and immediately around it.

(3) The proposed land and improvements must not result in significant disturbance of alteration of a sensitive area, unless another approval has already been given for such disturbance or alteration.

(4) The proposed land and improvements must be given to a homeowners’ association to insure continuing maintenance of them, unless, dedication is specifically requested by the city. [Ord. 29 § 1(96), 1993]


17.60.110 Administration.

The director of the department of planning and community development is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules and regulations, including the establishment of park service areas, for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 29 § 1(97), 1993]


Chapter 17.65 ALTERATION OR VACATION OF RECORDED SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.65.010    Purpose.

17.65.020    Application requirements.

17.65.030    Notice.

17.65.040    Public hearings.

17.65.050    Findings and recommendations.

17.65.060    Approved alterations and vacations.


17.65.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific procedures for the alteration or vacation of recorded subdivisions, or any portions thereof. [Ord. 29 § 1(100), 1993]


17.65.020 Application requirements.

(1) Any person may submit a subdivision alteration or vacation application consistent with the applicable provisions of BMC 17.55.050 and 17.55.110 to the city; provided:

(a) Alteration applications shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject subdivision to be altered or any portion to be altered. Vacation applications shall contain the signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in the portion of the subdivision subject to vacation.

(b) If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration or vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration or vacation of the subdivision or portion thereof.

(2) Applications for vacations of city streets may be processed pursuant to this chapter only when such road vacations are proposed in conjunction with the vacation of the plat together with the road. Vacations limited to city streets only shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 36.87 RCW. Regardless of the process used, vacations of roads may not be made that are prohibited under RCW 36.87.130. [Ord. 29 § 1(101), 1993]


17.65.030 Notice.

(1) Notice of a proposed subdivision alteration shall be given by the city of Burien within 10 days of determination of application completeness by:

(a) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the proposed alteration;

(b) Posting at least five signs or posters on or adjacent to the subdivision to be altered in conspicuous locations designed to provide public awareness of the proposal;

(c) Mailing notification to agencies identified in RCW 58.17.080; and

(d) Mailing notification to the owner(s) of each lot or parcel or property located within the total subdivision to be altered and to owners of property within 300 feet of the original subdivision.

(2) Alteration application notice shall include the name of the applicant and a general description of the proposed alteration. The notice shall also contain a vicinity map of the proposal, a general locational description rather than a legal description, the procedures and deadline of not less than 14 days from receipt of notice for filing comments or requests for public hearings, a form to request subsequent division reports, and the name of the responsible city official.

(3) Separate mailed notice of alteration hearings as required by subsection (1) of this section shall be made to all persons who have submitted written comments during the comment period. Hearing notices shall include a description of the time and place of the public hearing with the items specified in subsection (2) of this section.

(4) Vacation application notice shall be made as set forth for preliminary subdivision applications in BMC 17.55.060. [Ord. 29 § 1(102), 1993]


17.65.040 Public hearings.

(1) A public hearing shall be required for subdivision alteration proposals if requested by any person within the 14-day public comment period or if the city determines that a public hearing is in the public interest. In cases where public hearings are required, the city shall refer the application to the city council (or planning commission or zoning and subdivision examiner if appointed by the council) for consideration.

(2) All subdivision vacation applications shall be referred to the city council for public hearing and consideration. [Ord. 29 § 1(103), 1993]


17.65.050 Findings and recommendations.

(1) Following any public hearing required by BMC 17.65.030(1), the city council shall determine if the proposed alteration or vacation is consistent with the required findings of KCC 20.24.195.

(2) If a public hearing is not requested for an alteration application, the city shall make the same findings and recommendations as set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The council shall make findings and take actions as set forth for subdivisions in KCC 20.24.230 and 20.24.235 and shall deny or approve the alteration or vacation accordingly. [Ord. 29 § 1(104), 1993]


17.65.060 Approved alterations and vacations.

(1) After approval of an alteration, the council shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the final plat, to be processed in the same manner as set forth for final plats in Chapter 17.45 BMC. All persons with an ownership or security interest in property to be altered must sign the altered plat.

(2) Altered plats shall only alter or supersede the original plat in the specific ways approved by the council.

(3) Vacations shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of RCW 58.17.212. [Ord. 29 § 1(105), 1993]


Chapter 17.70 VIOLATIONS – PENALTIES

Sections:

17.70.010    Procedures.


17.70.010 Procedures.

(1) Violations. Pursuant to RCW 58.17.300, any person, firm, corporation, or association, or any agent of any person, firm, corporation or association who violates any provision of this title, relating to the sale, offer for sale, lease or transfer of any lot, tract or parcel of land is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalties, purchasers’ remedies and other legal sanctions authorized in this chapter.

(2) Enforcement. Penalties, purchasers, remedies, injunctions, and other legal sanctions necessary for the enforcement of this title shall be governed by RCW 58.17.200, 58.17.210, 58.17.220, 58.17.230, 58.17.300, and 58.17.320, which are adopted by reference. Injunctive remedies shall be available for enforcement of all chapters in this title.

(3) Review of Decision. Court review of any decision approving or disapproving any application authorized by any chapter of this title for unlawful, arbitrary, capricious or corrupt action of nonaction shall be governed by RCW 58.17.180, which is adopted by reference. [Ord. 29 § 1(107), 1993]


Title 18 INTERIM ZONING CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 545)


Title 19 ZONING CODE Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

Chapters:

19.01    User Guide 

19.05    General Provisions

19.10    Definitions Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.15    Use Zone Charts Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.17    Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.18    Affordable Housing Demonstration Program

19.20    Parking and Circulation 

19.25    Tree Retention and Landscaping 

19.30    Signs 

19.35    Transportation Impact Fees

19.40    Critical Areas

19.45    Urban Center Development

19.47    Downtown Design Standards

19.48    Airport Industrial Design Standards

19.49    Old Burien Design Standards

19.50    Personal Wireless Service Facilities

19.55    Non-Conformance

19.65    Procedures 

19.70    Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services

19.75    Temporary Use Permits

19.80    Enforcement

19.85    Historic Preservation 


Chapter 19.01 User Guide 

19.01.005    How to use this Code. 

19.01.010    Additional regulations in this Code. 

19.01.015    Additional regulations in other titles. 


19.01.005 How to use this Code. 

This Code has been designed and written to make it as easy as possible for the user to determine all land use regulations that apply to a particular piece of property and to uses, structures and activities on that piece of property. Follow the step-by-step procedure laid out below to find applicable regulations. To assist in understanding the Code, defined terms are italicized. Definitions are listed alphabetically in Chapter 19.10.

1. Find your property on the Zoning Map. This map is not included with this Code, but is available for review at the City of Burien Department of Community Development during regular business hours. The property will have one of the following zoning designations:

	RS-A	RM-18	CI	O	SPA-2

	RS-12,000	RM-24	CC-1	I	SPA-3

	RS-7,200	RM-48	CC-2	DC	AI-1

	RM-12	CN	CR	SPA-1	AI-2

	 	 	 	 	PR

2. Refer to the table of contents of this Code and find the section in Chapter 19.15 that corresponds with the zone in which the property is located.

3. Each of the sections in Chapter 19.15 contains a series of charts. The first chart in each section explains the purpose and intent of the zone, along with some regulations that apply to all uses in that zone. The remaining charts in the section contain the basic zoning regulations pertaining to the different uses that are allowed in that zone. Read down the first vertical column of each chart to find the use in which you are interested. Uses are generally listed in broadly defined terms, such as “retail” or “office.” If a use is not listed, it is not allowed in that zone, but may be allowed in other zones.

4. After finding the appropriate use, then read across the chart to find a variety of regulations that apply to that use. Also, read all of the sections that the chart refers to. For example, the basic parking stall requirement is listed in the chart for each use. However, the top of each chart refers to Chapter 19.20, which contains all of the details related to parking, such as the minimum size of parking stalls.

5. This Code is being adopted in phases. Until all phases are adopted, you will also need to review the Interim Zoning Code for applicable regulations. For the user’s benefit, this Code identifies the sections that are not yet complete, and where the Interim Zoning Code must be consulted. This is solely for the convenience of the reader and is not intended to replace a careful reading of this Code and the Interim Zoning Code to determine which regulations apply. If there is a conflict between the two Codes, the Director will determine which regulations apply.

6. You now have the basic zoning regulations that apply to the property. However, you should review the table of contents and BMC 19.01.010 to see if other regulations of this Code may be applicable. [Ord. 706 § 1, 2019; Ord. 533 §1, 2010, Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 §1, 2003, Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.01.010 Additional regulations in this Code. 

In addition to the regulations in the use zone charts (BMC 19.15), this Code contains a variety of provisions that may apply to your property or to a particular use or activity on the property. The following list of questions will help you determine what other chapters or sections of this Code contain regulations that may be of interest. This list is provided as an aid to assist the reader in finding applicable regulations. However, you should review the table of contents of this Code to find other Chapters or sections that may be of interest to you. City staff is also available to assist you.

1. Multi-family recreation space. Are you proposing to build an apartment, townhouse or condominium? If so, see BMC 19.17.010 for requirements for indoor and outdoor recreation space.

2. Transition standards. Is your property within 100 feet of a different zone? If so, see BMC 19.17.015 for additional height, setback and landscaping requirements that may apply.

3. Special review processes. Are you interested in applying for or participating in a use or activity that requires a Type 1, 2 or 3 decision by the City? If so, see BMC 19.65 for the rules of procedure for these types of decisions.

4. Amendments to Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code or zoning map. Are you interested in requesting a change to the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code or zoning map? If so, see BMC 19.65 for the rules of procedure for these types of decisions. [Ord. 706 § 1, 2019]


19.01.015 Additional regulations in other titles. 

In addition to the regulations in this Code, other titles of the BMC contain provisions that may apply to your property or to a particular use or activity on the property. The following list of questions will help you determine what other titles contain regulations that may be of interest. This list is provided as an aid to assist the reader in finding applicable regulations. However, you should review the table of contents of the BMC to find other titles that may be of interest to you. City staff is also available to assist you.

1. Shoreline development activities. Are you considering a development activity within 200 feet of the Puget Sound or Lake Burien shoreline? If so, see Title 20 BMC, Shoreline Master Program. A user’s guide to the Shoreline Master Program can be found in Chapter 20.10 BMC. [Ord. 706 § 1, 2019]


Chapter 19.05 General Provisions

19.05.010    Title

19.05.015    Phasing of zoning code.

19.05.020    Authority to adopt code.

19.05.030    Purpose.

19.05.040    Conformity with this Code required.

19.05.050    Public uses.

19.05.060    Permitted and prohibited uses.

19.05.065    Establishment of uses.

19.05.070    Minimum requirements.

19.05.080    Interpretation – General.

19.05.090    Interpretations of This Code – Specific.

19.05.100    Zoning map incorporated.

19.05.110    Interpretation – Zoning boundaries.

19.05.120    Zones and map designations established.

19.05.130    Unzoned property.

19.05.140    Annexed property.

19.05.150    Zone and map designation purpose.

19.05.160    Classification of right-of-way.

19.05.170    Severability.


19.05.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the City of Burien zoning code, hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”


19.05.015 Phasing of zoning code.

This Code is being prepared and adopted in phases. Phase 1 of this Code is the portion adopted by the City Council on June 7, 1999 (Ordinance 252) and as subsequently amended. Subsequent phases will include the remaining chapters and sections, as indicated in the table of contents. Until new chapters are adopted, both this Code and portions of the Interim Zoning Code will apply to property and development in Burien. This Code indicates when the Interim Zoning Code will apply, by either text stating its’ applicability, or by use of the symbol “#”. In the case of a conflict between this Code and the Interim Zoning Code, the most recently adopted provision shall be followed. [Ord. 333 § 1, 2001]


19.05.020 Authority to adopt code.

The zoning code is adopted by Burien ordinance, and is enacted under the authority of Article XI, Section 11 of the Washington state constitution and Chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW, as amended.


19.05.030 Purpose.

The general purposes of this Code are:

1. To encourage land use decision making in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of the state of Washington, including but not limited to the Growth Management Act and Regulatory Reform Act and subsequent amendments;

2. To promote the general public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the residents of the city of Burien;

3. To implement the city of Burien comprehensive plan and the goals of the state Growth Management Act (GMA);

4. To provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

5. To provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development;

6. To promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development;

7. To conserve and protect property values throughout the city; and

8. To restrict and regulate the height, number of stories and size of buildings; the percentage of lot coverage; the size of yards and other open spaces; and the density of population.


19.05.040 Conformity with this Code required.

1. No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained or otherwise changed except in conformance with this Code.

2. Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this Code and city of Burien subdivision regulations.

3. All land uses and development authorized by this Code shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this Code and any other local, state or federal agency that has jurisdiction over land uses and development. Where a difference exists between this Code and other regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

4. Where more than one part of this Code applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.


19.05.050 Public uses.

To insure that public uses and structures conform to regulations governing private uses and development, agencies of the federal government, the state of Washington and its political subdivisions, including the city of Burien, shall comply with this Code.


19.05.060 Permitted and prohibited uses.

Uses allowed in a specific zone are listed in the use zone chart for that zone in BMC 19.15. Any use or activity of land or structures that is not listed in the applicable use zone chart in BMC 19.15 is prohibited and shall not be established. Social card games are specifically prohibited in all zones.


19.05.065 Establishment of uses.

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use which will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of BMC 19.75. All applicable requirements of this code, or other applicable state or federal requirements, shall govern a use located in the incorporated city of Burien. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(327), 1993]


19.05.070 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this Code shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Code.


19.05.080 Interpretation – General.

1. Regulations, conditions or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual use shall supersede regulations, conditions or procedural requirements of general application.

2. A use includes the necessary structures and activities to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.

3. Chapter and section headings, captions, illustrations and references to other sections or Codes are for reference or explanation only and shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any section. In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning or implication between the text and any heading, caption or illustration, the text and the use zone charts in Chapter 19.15 BMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section or use zone chart.

4. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is discretionary.

5. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this Code, all words and terms used in this Code shall have their customary meanings.

6. The words “use,” “used,” “occupy” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words “intended,” “arranged” or “designed” to be used or occupied.


19.05.090 Interpretations of This Code – Specific.

1. The Director may, acting on his/her own initiative or in response to an inquiry, issue written interpretations of any of the provisions of this Code. The Director’s interpretation shall include findings of fact and conclusions and shall be based on:

a. The defined or common meaning of the words of the provision; and

b. The general purpose of the provision as expressed in the provision; and

c. The logical or likely meaning of the provision viewed in relation to the Comprehensive Plan and applicable purpose and intent statements in this Code.

2. The Director’s written interpretation of this Code will be enforced as if it is part of this Code.

3. All interpretations of this Code are available for public inspection and copying in the Department of Community Development during regular business hours. A reasonable fee for copying of interpretations may be charged.

4. Any person who is aggrieved by a written interpretation issued by the Director may appeal that interpretation at any time using the process for appealing a Director’s interpretation in BMC 2.15 [Ord. 313 §1, 2000].


19.05.100 Zoning map incorporated.

The map, or set of maps, entitled City of Burien Zoning Map and adopted by the City Council is hereby incorporated as part of this Code.


19.05.110 Interpretation – Zoning boundaries.

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:

1. Zoning district boundaries are the centerline of either streets, alleys, roads or highways, unless otherwise shown. Non-road-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owner’s lot;

2. Where boundaries are indicated as following approximately property lines, the actual property lines shall be considered the boundaries;

3. Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change the boundaries shall be considered to move with them;

4. Where a right-of-way is vacated, the area comprising the vacated right-of-way will acquire the zoning classification of the property to which it reverts;

5. Where a district boundary divides a lot under a single ownership into two districts, then the entire lot shall be zoned for the less restrictive use, provided the zoning district boundary adjustment is a distance of 50 feet or less. If the adjustment involves a distance of more than 50 feet, the procedures for a rezone (Chapter 19.65 BMC) shall be followed; and

6. If none of the rules of interpretation described in sections 19.05.110.1 through 19.05.110.5 apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling.


19.05.120 Zones and map designations established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this Code the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	ZONING DESIGNATION	MAP SYMBOL	ZONING DESIGNATION	MAP SYMBOL

	Residential, Single-Family	RS (followed by a designation indicating minimum lot area in square feet)	Regional Commercial	CR

	Residential, Multi-Family	RM (followed by a designation indicating base density in dwelling units per acres)	Office	O

	Professional Residential	PR	Downtown Commercial	DC

	Neighborhood Center	CN	Airport Industrial	AI (followed by a designation indicating which sub-zone within the Airport Industrial Zone)

	Community Commercial	CC (followed by a designation indicating which sub-zone within the Community Commercial Zone)	Industrial	I

	Intersection Commercial	CI	Special Planning Area	SPA (followed by a designation indicating which Special Planning Area)

[Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.05.130 Unzoned property.

Any property within the City of Burien which, for any reason, does not have a zone designation, will be construed to be within the RS-A zone.


19.05.140 Annexed property.

When a proposed Comprehensive Plan and zoning regulations and/or map have been adopted by the City of Burien, pursuant to RCW 35A.14.330 prior to annexation of land, that plan and zoning regulation and/or map will, upon the effective date of annexation, be deemed to amend this Code to the extent set forth in the annexation ordinance. Any other property or area which may, because of annexation, become a part of the City of Burien, will be deemed to be zoned with a classification the same as, or as nearly comparable as possible with the classification that the property was zoned immediately prior to annexation.


19.05.150 Zone and map designation purpose.

The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in Chapter 19.15 BMC shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in the city of Burien. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of uses allowed within each zone through amendments to this Code.


19.05.160 Classification of right-of-way.

Within street or alley rights-of-way, uses shall be limited to street purposes as defined by law, unless otherwise allowed by this Code, and shall be considered permitted uses in all cases.


19.05.170 Severability.

Should any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Code.


Chapter 19.10 Definitions Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.10.005    User Guide.

19.10.010    Accessory

19.10.012    Accessory living quarters

19.10.015    Adjoining

19.10.017    Adult entertainment facilities

19.10.018    Airplane unit load device

19.10.019    Alley

19.10.020    Alteration

19.10.025    Amusement arcade

19.10.026    Animal, small

19.10.027    Antenna

19.10.030    Applicant

19.10.031    Aquifer

19.10.032    Architectural scale

19.10.035    Arterial street

19.10.036    Articulation

19.10.037    Artwork

19.10.038    Balcony

19.10.038.2    Base flood

19.10.038.3    Base flood elevation

19.10.038.5    Bed and breakfast establishment

19.10.038.6    Beehive

19.10.038.7    Best available science

19.10.038.8    Best management practices (BMPs)

19.10.038.9    Bioretention facility

19.10.039    Blank walls

19.10.040    Buffer

19.10.045    Building

19.10.050    Building coverage

19.10.051    Building Modulation

19.10.051.5    Calculated LOS

19.10.052    Camouflaged

19.10.053    Capital facilities plan

19.10.054    Cargo container

19.10.055    Cemetery

19.10.056    Class A pedestrian-oriented street

19.10.057    Class B pedestrian-oriented street

19.10.058    Collocation

19.10.059    Common recreation space

19.10.060    Community facility

19.10.062    Community garden

19.10.065    Community residential facility

19.10.067    Compensatory mitigation

19.10.068    Confinement area

19.10.069    Congregate housing

19.10.070    Construction code

19.10.073    Continuing use

19.10.075    Convenience auto service

19.10.080    Convenience retail

19.10.081    Cornice

19.10.082    Cottage

19.10.082.5    Cottage housing development

19.10.083    Courtyard

19.10.084    Critical aquifer recharge areas

19.10.085    Critical areas

19.10.090    Critical facility

19.10.095    Cultural facility

19.10.100    Day care center

19.10.105    Day care operation

19.10.107    Deciduous

19.10.108    Deck

19.10.109    Department

19.10.109.3    Development proposal

19.10.109.5    Development proposal site

19.10.109.7    Development standards

19.10.109.8    Direct traffic impact

19.10.110    Director

19.10.111    Ditches

19.10.112    Domestic fowl

19.10.115    Dwelling unit

19.10.120    Dwelling unit, accessory Revised 1/20

19.10.123    Dwelling unit, apartment

19.10.124    Dwelling unit, primary

19.10.125    Dwelling unit, townhouse

19.10.130    Dwelling unit, senior citizen assisted

19.10.135    Dwelling unit, single detached

19.10.140    Eating and drinking establishment

19.10.140.5    Ecoregion

19.10.141    Endangered Species Act

19.10.141.5    Enhanced services facility Added 7/20

19.10.142    Enhancement

19.10.143    Equipment enclosure

19.10.144    Equipment, heavy

19.10.145    Erosion

19.10.150    Erosion hazard areas

19.10.155    Essential public facility

19.10.157    Evergreen

19.10.158    FAA

19.10.159    Facade

19.10.160    Family

19.10.165    Family day care home I

19.10.170    Family day care home II

19.10.173    FCC

19.10.174    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway

19.10.174.2    Fee-In-Lieu

19.10.175    Fence

19.10.176    Finished floor area

19.10.177    Fish Habitat

19.10.179.1    Flood fringe

19.10.179.2    Flood hazard areas

19.10.179.3    Flood Insurance Rate Map

19.10.179.4    Flood Insurance Study for King County

19.10.179.5    Flood protection elevation

19.10.179.6    Floodplain

19.10.179.7    Floodproofing

19.10.179.8    Floodway, zero-rise

19.10.180    Footprint

19.10.181    Forest practice

19.10.182    Frequently flooded area

19.10.183    Frontage

19.10.184    Functions and values

19.10.185    Garage, detached single-family

19.10.190    Geologically hazardous areas

19.10.195    Geologist

19.10.200    Geotechnical engineer

19.10.205    Golf course

19.10.210    Government facility

19.10.215    Grade

19.10.217    Grade, finished

19.10.220    Grade, natural

19.10.225    Grading

19.10.227    Grazing area

19.10.230    Gross floor area

19.10.232    Groundcover

19.10.233    Groundwater

19.10.235    Hatchery/fish preserve

19.10.240    Hazardous household substance

19.10.242    Hazardous materials or substances

19.10.243    Hazardous materials questionnaire

19.10.245    Hazardous substance

19.10.250    Hazardous waste

19.10.255    Hazardous waste storage

19.10.260    Hazardous waste treatment

19.10.265    Height

19.10.268    Heritage tree

19.10.270    High technology industry

19.10.273    Home occupation

19.10.275    Hospital

19.10.278    Human scale

19.10.280    Impervious surface

19.10.285    Impervious surface coverage

19.10.286    Improved public roadways

19.10.287    Injection well

19.10.288    In kind

19.10.290    Repealed

19.10.295    Kennel

19.10.298    Landscaping

19.10.300    Landslide

19.10.305    Landslide hazard areas

19.10.310    Light industry

19.10.312    Livestock

19.10.313    Loading space

19.10.315    Lodging facility

19.10.320    Lot

19.10.325    Lot area

19.10.327    Lot Averaging

19.10.329    Lot, corner

19.10.329.1    Low Impact best management practice (LID BMP)

19.10.330    Repealed

19.10.331    Major new construction or modification

19.10.333    Marijuana

19.10.333.2    Marijuana processor

19.10.333.3    Marijuana producer

19.10.333.4    Marijuana retailer

19.10.333.5    Marijuana-infused products

19.10.335    Master plan

19.10.340    Repealed

19.10.345    Mitigation

19.10.350    Mixed use

19.10.355    Mobile home

19.10.360    Mobile home park

19.10.361    Modular homes

19.10.362    Modulation

19.10.365    Monitoring

19.10.367    Monopole

19.10.367.5    Native vegetation

19.10.368    Nonconformance

19.10.368.3    Noxious weed

19.10.368.7    Net floor area

19.10.369    Non-Residential Zone

19.10.370    Nursing home

19.10.373    Off-site commercial parking

19.10.375    Off-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility

19.10.380    On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility

19.10.385    Office

19.10.387    Open-work fence

19.10.390    Ordinary high water mark

19.10.390.5    Owner Occupied

19.10.391    Panoram device

19.10.392    Panoram premises

19.10.393    Parking lot aisle

19.10.394    Parking space

19.10.394.5    Patio

19.10.394.6    Paved Surface

19.10.395    Pawn shop

19.10.395.3    Peak hour

19.10.395.5    Pedestrian-oriented facade

19.10.396    Pedestrian-oriented space

19.10.396.1    Permeable Pavement

19.10.397    Personal wireless service facility (PWSF)

19.10.398    Personal wireless services

19.10.399    Primary facade

19.10.399.5    Primary Structure

19.10.400    Primary use

19.10.403    Private

19.10.405    Private club

19.10.408    Prohibited tree

19.10.410    Property line

19.10.415    Public agency training facility

19.10.420    Public park and recreation facilities

19.10.425    Public agency

19.10.430    Public utility

19.10.435    Reasonable use

19.10.440    Recreational facility

19.10.443    Recyclable material

19.10.445    Recycling center

19.10.446    Regional utility corridor

19.10.447    Regulated facility or activities

19.10.450    Religious facility

19.10.455    Residential zone

19.10.460    Restoration

19.10.465    Retail

19.10.467    Retail marijuana outlet

19.10.470    Right-of-way

19.10.472    Riparian habitat

19.10.474    Salmonid

19.10.474.5    Scale (architectural)

19.10.475    School

19.10.477    Screen/screening

19.10.479    Secure community transition facility

19.10.480    Seismic hazard areas

19.10.485    Setback

19.10.490    Self service storage facility

19.10.492    Shorelines of the State

19.10.493    Significant tree

19.10.495    Site

19.10.500    Site improvements

19.10.505    Slope

19.10.506    Small Wireless Facility

19.10.507    Small Wireless Network

19.10.510    Social card game

19.10.511    Species

19.10.512    Specified anatomical areas

19.10.513    Specified sexual activities

19.10.515    Steep slope

19.10.516    Storefront

19.10.517    Stream

19.10.518    Stream, Intermittent

19.10.519    Stream, Perennial

19.10.520    Street

19.10.525    Structure

19.10.529    Sub-drainage basin

19.10.530    Submerged land

19.10.535    Substantial improvement

19.10.537    Support structure

19.10.539    Tiny house

19.10.540    Theater

19.10.543    Topographic map

19.10.545    Trail

19.10.545.5    Type F Water

19.10.546    Type Np Water

19.10.546.3    Type Ns Water

19.10.546.5    Type S Water

19.10.547    Ultimate roadway section

19.10.548    Unified Enclosure

19.10.549    Usable marijuana

19.10.550    Use

19.10.555    Vehicular access easement or tract

19.10.557    Vegetation

19.10.560    Vendor cart

19.10.562    Vernacular

19.10.565    Warehousing and wholesale trade

19.10.570    Water table

19.10.575    Wellhead protection areas

19.10.580    Wetlands

19.10.585    Wetlands, associated

19.10.590    Wetland classes, classes of wetlands, or wetland types

19.10.595    Wetland edge

19.10.600    Wildlife habitat


19.10.005 User Guide.

 – The definitions in this Chapter apply throughout this Code unless, from the context, another meaning is clearly intended.

A


19.10.010 Accessory

 – A use, activity, structure or part of a structure that is subordinate and incidental to the main activity or structure on the site.


19.10.012 Accessory living quarters

 – Living quarters in an accessory building for the use of the occupant or persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use of guests of the occupant. Such quarters have no kitchen and are not otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.015 Adjoining

 – Property that touches or is directly across a street, private street or access easement, or right of way (other than a freeway or principal arterial), from the subject property.


19.10.017 Adult entertainment facilities

 – Adult cabarets, adult massage parlors, adult motion picture theaters, adult panoram premises, adult sauna parlors, which are defined as follows:

1. Adult cabaret: A commercial establishment which presents go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar types of entertainment and which excludes any person by virtue of age from all or any portion of the premises.

2. Adult massage parlor: A commercial establishment in which massage or other touching of the human body is provided for a fee and which excludes any person by virtue of age from all or any portion of the premises in which such service is provided.

3. Adult motion picture theater: A building, enclosure, or portion thereof, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.

4. Adult panoram premise. A panoram premise used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.

5. Adult sauna parlor: A commercial sauna establishment which excludes any person by virtue of age from all or any portion of the premises. [Ord. 396 § 1, 2003, Ord. 291 § 3, 2000]


19.10.018 Airplane unit load device

 – The purpose of an airport unit load device is to enable individual pieces of cargo to be assembled into a standard-size unit to facilitate the rapid loading and unloading of airplanes having compatible handling and restraint systems. An airport unit load device includes any of the following:

1. Airplane pallet and pallet net.

2. Airplane pallet and net over a nonstructural container.

3. Airplane container.


19.10.019 Alley

 – An improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designated for general traffic circulation. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.10.020 Alteration

 – Any human activity which results or is likely to result in an impact upon the existing condition of a critical area. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, dredging, draining, channelizing, applying herbicides or pesticides or any hazardous substance, discharging pollutants except storm water, grazing domestic animals, paving, constructing, applying gravel, modifying for surface water management purposes, cutting, pruning, topping, trimming, relocating or removing vegetation or any other human activity which results or is likely to result in an impact to existent vegetation, hydrology, wildlife or wildlife habitat. Alterations do not include walking, fishing or any other passive recreation or other similar activities.


19.10.025 Amusement arcade

 – A building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other such player-operator amusement devices (excluding jukeboxes or gambling-related machines) are operated.


19.10.026 Animal, small

 – Any animal, other than livestock or animals considered to be predatory or wild, which are kept either inside or outside a dwelling unit. Animals considered predatory or wild shall be considered small animals when they are taken into captivity for the purposes of breeding, domestication, training, hunting or exhibition. Small animals include, but are not limited to, dogs, cats, rabbits, domestic fowl, birds, snakes, rodents, miniature goats and miniature potbellied pigs. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.027 Antenna

 – Means an apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information services. For purposes of this definition, the term antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under 47 CFR Part 17. Types of antennas include, but are not limited to:

1. An omni-directional antenna receives and transmits radio frequency signals in a 360 degree radial pattern. A whip antenna is an omni-directional antenna that is up to 15 feet in height and up to four inches in diameter. A cylindrical antenna is an omni-directional antenna that is up to 8 feet in height and up to 18 inches in diameter.

2. A directional or panel antenna receives and transmits radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.

3. Antennas attached as part of a small wireless facility. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 385 § 1, 2003, Ord. 265 § 15, 1999]


19.10.030 Applicant

 – A property owner or any person or entity acting as an agent for the property owner in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.


19.10.031 Aquifer

 – A body of soil or rock that contains sufficient saturated material to conduct groundwater and yield usable quantities of groundwater to wells or springs. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.032 Architectural scale

 – The perceived relative height and bulk of a building relative to that of neighboring buildings. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.035 Arterial street

 – Streets designated principal, minor or neighborhood arterials by the Burien Comprehensive Plan.


19.10.036 Articulation

 – Means the giving of emphasis to architectural elements (like windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.037 Artwork

 – a device, element or feature whose primary purpose is to express, enhance or illustrate aesthetic quality, feeling, physical entity, idea, local condition, historical or mythical happening, or cultural or social value. Examples of artwork include sculpture, bas relief sculpture, mural, or unique specially crafted lighting, furniture, pavement, landscaping, or architectural treatment that is intended primarily, but not necessarily exclusively, for aesthetic purposes. Signs are not considered artwork. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

B


19.10.038 Balcony

 – An exterior floor projecting from and supported by a structure without additional independent supports. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999, Ord. 437 § 12, 2005]


19.10.038.2 Base flood

 – A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.038.3 Base flood elevation

 – The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.038.5 Bed and breakfast establishment

 – A dwelling unit or accessory building within which bedrooms are available for paying guests on a nightly or weekly basis. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.038.6 Beehive

 – A structure designed to contain one colony of honeybees (apis mellifera). [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.038.7 Best available science

 – Current scientific information used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas, that is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 925. Sources of best available science are included in “Citations of Recommended Sources of Best Available Science for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas” published by the state Office of Community Development. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.038.8 Best management practices (BMPs)

 – Conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that:

1. Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by high concentrations of nutrients, animal waste, toxics, and sediment;

2. Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater flow, circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of wetlands;

3. Protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site construction; and

4. Provide standards for proper use of chemical herbicides within critical areas.

The City shall monitor the application of best management practices to ensure that the standards and policies of BMC 19.40 are adhered to. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.038.9 Bioretention facility

 – A Low Impact Development BMP consisting of a shallow landscaped depression designed in accordance with BMC Title 13 to temporarily store and infiltrate stormwater runoff. [Ord. 659 § 2, 2016]


19.10.039 Blank walls

 – Walls subject to “blank wall” requirements meet the following criteria:

1. Any wall or portion of a wall that has a surface area of 400 square feet having a width of at least 10 feet without a window, door, or building modulation as defined below or other architectural feature.

2. Any ground level wall surface or section of a wall over 4’ in height at ground level that is longer than 15’ as measured horizontally without having a ground level window or door lying wholly or in part within the 15’ section. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.040 Buffer

 – An area contiguous to a critical area that is required to protect the critical area and provide for the continued maintenance, functioning, and/or structural stability of a critical area. A buffer is measured outward from the edge of the critical area. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.045 Building

 – Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.


19.10.050 Building coverage

 – The percentage of the area of a lot that is covered by the total horizontal surface area of the roof of a building.


19.10.051 Building Modulation

 – A stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building facade within specified intervals of building width and depth, as a means of lessening the apparent bulk of a structure’s continuous exterior walls. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

C


19.10.051.5 Calculated LOS

 – A quantitative measure of traffic congestion identified by a declining letter scale (A – F) as calculated by the methodology contained in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual Special Report 209 or as calculated by another method approved by the department. LOS “A” indicates free flow of traffic with no delays while LOS “F” indicates jammed conditions or extensive delay. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.052 Camouflaged

 – A personal wireless service facility that is disguised, hidden or integrated with an existing or new building or support structure that does not appear to be a PWSF facility or support structure. It shall also mean any support structure sited among a stand of trees so as to be significantly screened from view; provided that the trees are legally protected from removal. [Ord. 265 § 16, 1999]


19.10.053 Capital facilities plan

 – A district’s, city’s, or utility’s facilities plan adopted by the school board, city council or utility board consisting of:

1. A forecast of future needs for facilities based on adopted projections;

2. The long-range construction and capital improvements projects of the district, city or utility;

3. The schools, streets or utilities under construction or expansion;

4. The proposed locations and capacities of expanded or new facilities;

5. At least a six-year financing plan component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues authorized by the voters and projected bond issues not yet authorized by the voters;

6. Any other long-range projects planned by the district, city or utilities.

7. The current capacity of facilities based on the district’s, city’s or utility’s adopted standard of service, and a plan to eliminate existing deficiencies, if any, without the use of impact fees; and

8. An inventory showing the location and capacity of existing facilities. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.054 Cargo container

 – A standardized, reusable vessel that is or appears to be:

1. Originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities, and/or,

2. Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car, and/or,

3. Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship. [Ord. 369 § 1, 2002; Ord. 313 § 1, 2000]


19.10.055 Cemetery

 – Land or structures used for burial or cremation of the dead (humans or animals), and related accessory uses.


19.10.056 Class A pedestrian-oriented street

 – The designation of a street where pedestrians are given priority in the design and planned use of the street and where motorized vehicles are given secondary consideration if there is a conflict of use. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.057 Class B pedestrian-oriented street

 – The designation of a street where motorized vehicles are given priority in the design and planned use of the street and where pedestrian accommodations are considered comparable to motorized vehicles. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.058 Collocation

 – Means (1) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure, and/or (2) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure. Provided that, for purposes of Eligible Facilities Requests, “collocation” is as defined in BMC 19.50.070. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 17, 1999]


19.10.059 Common recreation space

 – Recreation space within a development or building that is accessible to and available for common use by all residents or groups of residents and their invitees. Examples of common recreation space include but are not limited to the following: courtyards, children’s play areas, exercise rooms, gardens, lounges, hospitality rooms and media rooms. [Ord. 587 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]




19.10.060 Community facility

 – A use which serves the public and is generally of a public service, non-profit nature, including, but not limited to: food and clothing banks and other non-profit social service organizations.


19.10.062 Community garden

 – An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food and/or horticultural products for personal or group consumption or donation. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.10.065 Community residential facility

 – Living quarters meeting applicable federal and state standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification; if staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member for subclassifying community residential facilities as follows:

1. Community residential facility-I: Nine to ten residents and staff.

2. Community residential facility-II: Eleven or more residents and staff.


19.10.067 Compensatory mitigation

 – Replacing project-induced wetland losses or impacts, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Restoration – Actions performed to reestablish wetland functional characteristics and processes that have been lost by alterations, activities, or catastrophic events within an area that no longer meets the definition of a wetland.

2. Creation – Actions performed to intentionally establish a wetland at a site where it did not formerly exist.

3. Enhancement – Actions performed to improve the condition of existing degraded wetlands so that the functions they provide are of a higher quality. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.068 Confinement area

 – Any open land area in which livestock are kept where the forage does not meet the definition of a grazing area. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.069 Congregate housing

 – Residential development where individual dwelling units consist of a private bedroom or living quarters and where kitchen, dining and recreational uses are shared between residents. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.10.070 Construction code

 – The Construction Code as amended and adopted by the City of Burien.


19.10.073 Continuing use

 – An existing, legally established use in a non-residential zone that is not listed in the use zone chart for the zone in which the site is located. [Ord. 268 § 9, 1999]


19.10.075 Convenience auto service

 – A small-scale convenience retail use that provides services and related goods for the routine maintenance of a motor vehicle. Services offered include, but are not limited to: auto detailing, provision of gasoline or diesel, oil change, lubrication, tune-ups, and car washing. Vehicle repair is not allowed as a convenience auto service use, except as an accessory use to a gas station.


19.10.080 Convenience retail

 – A small-scale retail use that provides limited goods and/or services to consumers to meet their daily needs. Customers typically visit a convenience retail business at least once per month. Any goods purchased must be capable of being transported from the establishment in an automobile. Goods and services offered include, but are not limited to: convenience auto service, banking, groceries, hair salon, laundry, pet care, pharmacy, and video rental.


19.10.081 Cornice

 – A horizontal molding projecting along the top of a wall, building, etc. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.082 Cottage

 – A cottage is a small, detached dwelling unit, not greater than 1,200 square feet in total floor area that is developed at a density greater than the underlying zone. More than one cottage may occupy a single lot. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.10.082.5 Cottage housing development

 – Residential development consisting of clusters of detached dwelling units that includes cottages and may include compact single-family units and meets the following criteria:

1. Dwelling units are limited to a maximum square footage; and

2. Dwelling units are grouped around a common open space; and

3. Each unit has the construction characteristics of a single-family house; and

4. Units may be located on platted lots or as units in a condominium and may share use of common facilities, such as a party room, tool shed, garden orchard, workshop or parking areas. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.10.083 Courtyard

 – A courtyard is a landscaped space enclosed on at least three sides by a single structure. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.084 Critical aquifer recharge areas

 – Those areas that significantly contribute to the recharge of aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(2). Critical aquifer recharge areas have prevailing geologic conditions associated with infiltration rates that create a high potential for contamination of groundwater resources or contribute significantly to the replenishment of groundwater. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.085 Critical areas

 – Aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, streams, and wetlands.


19.10.090 Critical facility

 – A facility necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and which is defined under the occupancy categories of “essential facilities,” “hazardous facilities” and “special occupancy structures” in the International Building Code. Critical facilities also include nursing homes, public roadway bridges and sites for hazardous substance storage or production, not including the temporary storage of consumer products containing hazardous substances intended for household use or for retail sale on the site. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017]


19.10.095 Cultural facility

 – A use providing for display, performance, or enjoyment of heritage, history or the arts. This use includes, but is not limited to: museums, arts performance venues, cultural centers, or interpretive sites, but does not include commercially-operated theatres.

D


19.10.100 Day care center

 – A day care operation that is not a family day care home I or family day care home II.


19.10.105 Day care operation

 – The temporary care of persons for periods of less than twenty-four hours in a dwelling unit or structure on a regular or recurring basis for pay or other valuable consideration including, but not limited to the furnishing of shelter, sustenance, supervision, education or other supportive services, but not including drug or alcohol rehabilitation services.


19.10.107 Deciduous

 – A plant species with foliage that is shed annually. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.10.108 Deck

 – An exterior floor supported on at least two opposing sides by an adjacent structure, and/or posts, piers or other independent supports. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999, Ord. 437 § 12, 2005]


19.10.109 Department

 – The city of Burien department of community development. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.109.3 Development proposal

 – Any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the city of Burien relative to the use or development of land. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.109.5 Development proposal site

 – The legal boundaries of the parcel or parcels of land for which an applicant has or should have applied for authority from the city of Burien to carry out a development proposal. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.109.7 Development standards

 – Until otherwise amended by the city council, development standards for streets, roads, parks, open space, trails, utilities or other public improvements shall be those of King County; including King County’s Shoreline Master Program. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.109.8 Direct traffic impact

 – Any increase in vehicle traffic generated by a proposed development which equals or exceeds 10 peak hour, peak direction vehicle trips on any roadway or intersection. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.110 Director

 – The director of the City of Burien Department of Community Development Services or his/her designee.


19.10.111 Ditches

 – Artificial drainage features created in uplands through purposeful human action, such as irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, and canals. Purposeful creation must be demonstrated through documentation, photographs, statements, and/or other evidence. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.112 Domestic fowl

 – Domesticated birds commonly associated with farms and used for eggs or meat. Domestic fowl include but is not limited to chickens, ducks, geese and turkeys. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.115 Dwelling unit

 – One or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupant.


19.10.120 Dwelling unit, accessory Revised 1/20

 – An additional dwelling unit on a lot with a primary dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling unit is an independent living unit designed for residential occupancy by one or more people independent of the primary dwelling unit, with facilities for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation. An accessory dwelling unit may be attached or internal to the primary dwelling unit, or it may be detached from the primary dwelling unit. For the purposes of this title, internal accessory dwelling units are considered attached accessory dwelling units. [Ord. 724 § 1, 2019]


19.10.123 Dwelling unit, apartment

 – A building containing two or more dwelling units which may be stacked.


19.10.124 Dwelling unit, primary

 – A separate, complete dwelling unit that is the larger of the dwelling units when a single-family residential site development plan proposes or contains an accessory dwelling unit. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.125 Dwelling unit, townhouse

 – A building on its own separate lot containing one dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and is attached to one or more other townhouse dwelling units by at least one common wall.


19.10.130 Dwelling unit, senior citizen assisted

 – A building containing two or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by senior citizens, and including, but not limited to the following support services, as deemed necessary:

1. Food preparation and dining areas;

2. Group activity areas;

3. Medical supervision; and

4. Similar activities.


19.10.135 Dwelling unit, single detached

 – A detached building on a single lot containing one dwelling unit, or a factory-assembled structure constructed to State Building Code standards.

E


19.10.140 Eating and drinking establishment

 – A commercial use which sells prepared food or beverages and generally offers accommodations for consuming the food or beverage on the premises, and where the seating and associated circulation areas exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the use.


19.10.140.5 Ecoregion

 – Ecoregions are defined using EPA’s Ecoregions of the Pacific Northwest Document No. 600/3-86/033 July 1986 by Omernik and Gallant. The term ecoregions is used to define a mapped classification of the ecosystem regions of the United States. Ecoregions are generally considered to be regions of relative homogeneity in ecological systems or in relationships between organisms and their environments. In general, ecoregions have a distinct composition and distribution of plant and animal species. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.10.141 Endangered Species Act

 – A 1973 act of Congress that mandated that endangered and threatened species of fish, wildlife, and plants be protected and restored. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.141.5 Enhanced services facility Added 7/20

 – A residential facility licensed by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services and as defined by RCW 70.97.010(11) or as amended by the State Legislature. Enhanced services facility (ESF) means a residential facility that provides services to persons for whom acute inpatient treatment is not medically necessary and who have been determined by the Department of Social and Health Services to be inappropriate for placement in other licensed facilities due to complex needs. [Ord. 734 § 2, 2020]


19.10.142 Enhancement

 – An action which increases the functions and values of a stream, wetland or other critical area or buffer. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.143 Equipment enclosure

 – A facility, shelter, cabinet or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communications signals. Associated equipment may include, for example, air conditioning, backup power supplies and emergency generators. [Ord. 265 § 18, 1999]


19.10.144 Equipment, heavy

 – High-capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or other materials, and mobile power units including, but not limited to: carryalls, graders, loading and unloading devices, cranes, drag lines, trench diggers, tractors, augers, bulldozers, concrete mixers and conveyers, harvesters, combines, or other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by mechanical power as distinguished from manpower. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.145 Erosion

 – The process by which soil particles are mobilized and transported by natural agents such as wind, rainsplash, frost action or surface water flow.


19.10.150 Erosion hazard areas

 – Lands underlain by soils which are subject to severe erosion when disturbed.


19.10.155 Essential public facility

 – Those facilities described in RCW 36.70A.200.


19.10.157 Evergreen

 – A plant species with foliage that persists and remains green year round. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]

F


19.10.158 FAA

 – The Federal Aviation Administration. [Ord. 265 § 19, 1999]


19.10.159 Facade

 – Any portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from the finish grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.160 Family

 – An individual; two or more persons related by blood or marriage; a group of eight or fewer residents, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group living arrangement where eight or fewer residents receive 



 – supportive services such as counseling, foster care, or medical supervision at the dwelling unit by resident or nonresident staff. For purposes of this definition, minors living with parent shall not be counted as part of the maximum number of residents.


19.10.165 Family day care home I

 – A day care operation in the provider’s dwelling unit, in the family living quarters, with no more than six (6) attendees at any one time, not including the immediate family members who reside in the dwelling unit.


19.10.170 Family day care home II

 – A day care operation in the provider’s dwelling unit, in the family living quarters, with no more than twelve (12) attendees at any one time, not including the immediate family members who reside in the dwelling unit.


19.10.173 FCC

 – The Federal Communications Commission. [Ord. 265 § 20, 1999]


19.10.174 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway

 – The channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.174.2 Fee-In-Lieu

 – The Fee-in-Lieu program allows commercial development in certain zones, under some circumstances, to pay a fee for each parking space that otherwise would have been required, rather than construct the parking space. [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]


19.10.175 Fence

 – A barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of:

1. Masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or

2. Wood, metal or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh.


19.10.176 Finished floor area

 – Finished floor area is the total area (total living area) of a home (main and wings) less any built-in garage area and any bi-level unfinished lower level area. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017]


19.10.177 Fish Habitat

 – Habitat that is used by fish at any life stage at any time of the year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish that could be recovered by restoration or management and includes off-channel habitat. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.1 Flood fringe

 – That portion of the floodplain outside of the zero-rise floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the base flood, generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.2 Flood hazard areas

 – Those areas subject to inundation by the base flood including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands and closed depressions. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.3 Flood Insurance Rate Map

 – The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated some areas of flood hazard. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.4 Flood Insurance Study for King County

 – The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration which includes flood profiles and the Flood Insurance Rate Map. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.5 Flood protection elevation

 – An elevation which is one foot above the base flood elevation. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.6 Floodplain

 – The total area subject to inundation by the base flood. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.7 Floodproofing

 – Adaptations which will make a structure that is below the flood protection elevation substantially impermeable to the passage of water and resistant to hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the impacts of buoyancy. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.179.8 Floodway, zero-rise

 – The channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without any measurable increase in flood height. A measurable increase in base flood height means a calculated upward rise in the base flood elevation, equal to or greater than .01 foot, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and changed conditions directly attributable to development in the floodplain. This definition is broader than that of the FEMA floodway, but always includes the FEMA floodway. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the Flood Insurance Study for King County, are considered the boundaries of the zero-rise floodway unless otherwise delineated by a critical area study. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.180 Footprint

 – The exterior outline of a structure where it meets the earth.


19.10.181 Forest practice

 – Any activity regulated by the Washington Department of Natural Resources in WAC Title 222 or Chapter 79.06 RCW for which a forest practice permit is required, together with:

1. Fire prevention, detection and suppression; and

2. Slash burning or removal. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.182 Frequently flooded area

 – Frequently flooded areas are lands in the floodplain subject to at least a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, or within areas subject to flooding due to high groundwater. These areas include, but are not limited to, streams, rivers, lakes, coastal areas, wetlands, and areas where high groundwater forms ponds on the ground surface. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.10.183 Frontage

 – The length of a property line along a street. For the purposes of BMC 19.30 (Signs), frontage shall also include the length of a property line along a vehicular access easement or tract. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.10.184 Functions and values

 – The beneficial roles served by critical areas including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, wave attenuation, protection from hazards, historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]



G


19.10.185 Garage, detached single-family

 – A detached structure which is accessory to a single detached dwelling unit and to which there is legal vehicular access from a public right-of-way, designed for the storage of motor vehicles or boats of the residents of the single detached dwelling unit. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]


19.10.190 Geologically hazardous areas

 – Areas that because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake or other geological events, are not suited to siting development due to public health and safety concerns. These areas include, but are not limited to erosion hazard areas, landslide hazard areas and seismic hazard areas.


19.10.195 Geologist

 – A person who has earned a degree in geology from an accredited college or university and has at least five years of experience as a practicing geologist. The practical experience shall include at least three years work conducting slope stability and ground water hydrology evaluations in close association with qualified practicing geologists and geotechnical engineers.


19.10.200 Geotechnical engineer

 – A practicing geotechnical engineer licensed as a professional civil engineer in the state of Washington and who has at least four years of professional employment as a geotechnical engineer in responsible charge, including experience with landslide evaluation.


19.10.205 Golf course

 – A recreational facility under private ownership, designed and developed for the playing of golf, and which may include related accessory uses.


19.10.210 Government facility

 – Services and facilities operated by any level of government, excluding those uses listed separately in this Code.


19.10.215 Grade

 – The average ground level at the midpoint of all exterior walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be considered the finished ground level.


19.10.217 Grade, finished

 – The grade following development. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.10.220 Grade, natural

 – The topography of the lot immediately prior to any site preparation or grading, including excavation or filling.


19.10.225 Grading

 – Any excavation, filling, removing the duff layer or any combination thereof.


19.10.227 Grazing area

 – Any open land area used to pasture livestock in which suitable forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.230 Gross floor area

 – The total square footage of all floors in a structure as measured from either the interior surface of each exterior wall of the structure or, if the structure does not have walls, from each outer edge of the roof. Area used to meet minimum parking requirements is not included in gross floor area.


19.10.232 Groundcover

 – Living plants designed to grow low to the ground (generally one foot or less) and intended to stabilize soils and protect against erosion. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.10.233 Groundwater

 – Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of the land or below a surface water body. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

H


19.10.235 Hatchery/fish preserve

 – A place where fish eggs are incubated to produce young.


19.10.240 Hazardous household substance

 – A substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010.


19.10.242 Hazardous materials or substances

 – The following applies only to BMC 19.40: Any hazardous waste, hazardous substance, dangerous waste, or extremely hazardous waste that are physical or health hazards as defined and classified in Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition, that may degrade groundwater quality when improperly stored, handled, treated, used, produced, recycled, disposed of, or otherwise mismanaged. Hazardous materials shall also include petroleum or petroleum products that are in a liquid phase at ambient temperatures, including any waste oils or sludges. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.243 Hazardous materials questionnaire

 – A form provided by the City of Burien and completed by a facility owner or operator that discloses the types and estimated amounts of hazardous materials used by the facility and the operational activities of the facility so as to establish the level of risk associated with those hazardous materials and activities for determination of regulatory status. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.245 Hazardous substance

 – A substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010.


19.10.250 Hazardous waste

 – All dangerous and extremely hazardous waste as defined in RCW 70.105.010(15), or its successor, except for moderate risk waste as set forth in RCW 70.105.010(17), or its successor.


19.10.255 Hazardous waste storage

 – The holding of hazardous waste for a temporary period, as regulated by the State Dangerous Waste Regulations, Chapter 173-303 WAC, or its successor.


19.10.260 Hazardous waste treatment

 – The physical, chemical, or biological processing of hazardous waste for the purpose of rendering these wastes nondangerous or less dangerous, safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume, as regulated by the State Dangerous Waste Regulations, Chapter 173-303 WAC, or its successor.


19.10.265 Height

 – The vertical distance measured from average natural grade, to the highest point of the structure.


19.10.268 Heritage tree

 – A tree that has been designated a City of Burien Community Landmark and is protected and preserved pursuant to BMC 19.85 Protection and Preservation of Landmarks. Any person, group or the City may nominate a tree, but the property owner shall consent in writing before the nomination will be considered. To be eligible for heritage designation the tree must be more than 40 years old, have State or local cultural/historic importance and be rare or exceptional by virtue of its size, species, condition, and/or contribution as part of a grove of trees which is determined to be of historical value. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017]


19.10.270 High technology industry

 – A use engaged in research and development, testing, assembly, repair, and manufacturing in the following industries: bio-technology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. Office, warehousing, wholesaling and distribution of the finished products produced at the site are allowed as part of this use.


19.10.273 Home occupation

 – Any business or occupation undertaken for financial gain within a dwelling unit or accessory building that is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises. Telecommuting, which is work done from home on a part-time basis for a business that is based off the premises, is not a home occupation. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.275 Hospital

 – An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, extended care facilities, medical offices, training facilities, pharmacies, and eating and drinking establishment.


19.10.278 Human scale

 – The perceived size of a building relative to a human being. A building is considered to have “good human scale” if there is an expression of human activity or use that indicates the building’s size. For example, traditionally sized doors, windows, and balconies are elements that respond to the size of the human body, so these elements in a building indicate a building’s overall size. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

I


19.10.280 Impervious surface

 – Any nonvertical surface artificially covered or hardened so as to prevent or impede the percolation of water into the soil mantle including, but not limited to, roof tops, swimming pools, paved roads and walkways or parking areas and excluding landscaping, surface water retention/detention facilities, and vehicular access easements or tracts shared by two or more single detached dwelling units.


19.10.285 Impervious surface coverage

 – The sum of the percentage of the lot covered by impervious surface and the percentage of the lot covered by permeable pavement. [Ord. 659 § 1, 2016]


19.10.286 Improved public roadways

 – Public road rights-of-way that have been improved with at least two travel lanes and are maintained by either the city of Burien, King County or the state of Washington. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.287 Injection well

 – A well that is used for the subsurface emplacement of fluids, including Class I, II, II, IV, and V wells as defined in Chapter 173-218 WAC. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.288 In kind

 – To replace critical areas with substitute areas whose characteristics and functions closely approximate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity. It does not mean replacement “in category.” [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.290 Interim zoning code

 – Repealed by Ord. 620.

K


19.10.295 Kennel

 – A place where dogs or cats are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training.

L


19.10.298 Landscaping

 – Live vegetative materials required for a development. Said materials provided along the boundaries of a site are referred to as perimeter landscaping. Landscaping provided on the remainder of the site is referred to as interior landscaping. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.10.300 Landslide

 – Episodic downslope movement of a mass including, but not limited to, soil, rock or snow.


19.10.305 Landslide hazard areas

 – Lands that are potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to a combination of factors, including historic failures, geologic, topographic and hydrologic features, including any of the following:

1. Any slope with a vertical relief of 10 feet or more that is steeper than 15 percent with a combination of:

a. Impermeable soils, such as silt and clay, frequently interbedded with granular soils, such as sand and gravel; and

b. Springs or ground water seepage;

2. Any slope with a vertical relief of 10 feet or more that is 40 percent or steeper, except areas composed of consolidated rock;

3. Any area designated or mapped as class U, UOS or URS by the Department of Ecology Coastal Zone Atlas;

4. Any area subject to wave erosion and bluff retreat;

5. Any area which has shown movement during the Holocene epoch, from 10,000 years ago to the present, or which is underlain by mass wastage debris from that epoch;

6. Any area potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion or undercutting by wave action;

7. Any area located on an alluvial fan, presently subject to or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or deposition of stream-transported sediments.


19.10.310 Light industry

 – A use that involves the manufacturing, production, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, repair and/or packaging of finished products, predominantly from previously prepared and/or refined materials (or from raw materials that do not need refining). Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution of the finished products produced at the site is allowed as part of this use.


19.10.312 Livestock

 – Grazing animals kept either in open fields or structures for training, boarding, home use, sales, or breeding and production, including but not limited to: cattle, riding and draft horses, hogs, sheep, full-size goats, miniature horses, llamas, and alpacas. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]


19.10.313 Loading space

 – A space for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading cargo or passengers. [Ord. 292 § 2, 2000]


19.10.315 Lodging facility

 – A building or portion thereof designed or used for the transient rental of rooms for sleeping. Accessory shops and services catering to the general public may be provided. Not included are institutions housing persons under legal restraint or requiring medical attention or care.


19.10.320 Lot

 – A physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created pursuant to the City of Burien subdivision regulations, or was legally created prior to February 28, 1993.


19.10.325 Lot area

 – The total land area, excluding submerged land, contained within the property lines of a lot.


19.10.327 Lot Averaging

 – The numerical averaging of lot areas to determine compliance with the minimum lot area requirements of this title. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.10.329 Lot, corner

 – A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersections, or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees within the lines. Corner lots have two street frontages, primary and secondary. The primary street shall be the one that the building is primarily oriented to. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 103 § 1, 1994; Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.329.1 Low Impact best management practice (LID BMP)

 – A small scale drainage facility or feature designed in accordance with BMC Title 13 that is part of a development site strategy to use processes such as infiltration, dispersion, storage, evaporation, transpiration, forest retention, and reduced impervious surface footprint to mimic pre-developed hydrology and minimize stormwater runoff. [Ord. 659 § 3, 2016]

M


19.10.330 Major communication facility

 – [Repealed, Ord. 265 § 34, 1999]




19.10.331 Major new construction or modification

 – Construction from the bare ground or an enlargement or modification of an existing structure in excess of 50% of the current King County assessment value for the existing structure (excluding tenant improvements), as determined by BMC Title 15. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.333 Marijuana

 – All parts of the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.333.2 Marijuana processor

 – A facility licensed by the State Liquor Control Board to process marijuana into usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.333.3 Marijuana producer

 – A facility licensed by the State Liquor Control Board for the production and sale at wholesale of marijuana to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.333.4 Marijuana retailer

 – A facility licensed by the State Liquor Control Board where usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products may be sold at retail. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.333.5 Marijuana-infused products

 – Products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts and are intended for human use. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include usable marijuana. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.335 Master plan

 – A complete development plan for the site showing: placement, dimensions and uses of all structures as well as streets and other areas used for vehicular circulation.


19.10.340 Minor communication facility

 – [Repealed, Ord. 265 § 34, 1999]


19.10.345 Mitigation

 – The use of any or all of the following actions listed in descending order of preference:

1. Avoiding the impact by not taking a certain action;

2. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce the impact;

3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected critical area or buffer;



4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal;

5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing substitute critical areas and environments; and

6. Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.


19.10.350 Mixed use

 – A project or building that combines non-residential use with dwelling units, either in the same building, or in different buildings located on the same site.


19.10.355 Mobile home

 – A structure transportable in one or more sections; that in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 32 body feet or more in length; or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more in area; built on a permanent chassis; designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; which contains plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems; and shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this section, or of Chapter 296-150B WAC, except the size requirements for which the manufacturer voluntarily complies with the standards and files the certification required by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”).


19.10.360 Mobile home park

 – A development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes.


19.10.361 Modular Homes

 – Dwelling units that are prefabricated homes consisting of repeated sections called modules. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.10.362 Modulation

 – Modulation is a stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building face within specified intervals of building width and depth, as a means of breaking up the apparent bulk of a structure’s continuous exterior walls. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.365 Monitoring

 – Evaluating the impacts of development proposals on biologic, hydrologic and geologic systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation through the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data.


19.10.367 Monopole

 – A support structure that consists of a single steel or wood pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a concrete pad. Monopoles exclude poles used solely for small wireless facilities. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 21, 1999]

N


19.10.367.5 Native vegetation

 – Vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, that is indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and which reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur in the Puget Sound region. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.368 Nonconformance

 – Any use, site improvement or structure established in conformance with the City of Burien, or King County if prior to March 1, 1993, rules and regulations in effect at the time of establishment, that no longer conforms to the uses permitted in the site’s current zone, or to the current development standards of the code due to changes in the code or its application to the site. [Ord. 268 § 10, 1999]


19.10.368.3 Noxious weed

 – Any plant which is highly destructive, competitive, or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices, limited to those plants on the state noxious weed list contained in Chapter 16-750 WAC and those regulated by King County. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.368.7 Net floor area

 – The usable or net square footage of floor area, exclusive of areas such as but not limited to building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets, or restrooms [Ord. 313, § 1, 2000].


19.10.369 Non-Residential Zone

 – The following zones: CN, CI, CC-1, CC-2, DC, CR, PR, O, AI-1, AI-2, I, SPA-1, SPA-2, and SPA-3. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003, Ord. 382 § 4, 2003, Ord. 265 § 22, 1999]


19.10.370 Nursing home

 – An establishment as defined in RCW 18.51.010.

O


19.10.373 Off-site commercial parking

 – Use of land or structure for parking of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise where hourly, daily, weekly or monthly fees are charged and transportation is provided for users to a separate off-site commercial use. [Ord. 510 § 1, 2009]


19.10.375 Off-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility

 – A facility that stores and/or treats hazardous wastes generated on a site other than the site where the storage and/or treatment occurs.


19.10.380 On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility

 – A facility that stores and/or treats hazardous wastes generated on the same site where the storage and/or treatment occurs.


19.10.385 Office

 – A place of employment providing professional, administrative, educational, business or governmental services other than production, distribution, sale or repair of goods or commodities. The following is a nonexclusive list of office uses: medical, dental or other health care; veterinary, accounting, architectural, engineering, consulting or other similar professional services; management, administrative, secretarial, marketing, advertising, personnel or other similar services; sales offices where no inventories or goods are available on the premises, real estate, insurance, travel agent, brokerage or other similar services.


19.10.387 Open-work fence

 – A fence in which the solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute no more than 50 percent of the total surface area. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.390 Ordinary high water mark

 – The mark found by examining the bed and banks of a stream, lake, or tidal water and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and long maintained in ordinary years as to mark upon the soil a vegetative character distinct from that of the abutting upland. In any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the line of mean high water shall substitute. In any area where neither can be found, the top of the channel bank shall substitute. In braided channels and alluvial fans, the ordinary high water mark or line of mean high water shall be measured so as to include the entire stream feature.


19.10.390.5 Owner Occupied

 – A property owner as reflected in the title records, who makes his/her legal residence at the site as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle registration, or similar means, and resides at the site more than six months out of any given year. [Ord. 355 § 1, 2002]

P


19.10.391 Panoram device

 – Any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee or other charge, is used to view, exhibit or display a film or videotape. A panoram device also refers to a panoram, preview, picture arcade or peep show. The term panoram device does not include games which employ pictures, views or video displays, or gambling devices regulated by the state. [Ord. 291 § 4, 2000]


19.10.392 Panoram premises

 – Any premises or portion of any premises on which any panoram device is located and to which members of the public are admitted. Panoram premises does not include movie or motion picture theater auditoriums capable of seating more than five people. [Ord. 291 § 5, 2000]


19.10.393 Parking lot aisle

 – That portion of the off-street parking area used exclusively for the maneuvering and circulation of motor vehicles and in which parking is prohibited. [Ord. 292 § 3, 2000]


19.10.394 Parking space

 – An area accessible to vehicles, improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of parking a motor vehicle. [Ord. 292 § 4, 2000]


19.10.394.5 Patio

 – A surfaced area of the ground beyond a building designed, established, and/or installed to provide for outdoor living, cooking, and recreation, some sides of which are open and which may or may not have a permanent overhead covering. [Ord. 437 § 12, 2005]


19.10.394.6 Paved Surface

 – An impervious pavement, a permeable pavement or a compacted gravel surface. [Ord. 659 § 4, 2016]


19.10.395 Pawn shop

 – An establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property.


19.10.395.3 Peak hour

 – The hour during the morning or afternoon when the most critical level of service occurs for a particular roadway or intersection. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.395.5 Pedestrian-oriented facade

 – Ground floor facades that contain the following characteristics:

(a) Transparent window area or window displays along a minimum of 75 percent of the ground floor facade between a height of 2 feet to 8 feet above the ground.

(b) The primary building entry shall be on this facade. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.396 Pedestrian-oriented space

 – A pedestrian-oriented space is an area located outside of the right-of-way, between a building and a street or along a pedestrian path which promotes visual and pedestrian access onto the site and provides pedestrian-oriented amenities and landscaping to enhance the public’s use of the space for passive activities such as resting, reading, picnicking, etc.

1. To qualify as a “pedestrian-oriented space”, an area must have:

A. Visual and pedestrian access (including handicapped access) into the site from the street.

B. Paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved unit paving.

C. On-site or building-mounted lighting providing at least 4-foot candles at ground level with lighting level uniformity, average to minimum, shall be 2:1 or better.

D. At least 2 square feet of seating area (bench, ledge, etc.) or one individual seat per 60 SF of plaza area or open space.

2. A “pedestrian-oriented space” is encouraged to have:

A. Landscaping that does not act as a visual barrier.

B. Site furniture, artwork, or amenities such as fountains, kiosk, etc.

3. A “pedestrian-oriented space” shall not have:

A. Asphalt or gravel pavement (note: crushed granite may be used to protect tree roots).

B. Adjacent non-buffered parking lots.

C. Adjacent chain-link fences.

D. Adjacent blank walls without “blank wall treatment”. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.396.1 Permeable Pavement

 – An area of pavement constructed of pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable interlocking pavers, pervious vegetated grids or other forms of porous or pervious paving material intended to allow passage of water through the pavement section. [Ord. 659 § 5, 2016]


19.10.397 Personal wireless service facility (PWSF)

 – A site, building, and/or structure that contains facilities to provide personal wireless services. A personal wireless service facility includes at least one of the following: antenna, support structure, and/or equipment enclosure. Personal wireless service facilities include small wireless facilities. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 23, 1999]


19.10.398 Personal wireless services

 – As defined in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), as they may be amended now or in the future. [Ord. 265 § 24, 1999]


19.10.399 Primary facade

 – The facade containing the building or individual business’ primary entrance. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.399.5 Primary structure

 – The structure that contains the primary use. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]


19.10.400 Primary use

 – The use listed in Chapter 19.15 for which the majority of the total square footage of a site is designed, arranged, occupied, dedicated or maintained. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]


19.10.403 Private

 – Solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their guests is a private garage. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.405 Private club

 – An association of persons organized for some common purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is commonly carried on as a business.


19.10.408 Prohibited tree

 – Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia), Cottonwood (Populus trichocarpa), Native alder (Alnus glutinosa), Native willow (Salix), Lombardy poplar (Populus nigra ‘Italica’), and European ash (Fraxinus excelsior) are prohibited in new land development landscaping or as a required replacement tree on private and public property. An existing prohibited tree shall be included on tree retention plans and counted as a significant tree if meeting the definition in BMC 19.10.493. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017]


19.10.410 Property line

 – Those lines enclosing a lot and those lines defining a recorded vehicular access easement or tract. The following are categories of property lines:

1. Front property line: Any property line that is adjacent to a street. A property line abutting SR 518 freeway and/or the SR 509 freeway shall not be considered front property lines.

2. Interior property line: Any property line other than a front property line, and any property line that is adjacent to a vehicular access easement or tract.


19.10.415 Public agency training facility

 – An establishment for training state and local law enforcement, fire safety, national guard or transit personnel and accessory facilities including but not limited to:

1. Dining and overnight accommodations;



2. Classrooms;

3. Indoor shooting ranges;

4. Auto test tracks; and

5. Fire suppression simulations.


19.10.420 Public park and recreation facilities

 – A natural or landscaped area, buildings or structures, provided by a unit of government, to meet the active or passive recreational needs of people.


19.10.425 Public agency

 – Any agency, political subdivision or unit of local government of this state, or private utility regulated by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission, including, but not limited to, municipal corporations, special purpose districts and local service districts, private regulated utilities, any agency of the state of Washington, the United States or any state thereof or any Indian tribe recognized as such by the federal government.


19.10.430 Public utility

 – A facility for the distribution or transmission of services to an area; requiring location in the area to be served; including, but not limited to:

1. Telephone exchanges;

2. Water pumping or treatment stations;

3. Electrical switching substations;

4. Water storage reservoirs or tanks;

5. Groundwater well-fields;

6. Regional storm water management facilities;

7. Storm drainage control facilities

8. Natural gas gate stations and limiting stations;

9. Propane, compressed natural gas and liquefied natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users; and

10. Sewer lift stations.

R


19.10.435 Reasonable use

 – A legal concept articulated by federal and state courts in regulatory taking cases. Within the context of these cases and for the purposes of this title, reasonable use shall mean any use allowed by Chapter 19.15 BMC and shall not mean the subdivision of property.


19.10.440 Recreational facility

 – A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities. Includes, but is not limited to: health club, sports instruction, and bowling alley.


19.10.443 Recyclable material

 – A nontoxic, recoverable substance that can be re-processed for the manufacture of new products. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.445 Recycling center

 – An establishment for the processing (separation and/or recovery) or collection of recyclable materials from solid wastes. Recycling of oil or other liquids may also occur.


19.10.446 Regional utility corridor

 – A right-of-way tract or easement which contains transmission lines or pipelines for utility companies, excluding distribution lines contained within striate rights-of-way or lines serving individual lot or developments. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.10.447 Regulated facility or activities

 – A facility or activity that lies or occurs within the boundaries of a critical aquifer recharge area, and in which quantities of hazardous materials or substances in excess of twenty (20) gallons or two hundred (200) pounds are or will be present on the premises at any one time, unless otherwise exempted under this ordinance. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.450 Religious facility

 – An establishment, the principal purpose of which is religious worship, and for which the principal building or other structure contains the sanctuary or principal place of worship, and which includes related accessory uses.


19.10.455 Residential zone

 – Any RS or RM zone.


19.10.460 Restoration

 – Returning a critical area and/or its buffer to a state in which its stability and functions approach its unaltered state as closely as possible.


19.10.465 Retail

 – A commercial enterprise which: provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer; and, whose goods are available for immediate purchase and/or rental; and, whose goods are available for immediate removal from the premises by the purchaser and/or whose services are traditionally not permitted within an office use. The sale and consumption of food are included if: a) the seating and associated circulation area does not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the use, and b) it can be demonstrated to the City that the floor plan is designed to preclude the seating area from being expanded. Goods and services offered include, but are not limited to: convenience retail uses.


19.10.467 Retail marijuana outlet

 – A location licensed by the State Liquor Control Board for the retail sale of usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]


19.10.470 Right-of-way

 – Land dedicated primarily to the movement of vehicles and providing for primary access to adjacent lots. The land may also provide space for pedestrian movement, utility lines and appurtenances and other publicly owned devices.


19.10.472 Riparian habitat

 – Areas adjacent to aquatic systems with flowing water that contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems that mutually influence each other. The width of these areas extends to that portion of the terrestrial landscape that directly influences the aquatic ecosystem by providing shade, fine or large woody material, nutrients, organic and inorganic debris, terrestrial insects, or habitat for riparian-associated wildlife. Widths shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified. It includes the entire extent of the floodplain and the extent of vegetation adapted to wet conditions as well as adjacent upland plant communities that directly influence the stream system. Riparian habitat areas include those riparian areas severely altered or damaged due to human development activities. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

S


19.10.474 Salmonid

 – A member of the fish family salmonidae, including:

1. Chinook, coho, chum, sockeye and pink salmon;

2. Rainbow, steelhead and cutthroat salmon;

3. Brown trout;

4. Brook and dolly varden char;

5. Kokanee; and

6. Whitefish. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.474.5 Scale (architectural)

 – Means the perceived relative height and bulk of a building relative to that of neighboring buildings. A building’s apparent height and bulk may be reduced by modulating facades. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.475 School

 – An institution of learning, public or private, offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the state of Washington, such as preschools, elementary, middle/junior high, and secondary or high schools; also including schools of higher education such as colleges, vocational, and technical schools. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.10.477 Screen/screening

 – The treatment created with landscaping and/or a decorative two-dimensional structure to visually conceal an area or on-site utilitarian use that is considered unattractive. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.10.479 Secure community transition facility

 – A residential facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative under RCW 71.09. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security, and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facilities established pursuant to RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under RCW 71.09 and operated by or under contract with the Washington State Dept. of Social and Health Services. [Ord. 363 § 1, 2002]


19.10.480 Seismic hazard areas

 – Lands subject to severe risk of earthquake damage as a result of seismically induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement or soil liquefaction. These conditions occur in areas underlain by soft or loose soils.


19.10.485 Setback

 – The area on a lot that is required to remain free of structures.

1. Front setback: That portion of a lot adjacent to and parallel with any front property lines and at a distance therefrom equal to the required minimum front setback depth.

2. Interior setback: That portion of a lot adjacent to and parallel with any interior property lines and at a distance therefrom equal to the required minimum interior setback depth.


19.10.490 Self service storage facility

 – An establishment containing separate storage spaces that are leased or rented as individual units.


19.10.492 Shorelines of the State

 – The total of all “shorelines” as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(d), and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the state, as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)c. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.493 Significant tree

 – An existing healthy tree which, when measured four feet above grade, has a minimum diameter of six (6) inches. A Heritage tree shall be considered to be a significant tree. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.10.495 Site

 – The entire lot or series of adjoining lots on which a use is or will locate and that is otherwise subject to the provision of this Code.


19.10.500 Site improvements

 – Improvements on a site that are required so that the use on the site complies with the provisions of this Code. Site improvements include, but are not limited to landscaping, parking, signs, design features, impervious surface coverage, multi-family recreation space and other open spaces on the site.


19.10.505 Slope

 – An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio or percentage of vertical distance to horizontal distance by the following formula:

	vertical distance	x 100 = % Slope

	horizontal distance	 

[Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]


19.10.506 Small Wireless Facility

 – “Small wireless facility” is as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6002 (as proposed). [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


19.10.507 Small Wireless Network

 – A collection of interrelated small wireless facilities designed to deliver personal wireless services. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


19.10.510 Social card game

 – A card game governed pursuant to the provisions of RCW 9.46, 1973 Gaming Act and licensing by the Washington State Gambling Commission, whose purpose is to serve as a commercial stimulant to a use where food and beverages are served on the premises. Social card games may include house-banked or player-funded card games.


19.10.511 Species

 – Any group of animals or vegetation classified as a species or subspecies as commonly accepted by the scientific community.

1. Endangered – Any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed by the state or federal government as an endangered species.

2. Sensitive – Any fish or wildlife species that is vulnerable or declining and could become endangered or threatened in the state without active management or removal of threats.

3. Threatened – Any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats, and is listed by the state or federal government as a threatened species. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.512 Specified anatomical areas

 

1. Less than completely and/or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely or opaquely covered. [Ord. 291 § 6, 2000]


19.10.513 Specified sexual activities

 – Human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or erotic fondling, touching or display of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. [Ord. 291 § 7, 2000]


19.10.515 Steep slope

 – Slopes 40 percent or steeper within a vertical elevation change of at least 10 feet. A steep slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and is measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief. For the purpose of this definition:

1. The toe of a slope is a distinct topographic break in slope which separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes 40 percent or steeper. Where no distinct break exists, the toe of a steep slope is the lowermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet; and

2. The top of a slope is a distinct, topographic break in slope which separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes 40 percent or steeper. Where no distinct break exists, the top of a steep slope is the uppermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet.


19.10.516 Storefront

 – Means the front side of a store facing the street and including windows. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]


19.10.517 Stream

 – Water contained within a channel, either perennial or intermittent, and classified according to WAC 222-16-030 or WAC 222-16-031 and as listed under “water typing system.” Streams also include natural watercourses modified by man. Streams do not include irrigation ditches, waste ways, drains, outfalls, operational spillways, channels, storm water runoff facilities or other wholly artificial watercourses, except those that directly result from the modification to a natural watercourse. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.518 Stream, Intermittent

 – Any non-permanent flowing drainage feature having a definable channel and evidence of scour or deposition. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.519 Stream, Perennial

 – A stream that carries flowing water continuously throughout the year regardless of weather conditions. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.520 Street

 – A public right-of-way.


19.10.525 Structure

 – Anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water; excluding fences less than six feet in height, decks less than 18 inches above grade, bioretention facilities with wall height less than four feet from the top of footing to the top of the wall, and paved areas. “Structure” as used in Chapter 19.50 BMC shall mean a pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of personal wireless service (whether on its own or commingled with other types of services). [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 659 § 6, 2016]


19.10.529 Sub-drainage basin

 – The drainage area of the highest order stream containing the subject property impact area. Stream order is the term used to define the position of a stream in the hierarchy of tributaries in the watershed. The smallest streams are the highest order (first order) tributaries. These are the upper watershed streams and have no tributaries of their own. When two first order streams meet, they form a second order stream, and when two second order streams meet they become a third order stream, and so on. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.530 Submerged land

 – Any land at or below the ordinary high water mark.


19.10.535 Substantial improvement

 – Any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition or other improvement of a site, the cost of which within any 60 month period, equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the buildings on the site, either before the maintenance, repair, modification or addition is started or before the damage occurred, if the building has been damaged and is being restored.


19.10.537 Support structure

 – Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. [Ord. 265 § 25, 1999]

T


19.10.539 Tiny house

 – A single dwelling unit that is 400 square feet or less, and incorporates a kitchen and bathroom uses within the structure, and as defined in the 2018 International Residential Code or its successor. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.10.540 Theater

 – A building or portion of a building designed and/or used for showing motion pictures, video presentations, or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances.


19.10.543 Topographic map

 – A survey of elevations, prepared with minimum five-foot contours. All planned grading shall be indicated with dashed contour lines for existing or natural grades and by solid contour lines for finished grades. The entire area to be cut and/or filled shall be indicated and temporary storage of any excavated or fill material shall also be indicated. All survey information shall be furnished, at the property owner or applicant’s expense, by a professional land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. In cases where, at a required point of measurement, the topography lines and building footprint do not intersect, spot elevations for the natural grade shall be indicated on the topography map. A bench mark shall be noted on all information supplied for the purpose of establishing a field reference. The bench mark shall, where practical, be located on city property. The bench mark shall be maintained at all times before and during construction. The presence of this bench mark shall be confirmed by the building official, or his/her designee before the natural topography is disturbed. Removal or disruption of the bench mark shall be grounds for a stop work order until the bench mark is properly reestablished. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.10.545 Trail

 – All public property designated as a trail including: the Indian Trail located in the Plats of Secoma Beach Subdivision Nos. 1, 2 and 3, as recorded in Volume 15, pages 70 and 94, and Volume 16, page 25, book of plats; all public accesses to, from and across the Indian Trail shall be considered as part of the Indian Trail System, including public rights-of-way from existing or future roadway to the Trail and public rights-of-way from the Trail to the waterfront, which are not designated as street; and any future identified or developed trail included in the Comprehensive Parks Plan for the City of Burien.


19.10.545.5 Type F Water

 – Type F Water means segments of natural waters other than Type S Waters, which are within the bankfull widths of defined channels and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of 0.5 acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat or are described by one of the following four categories:

(a) Waters, which are diverted for domestic use by more than 10 residential or camping units or by a public accommodation facility licensed to serve more than 10 persons, where such diversion is determined by the department to be a valid appropriation of water and the only practical water source for such users. Such waters shall be considered to be Type F Water upstream from the point of such diversion for 1,500 feet or until the drainage area is reduced by 50 percent, whichever is less;

(b) Waters, which are diverted for use by federal, state, tribal or private fish hatcheries. Such waters shall be considered Type F Water upstream from the point of diversion for 1,500 feet, including tributaries if highly significant for protection of downstream water quality. The department may allow additional harvest beyond the requirements of Type F Water designation provided the department determines after a landowner-requested on-site assessment by the department of fish and wildlife, department of ecology, the affected tribes and interested parties that:

(i) The management practices proposed by the landowner will adequately protect water quality for the fish hatchery; and

(ii) Such additional harvest meets the requirements of the water type designation that would apply in the absence of the hatchery;

(c) Waters, which are within a federal, state, local, or private campground having more than 10 camping units: Provided, That the water shall not be considered to enter a campground until it reaches the boundary of the park lands available for public use and comes within 100 feet of a camping unit, trail or other park improvement;

(d) Riverine ponds, wall-based channels, and other channel features that are used by fish for off-channel habitat. These areas are critical to the maintenance of optimum survival of fish. This habitat shall be identified based on the following criteria:

(i) The site must be connected to a fish habitat stream and accessible during some period of the year; and

(ii) The off-channel water must be accessible to fish. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.10.546 Type Np Water

 – Type Np Water means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial nonfish habitat streams. Perennial streams are flowing waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall and include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.10.546.3 Type Ns Water

 – Type Ns Water means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of the defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np Waters. These are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np Water. Ns Waters must be physically connected by an above-ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np Waters. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.10.546.5 Type S Water

 – Type S Water means all waters, within their bankfull width, as inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under Chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW including periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]

U


19.10.547 Ultimate roadway section

 – A designation by the city of Burien that the maximum roadway or intersection capacity has been reached and further right-of-way acquisition and/or improvements are not feasible to increase peak hour vehicle capacity. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.548 Unified Enclosure

 – A small wireless facility providing concealment of antennas and equipment within a single enclosure. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


19.10.549 Usable marijuana

 – Dried marijuana flowers. The term “usable marijuana” does not include marijuana-infused products. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]




19.10.550 Use

 – The nature of the activities taking place on public or private property. Each separate listing under the “Use” column in Chapter 19.15 BMC is a separate use. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

V


19.10.555 Vehicular access easement or tract

 – A privately owned right-of-way.


19.10.557 Vegetation

 – Any and all plant life growing at, below or above the soil surface. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(40), 1993]


19.10.560 Vendor cart

 – An accessory use consisting of a portable stand and any related accessory appurtenances such as an awning, canopy or seating, used for the retail sales of goods including but not limited to beverages, food and flowers.


19.10.562 Vernacular

 – A building or complex of buildings that relate to, or are characteristic of a period, place or group; especially relating to or being the common building style of a period or place. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

W


19.10.565 Warehousing and wholesale trade

 – Establishments involved in the storage and/or sale of bulk goods for resale or assembly, excluding establishments offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public which is classified as a retail use.


19.10.570 Water table

 – The upper limit of the groundwater body marking the boundary between the saturated zone, where soil and rock is completely saturated with water, and the unsaturated zone. It is defined by the levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the aquifer just far enough to hold standing water. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.575 Wellhead protection areas

 – Wellhead protection areas may be defined by the boundaries of the ten (10) year time of groundwater travel, or boundaries established using alternate criteria approved by the Department of Health in those settings where groundwater time of travel is not a reasonable delineation criterion, in accordance with WAC 246-290-135. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.580 Wetlands

 – Wetlands are defined as those areas that are inundated or saturated, by ground or surface water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. For identifying and delineating a wetland, local government shall use the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.585 Wetlands, associated

 – Wetlands that are in proximity to and either influence or are influenced by tidal waters or a lake or stream subject to the Shoreline Management Act (WAC 173-22-030). [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.590 Wetland classes, classes of wetlands, or wetland types

 – The descriptive classes of wetland habitat types outlined in the classification system of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cowardin et al. 1979). These include, among others, the following: palustrine forested, palustrine scrub-shrub, and palustrine emergent, and open water. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.595 Wetland edge

 – The boundary of a wetland as delineated based on the methods outlined in Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.10.600 Wildlife habitat

 – The place, including physical and biological conditions, where an animal usually occurs. This includes areas for breeding, foraging, resting, and cover. [Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


Chapter 19.15 USE ZONE CHARTS Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.15.001    User Guide.

19.15.005    Single-Family Residential Zones. Revised 7/20

19.15.005.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.010    Multi-Family Residential Zones. Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.15.010.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.015    Neighborhood Center Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.015.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.020    Intersection Commercial Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.020.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.025    Downtown Commercial Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.025.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.030    Professional Residential Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.030.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.035    Community Commercial Zones. Revised 7/20

19.15.035.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.040    Regional Commercial Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.040.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.045    Office Zone. Revised 7/20

19.15.045.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.050    Industrial Zone.

19.15.050.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.055    Special Planning Area 1: Old Burien. Revised 7/20

19.15.055.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.060    Special Planning Area 2: Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center. Revised 7/20

19.15.060.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.065    Special Planning Area 3: Gateway. Revised 7/20

19.15.065.1    Special Regulations.

19.15.070    Airport Industrial Zones.

19.15.070.1    Special Regulations.

    

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.001 User Guide.

The charts in this Chapter contain the basic zoning regulations that apply in each zone within the City of Burien. Use these charts by reading the first page in each section, which provides general regulations that apply to all uses in that zone. Then, on the following pages of each zone, read down the left column entitled “use”. Once you locate the use in which you are interested, read across to find the regulations that apply to that use. In addition, if the top of each column contains a reference to another Zoning Code section or chapter, you should read that section or chapter to determine which additional regulations pertain to your use. The symbol “#” indicates that applicable regulations are in the Interim Zoning Code. Finally, reading Chapter 19.05 of this Code will help you find other regulations that may apply to your property or use. The sample chart below describes the regulations that are contained in each column. Italicized words are defined in Chapter 19.10.

 

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations

(See also Chapter 19.17, Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	This column contains all of the uses that may locate in this zone. If a use is not listed, it is not allowed in this zone. Each use listed is subject to all of the regulations listed in the columns to the right of that use.	This column lists the special review processes that the City will use to approve or disapprove each listed use. If no process is listed, no formal land use review process is required. In any event, a building or other permit may be required by the Building Official. See Chapter 19.65 of this Code for details on special review processes.	This column lists the minimum required lot area for each listed use. 	These columns list the minimum required setbacks for each use. Chapter 19.17 of this Code establishes what structures, improvements, and activities may or may not take place in these required setbacks.	This column lists the maximum amount of building coverage allowed for each use. Chapter 19.17 of this Code establishes what structures, and improvements may or may not be counted as building coverage.	This column lists the maximum amount of impervious surface coverage allowed for each use. Chapter 19.17 of this Code establishes what structures and improvements may or may not be counted as impervious surface.	This column lists the maximum height of structures allowed for each use.	This column lists the landscaping category for each use. See Chapter 19.25 of this Code for details on landscaping requirements.	This column lists the parking requirement for each use. For some uses, a specific number of stalls is not listed and a reference is given to a specific section in the parking chapter that states that the City will determine the parking requirement on a case-by-case basis.	This column contains any special regulations, standards or decisional criteria that may apply to each use.

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.005 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: These zones implement the Low Density Residential Neighborhood and Moderate Density Residential Neighborhood Comprehensive Plan designations. The purpose of these zones is to establish areas in which a wide range of single-family housing opportunities can be provided, while preserving the character of the surrounding neighborhood and protecting environmentally sensitive areas. The intent is to provide a variety of attractive, well-designed housing choices that meet the needs of existing and future City residents.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE RS ZONES, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.005.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Repealed, Ord. 529, 2009

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.005.1 and Chapter 19.17, Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	19.15.005.2

Single Detached Dwelling Unit (2)	None	See Spec. Regs. 1, 2 & 3	20’	5’	RS-A zone: 20%

All other RS zones: 35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70%	35’	A	2 spaces per unit	1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is:

a. 1 acre in the RS-A zone.

b. 12,000 s.f. in the RS-12,000 zone.

c. 7,200 s.f. in the RS-7,200 zone.

2. One single detached dwelling unit may be built on a lot that has less than the stated minimum lot area.

3. No lot shall be created less than the minimum lot area except through the application of lot averaging. Lot averaging is permitted through a short plat, subdivision or lot line adjustment. However, no lot shall be created with an area less than 90 percent of the stated minimum lot area. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

4. Chapter 19.17 contains regulations regarding home occupations, and other accessory uses, facilities and activities associated with this use.

	19.15.005.3

Family Day Care Home I and II

Day Care Center	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II and Day Care Center: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

3. Day Care Center: Allowed only within a religious facility or school.

	19.15.005.4

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 4 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None. See Spec. Reg. 1	30’ See Spec. Reg. 3	30’ See Spec Reg. 3	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Marinas only allowed on public property in excess of two acres.

2. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from dwelling units.

3. Structures shall maintain a 50-foot setback from adjoining lots containing single detached dwelling units. The Director may allow structures such as playground equipment, ball field backstops and tennis court fences closer than 50 feet if compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and traffic safety considerations.

4. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.005.5

Cemetery	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Columbarium or mausoleum structures must be setback 100 feet minimum from property lines adjoining residential zones.

	19.15.005.6

Community Residential Facility – I(2)	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	See Spec. Reg. 1	20’	5’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	B	1 space for every 2 bedrooms	1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is:

a. 1 acre in the RS-A zone.

b. 12,000 s.f. in the RS-12,000 zone.

c. 7,200 s.f. in the RS-7,200 zone.

	19.15.005.7

Golf Course	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’ See Spec. Reg. 1	30’ See Spec Reg. 1	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	3 spaces per hole, plus 3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of clubhouse facilities	1. Structures, driving ranges and lighted areas shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

	(2) Amended, Ord. 269, 1999

	19.15.005.8

Hatchery/Fish Preserve	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. This use may be further subject to the provisions of KCC Title 25, Shoreline Management Program.

	19.15.005.9

Religious Facility	Type 2	None	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Accessory use shall comply with the requirements for that use listed in this use zone chart (BMC 19.15.005).

	19.15.005.10

School	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.005.11

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit(2)	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	See Spec. Reg. 1	20’	5’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	B	0.5 spaces per unit	1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is:

a. 1 acre in the RS-A zone.

b. 12,000 s.f. in the RS-12,000 zone.

c. 7,200 s.f. in the RS-7,200 zone.

2. Conversion to another use is allowed, provided that all requirements for the new use are met, including density limitations.

	19.15.005.12

Essential Public Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 3 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.005.13

Community, Cultural or Government Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	See Spec. Reg. 1	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Minimum lot area for a public agency training facility is 35 acres.

	19.15.005.14

Public Utility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70% [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	20’ See Spec. Reg. 1	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. The City Council may approve height no greater than 35 feet if the applicant shows that no feasible alternative is available.

2. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.005.15

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50

	19.15.005.16

Community Garden(2)	None	None	20’	5’	15%	25%	12’	A	See. Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.005.17

Enhanced Services Facilities(3)	Type 1	See Spec. Reg. 1	20’	5’	35%	RS-A zone: 20%

RS-12,000 zone: 45%

RS-7,200 zone: 70%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Minimum lot area per ESF is:

a. 12,000 s.f. in the RS-A and RS-12,000 zones.

b. 7,200 s.f. in the RS-7,200 zone.

2. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000.



 

 

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.010 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20 Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: These zones implement the Low and High Density Multifamily Neighborhood Comprehensive Plan designations. The purpose of these zones is to establish areas in which a wide range of single-family and multi-family housing opportunities can be provided, which are compatible with adjacent lower density single-family housing and which protect environmentally sensitive areas. The intent is to provide a variety of stable and attractive, well-designed housing choices that are located near transit, employment, shopping and recreational facilities, and meet the needs of existing and future City residents. Redevelopment of existing housing complexes is encouraged.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE RM ZONES, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.010.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Repealed, Ord. 529, 2009

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.010.1 and Chapter 19.17, Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.010.2

Townhouse Dwelling Unit	Type 1	See Spec. Reg. 1	10'	See Spec Reg. 3	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zone: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'

RM-48 zone: 60' See Spec Reg. 6 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	B	2.0 spaces per unit	1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is:

a. 3,600 square feet in the RM-12 zone.

b. 2,400 square feet in the RM-18 zone.

c. 1,800 square feet in the RM-24 zone.

d. 900 square feet in the RM-48 zone. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

2. Each dwelling unit must be located on its own lot.

3. Minimum interior setback is 5 feet, except interior setback between townhouses may be reduced to zero feet.

4. Chapter 19.17 contains regulations regarding home occupations, and other accessory uses, facilities and activities associated with this use.

5. No lot shall be created less than the minimum lot area except through the application of lot averaging. Lot averaging is permitted through a short plat, subdivision or lot line adjustment. However, no lot shall be created with an area less than 90 percent of the stated minimum lot area. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

6. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75'. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.3

Apartment Dwelling Unit	Type 1 [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]	5,000 s.f. See Spec. Reg. 1	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zone: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'

RM-48 zone: 60'

See Spec Reg. 3 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	B	1.8 spaces per unit	1. Maximum density per dwelling unit is:

a. 12 units per acre in the RM-12 zone.

b. 18 units per acre in the RM-18 zone.

c. 24 units per acre in the RM-24 zone.

d. 48 units per acre in the RM-48 zone. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

2. Chapter 19.17 contains regulations regarding home occupations, and other accessory uses, facilities and activities associated with this use.

3. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.4(3)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	19.15.010.5

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.010.6

Day Care Center	None	5,000 s.f.	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zone: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.010.7

Mixed Use	Type 1	5,000 s.f.	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zone: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35' See Spec. Reg. 5

RM-48 zone: 60' See Spec Reg. 6 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Mixed use is allowed only in RM-24 and RM-48 zones.

2. The proposed development must fit in with the character of the surrounding residential neighborhood.

3. No more than 50% of the gross floor area of the structure shall be devoted to office uses. Retail uses, banks, loan companies and similar financial institutions are not permitted.

4. Maximum residential density is 24 dwelling units per acre in the RM-24 zone and 48 dwelling units per acre in the RM-48 zone.

5. Height may be increased to 60 feet, if:

a. At least 25% of the required parking is under or within a building and is fully screened from public view; and

b. The landscape type in the prescribed category is increased by one type (for example, Type III is increased to Type II). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

6. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.8

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 3 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	30' See Spec. Reg. 2	30' See Spec. Reg. 2	60%	85%	35'	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from dwelling units.

2. Structures shall maintain a 50-foot setback from adjoining lots containing single detached dwelling units. The Director may allow structures such as playground equipment, ball field backstops and tennis court fences closer than 50' if compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and traffic safety considerations.

3. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.010.9

Community Residential Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	5,000 s.f.	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zones: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'

RM-48 zone: 60' See Spec. Reg.1 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	B	1 space for every 2 bedrooms	1. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.10

Nursing Home	Type 2	5,000 s.f.	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zones: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'

RM-48 zone: 60' See Spec. Reg.1 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	B	1 space for every 4 beds	1. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.11

Religious Facility	Type 2	5,000 s.f.	30'	30'	60%	85%	35'	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.010.12

School	Type 2	5,000 s.f.	30'	30'	60%	85%	35'	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.010.13

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit	Type 2	5,000 s.f. See Spec. Reg. 1	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zones: 70% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	85%

RM-48 zone: 90% [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	35'

RM-48 zone: 60'

See Spec. Reg. 3 [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	B	0.5 spaces per unit	1. Maximum density per dwelling unit is:

a. 12 units per acre in the RM-12 zone.

b. 18 units per acre in the RM-18 zone.

c. 24 units per acre in the RM-24 zone.

d. 48 units per acre in the RM-48 zone.

Additional density may be allowed in the RM-24 and RM-48 zones if appropriate for the site and if zoning code requirements are met without the need for variances or administrative adjustments. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

2. Chapter 19.17 contains regulations regarding home occupations, and other accessory uses, facilities and activities associated with this use.

3. In the RM-48 zone this height limit may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of front and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]

	19.15.010.14

Essential Public Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 3 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.010.15

Community, Cultural or Government Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	5,000 s.f.	30'	30'	60%	85%	35'	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.010.16

Public Utility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30'	30'	60%	85%	35'	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.010.17

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.010.18

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10'	5'	15%	25%	12'	A	See. Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.010.19

Enhanced Services Facilities(4)	Type 1	5,000 s.f.	10'	5'	RM-12 & RM-18 zones: 60%

RM-24 & RM-48 zones: 70%	85%

RM-48 zone: 90%	35'

RM-48 zone: 60'

See Spec. Reg. 3 	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Repealed, Ord. 724, 2019

(4) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

NOTE: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000.



 

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.015 NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Neighborhood Center (CN) zone implements the Neighborhood Center Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish relatively small areas to provide convenience goods and services to meet the everyday needs of the surrounding residential neighborhoods, while protecting neighborhood character. The intent is to provide for limited retail stores, services, offices and mixed use buildings that serve the immediate neighborhood (as well as other markets or service areas), located in neighborhood focal points which are designed to encourage pedestrian and transit access, be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods, and be consistent with road and utility capacity.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE CN ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.015.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Maximum gross floor area per building is 4,000 s.f. Up to 8,000 s.f. may be approved through a Type 1 review process. Greater than 8,000 s.f may be approved through a Type 2 review process.

B. Front setback shall be 10 feet. Greater or lesser setback shall be reviewed through a Type 1 process. The area between the building and the front property line shall be used for pedestrian-oriented features, such as outdoor displays, benches, tables, gardens or similar features. The main pedestrian access shall be located in the front of the building with direct access onto a sidewalk. Buildings may be setback greater than 10 feet from the front property line if the area between the front property line and building is used for pedestrian-oriented features, or, if the area is an alcove in front of the pedestrian entrance. Buildings may be setback less than 10 feet if building wall design and finishes relate to the pedestrian scale (i.e., use of color, texture, windows), and pedestrian needs are otherwise accommodated.

C. The following are not permitted: Auto repair, convenience auto service, auto sales, pawn shop, veterinarian, and drive-through facilities.

D. Site design shall include at least one pedestrian amenity for each 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area or portion thereof. The amenity shall be approved by the Director, shall be located in an area accessible to pedestrians, and shall not be located on a sidewalk in the public right-of-way, unless approved through a Type 1 review. The following are examples of possible pedestrian amenities: awning over public sidewalk; bench; outdoor table and chairs for minimum of four people.

E. Outdoor storage is limited to accessory storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

F. Parking and loading areas shall not be located between the building and the right-of-way.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.015.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.015.2:

Convenience Retail

Office

Eating & Drinking Establishment	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	1.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. May be reduced to 1 space per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area if on-street parking is available.

Eating & Drinking Establishment: 7 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. May be reduced to 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area if on-street parking is available. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	 

	19.15.015.3

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.015.4:

Day Care Center	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Day Care Center: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.015.5:

Mixed Use

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit

Community Residential Facility	Type 1	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Mixed use not allowed in CN zone located on Maplewild Avenue SW.

2. Shall provide retail convenience, office, or eating & drinking establishment uses on floor adjacent to public street, or if property does not abut a public street, on floor adjacent to parking lot. Eating & drinking establishment may be located on any floor.

3. Maximum residential density is 12 dwelling units per acre.

4. Senior citizen assisted dwelling unit or community residential facility only allowed as part of a mixed use project.

	19.15.015.6

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 3 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	10’ See Spec. Reg. 2	0’ See Spec. Reg. 2	60%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from dwelling units.

2. Structures shall maintain a 50-foot setback from adjoining lots containing single detached dwelling units. The Director may allow structures such as playground equipment, ball field backstops and tennis court fences closer than 50’ if compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and traffic safety considerations.

3. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.015.7:

Community, Cultural, Religious or Government Facility [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	10’	0’	60%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.015.8:

Public Utility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	60%	85%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.015.9:

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.015.10

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.015.11

Marijuana retailers(3)	Type 1	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.015.12

Enhanced Services Facilities(4)	Type 1	None	10’	0’	 70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000





 

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.020 INTERSECTION COMMERCIAL ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Intersection Commercial (IC) zone implements the Intersection Commercial Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish areas (in otherwise residential areas) for low to moderate intensity convenience commercial uses to serve customers travelling to and from their nearby homes. The intent is to provide a diverse mix of uses which serve multiple residential areas, designed to encourage pedestrian and transit access, be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods, and be consistent with road and utility capacity.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE CI ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE INTERSECTION COMMERCIAL ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.020.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Primary vehicular access shall be from an arterial street.

B. The property owner shall record access easements and shared parking agreements between the site and abutting CI-zoned properties. This regulation applies whenever there is a change in tenant or a substantial improvement on a lot. This regulation may be waived or modified through a Type 1 review, if complying with the requirement is infeasible or an alternative solution would better meet the goals of providing shared access and parking.

C. Repealed, Ord. 529, 2009

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.020.1 and Chapter 19.17, Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.020.2

Convenience Retail

Office

Eating and Drinking Establishment

Convenience Auto Service	See Spec. Reg. 1	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area

Eating and Drinking Establishment-13 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of dining or lounge area. [Ord. 313 § 1, 2000]	1. Maximum gross floor area per building is 5,000 s.f. Up to 10,000 s.f. may be approved through a Type 1 review process. Greater than 10,000 s.f may be approved through a Type 2 review process.

2. The following are not permitted: auto sales, pawn shop and veterinarian.

3. Outdoor use and storage is limited to accessory display and/or storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor use and storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

4. Auto service activities shall occur inside a building.

	19.15.020.3

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.020.4

Day Care Center	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.020.5

Mixed Use

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit

Community Residential Facility	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	45’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall provide convenience retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses on the floor adjacent to a street, or if the site does not abut a street, on floor adjacent to parking lot. Eating and drinking establishment is permitted on any floor.

2. Maximum residential density shall not exceed the highest density allowed by the zoning of an abutting residentially zoned lot. If more than one residentially zoned lot abuts the subject lot, the highest residential zoning density may be used to calculate the maximum residential density. In cases where there is no residentially zoned lot abutting the subject lot, the maximum allowed residential density shall be established by the zoning of the closest residentially zoned lot. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

3. The following are not permitted: auto repair shop, auto sales, convenience auto service, drive-through facilities, pawn shop, or veterinarian.

4. Outdoor use and storage is limited to accessory display and/or storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor use and storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

5. Senior citizen assisted dwelling unit or community residential facility only allowed as part of a mixed use project.

6. At least 25% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.020.6

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 3 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	10’ See Spec. Reg. 2	0’ See Spec. Reg. 2	60%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

2. Structures shall maintain a 50-foot setback from adjoining lots zoned RS. The Director may allow structures such as playground equipment, ball field backstops and tennis court fences closer than 50’ if compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and traffic safety considerations.

3. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.020.7

Community, Cultural, Religious or Government Facility [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	10’	0’	60%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.020.8

Public Utility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	60%	85%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.020.9

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.020.10

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.020.11

Marijuana Retailers(3)	Type 1	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.020.12

Enhanced Services Facilities(4)	None	None	10’	0’	 70%	85%	45’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(4) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000





 

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.025 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Downtown Commercial (DC) zone implements the Downtown Commercial Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of the DC zone is to foster a vibrant, compact, pedestrian oriented area by allowing high density residential development in combination with office, retail and commercial uses, government activities, and restaurants, entertainment and cultural uses. Mixed use developments are encouraged, including well-designed townhouses and condominiums, providing a convenient living environment and making downtown a community focal point and center, as well as a lively place in the evening and on the weekends. Residential densities re limited only by physical constraints such as height, bulk, parking and infrastructure capacities. Moderate to high rise buildings, pedestrian amenities and facilities that help define downtown Burien’s distinctive qualities are encouraged.

The community’s vision for downtown is an attractive, clean, safe and vibrant place that is welcoming to people of all ages. A friendly place where you can walk between the good mix of shops. Downtown will have a special look, created by a cohesive physical theme and design guidelines that emphasize quality, permanence, individuality and uniqueness within the overall urban fabric. Overall, downtown Burien will be a destination-the comfortable and welcoming, fun and lively heart of a great small town.

To help achieve these goals, desired uses and public amenities are achieved through a public benefit incentive program. This program allows increased building height and bulk in exchange for the provision of streetscape improvements, design elements, civic contributions and provision of land uses that are highly desired by the community.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE DC ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.025.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Outdoor use and storage is limited to accessory storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. All outdoor storage must be located to the side or the rear of buildings, and may not exceed 200 square feet in size.

B. Distribution, wholesaling, or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

C. Drive-through facilities are prohibited adjacent to Class A Pedestrian-Oriented Streets. This prohibition does not apply to drive-through banks.

D. Temporary seasonal uses (such as Christmas tree lots or farmers markets) and community festivals may be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.

E. All utilities on-site shall be located underground. Undergrounding of utilities in public rights-of-way or alleys is encouraged through the Public Benefit Incentive System (BMC 19.15.025.1.J).

F. MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT: Maximum building heights in the DC zone shown on Figure 19.15.025-1. The first number listed is the base building height. The second number listed is the maximum allowable building height that can only be achieved by using the Public Benefit Incentive System in Section 19.15.025.1.J below. In the 5-8 story height area, the City Council may increase the height limit on a case-by-case basis to 12 stories through a Type 3 review. The maximum allowable building height may be increased by no more than 10 percent or 15 feet, whichever is greater, if the applicant demonstrates that the increase in necessary for reasonable development of the building and will be used to provide interesting roof forms such as pitched or sloped elements, pyramidal, spire or dome shapes, cupolas, or other such decorative architectural features.

G. MAXIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA: The maximum gross floor area allowed on a site is determined by multiplying the lot area of the site (prior to any required right-of-way dedication) by the first number in the floor area ratio (FAR). The base FAR is 3.5:1. Using the Public Benefit Incentive System in Section 19.15.025.1.J below, the maximum gross floor area allowed on a site can be increased up to an FAR of 7:1. For the purposes of this section, gross floor area does not include any area designed and used for parking.

H. DESIGN GUIDELINES: See BMC 19.47 for downtown design standards and BMC 19.65.105 for information on the Administrative Design Review process.

I. On-site pedestrian pathways and amenities and pedestrian-oriented space do not count toward the maximum allowable impervious surface coverage.

J. PUBLIC BENEFIT INCENTIVE SYSTEM: A building may exceed the gross floor area and/or building height limits as allowed in Sections 19.15.025.1.F and G above, only if the requirements of this section are met.

i. After a project uses the maximum area of public benefit feature eligible for bonus, additional bonus floor area for that public benefit will not be awarded.

ii. The applicant shall dedicate right-of-way to the City (if additional right-of-way is needed, based on an adopted City street or right-of-way plan) in order to participate in the Public Benefit Incentive System. Dedication of right-of-way is eligible for bonus floor area as described in Table 19.15.025.1.

The Director may approve any public benefit feature not listed in Table 19.15.025.1 if a public benefit will be derived from development of the proposed public benefit feature in the proposed location.

 

Table 19.15.025.1 

	PUBLIC BENEFIT FEATURE	BONUS GROSS FLOOR AREA PER UNIT OF PUBLIC BENEFIT FEATURE	MAXIMUM BONUS GROSS FLOOR AREA ALLOWED PER PUBLIC BENEFIT FEATURE

	1. Streetscape

	1 sq.ft. of right-of-way dedication	5 square feet	No limit

	1 linear foot to underground utilities within public right-of-way or alley	5 square feet	No limit

	2. Design Elements

	1 sq.ft. of underground parking	5 square feet	No limit

	1 sq. ft. of well-designed above-ground parking structure	2.5 square foot	No limit

	1 sq.ft. of shared parking (for other sites)	0.5 square feet	No limit

	Unique Architectural Design1	10% of site area	10% of site area

	1 sq.ft. of Rooftop Garden	2 square feet	No limit

	1 sq. ft. of rooftop beautification	2 square feet	No limit

	3. Civic Contributions

	1 sq.ft. of public parking area	0.5 square feet	15,000 square feet

	1 sq. ft. of public meeting/conference facilities	1 square foot	No limit

	Each $1,000 spent on public art	100 square feet	No limit

	4. Uses

	1 sq.ft. restaurant (not fast-food or take-out)	1 square foot	No limit

	1 sq.ft. rooftop or top floor restaurant (not fast-food or take-out)	4 square feet	No limit

	1 sq.ft. market rate or higher dwelling unit	2 square feet	No limit

	1 sq.ft. condominium dwelling unit4	2 square feet	No limit

	1 sq.ft. of day-care facilities	6 square feet	2,000 square feet

	1 sq.ft. of public restroom	4 square feet	1,000 square feet

	1 sq.ft. of public open space	4 square feet	No limit

	1 sq. ft. of retail use on ground floor	2 square feet	No limit

	1 sq.ft. of theater or performing arts venue	5 square feet	No limit

	Transfer of development rights	To be determined	To be determined

1 Director determination.

2 Areas devoted to service cores and community facilities may be used to obtain bonus floor area. No area devoted to parking or circulation may be used for this purpose.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.030.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.025.2

Mixed Use	None	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. Must have at least two uses listed in Sec. 19.15.025.

2. At least 75% of the gross floor area located at street level must be devoted to non-residential uses.

3. The following are not permitted: motor vehicle sales and rental; boat sales and rental; recycling center; pawn shops and self-service storage facility.

	19.15.025.3

Retail	None	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. The following are not permitted: motor vehicle sales and rental; boat sales and rental; recycling center; pawn shops and self-service storage facility.

2. Repair uses are permitted subject to the following conditions:

a) All activities shall be conducted indoors; and

b) Patrons wishing services must be able to carry item(s) in by hand (examples include watch, shoe, jewelry and small hand tool repair); and

c) The Director has the final determination on what constitutes small-scale repair uses consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone and all applicable comprehensive plan policies. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

	19.15.025.4

Dwelling Units	None	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Not permitted at street level abutting a Class A Pedestrian-Oriented Street.

2. All resident parking must be in structured parking (such as garages or under-building or underground parking). Carports are not considered structured parking.

3. Exterior hallways and corridors are not allowed.

	19.15.025.5

Community Facility

Cultural Facility

Eating and Drinking Establishment

Government Facility

Lodging Facility

Office

Private Club

Public Park and Recreation Facilities

Recreational Facility

School

Theater	None	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. Auto rental is permitted as an accessory use to a lodging facility. The maximum number of cars allowed is the lesser of 30 cars or 5% of the total number of parking spaces on the site. The rental desk must be inside the lodging facility building.

2. Repair uses are permitted subject to the following conditions:

a) All activities shall be conducted indoors; and

b) Patrons wishing services must be able to carry item(s) in by hand (examples include watch, shoe, jewelry and small hand tool repair); and

c) The Director has the final determination on what constitutes small-scale repair uses consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone and all applicable comprehensive plan policies. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

	19.15.025.6

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

3. Use of the Fee-In-Lieu of Parking Program in BMC 19.20.040.3.B is an option for this use.

	19.15.025.7

Day Care Center	None	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.025.8

Religious Facility [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]	None	None.	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	 

	19.15.025.9

Public Utility	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	35 feet	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.025.10

Essential Public Facility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]		1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.025.11

Personal Wireless Service Facility	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.025.12

Community Garden(1)	None	None	0’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B

[Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.025.13

Marijuana Retailers(2)	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.025.14

Enhanced Services Facilities(3)	None	None	0’	0’	 85%	95%	See Sec. 19.15.025.1.F	E	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(2) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000






[IMAGE]


 

	
[IMAGE]


 


19.15.030 PROFESSIONAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Professional Residential zone implements the Professional Residential Comprehensive Plan designation within the Northeast Redevelopment Area. The purpose and intent of this zone is to provide land use flexibility by allowing both single-family homes and small businesses in an area near but not directly under SeaTac International Airport’s third runway.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE PR ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE PR ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.030.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. GENERAL.

i. Hours of trash pickup should be restricted to reduce potential disturbance from noise.

ii. New and conversion of existing residential structures shall be architecturally consistent with the surrounding character of the neighborhood and include similarities in materials, color, roof pitch and detailing. The intent of this provision is for businesses to look like residential structures.

B. TRANSPORTATION MITIGATION. In addition to providing street improvements on adjacent streets pursuant to BMC 12.05, the City may require off-site improvements necessary to mitigate transportation impacts of the proposal as part of the Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for the Northeast Redevelopment Area dated November 23, 2009, SEPA planned action or other SEPA review under BMC Title 14. Transportation impact fees may also apply pursuant to BMC 19.35.

C. CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USES. In order to facilitate and encourage non-residential uses to reuse existing residential structures, the Director may modify landscaping and parking design requirements. The intent of this provision is to maintain the residential character of properties, reduce the amount of new paving and storm runoff, and provide landscaping and screening where it is most beneficial to buffer adjacent residential uses.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.030.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.030.1

Single Detached Dwelling Unit	None	7,200 s.f.	20’	5’	35%	70%	35’	A	2 spaces per unit	1. One single detached dwelling unit may be built on a lot that has less than the stated minimum lot area.

2. No lot shall be created less than the minimum lot area except through the application of lot averaging. Lot averaging is permitted through a short plat, subdivision or lot line adjustment. However, no lot shall be created with an area less than 90 percent of the stated minimum lot area.

3. Chapter 19.17 contains regulations regarding home occupations, and other accessory uses, facilities and activities associated with this use.

	19.15.030.2

Professional Office	None	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	 

	19.15.030.3

Art Studio	None	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. May include artists’ lofts at a maximum density of one dwelling unit per 7,200 s.f. of lot area.

	19.15.030.4

Convenience Retail

Eating and Drinking Establishments	None	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Convenience auto service uses are not permitted.

2. Outdoor activities related to eating and drinking establishments are only permitted between the hours of 7:00AM and 9:00PM.

3. Outdoor retail sales or storage are not permitted.

	19.15.030.5

Day Care Center	None	None	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Day Care Center: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.030.6

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.030.7

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None	None.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from dwelling units.

	19.15.030.8

Religious Facility	Type 2	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Accessory use shall comply with the requirements for that use listed in this use zone chart (BMC 19.15.030).

	19.15.030.9

Community Residential Facility	Type 2	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	B	1 space for every 2 bedrooms	 

	19.15.030.10

School	Type 2	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	 

	19.15.030.11

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit	Type 2	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	B	0.5 spaces per unit	1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is 7,200 s.f.

2. Conversion to another use is allowed, provided that all requirements for the new use are met, including density limitations.

	19.15.030.12

Essential Public Facility	Type 2	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.030.13

Community, Cultural or Government Facility	Type 2	None	20’	10’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	 

	19.15.030.14

Public Utility	Type 2	None	30’	30’	35%	70%	20’ See Spec. Reg. 1	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The Hearing Examiner may approve height no greater than 35 feet if the applicant shows that no feasible alternative is available.

2. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.030.15

Personal Wireless Service Facility	See Chapter 19.50

	19.15.030.16

Community Garden(1)	None	None	20’	5’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.030.17

Enhanced Services Facilities(2)	Type 1	7,200 s.f.	20’	10’	 70%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(2) Added, Ord. 734, 2020



 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.035 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONES Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Community Commercial (CC) zones implement the Community Commercial Comprehensive Plan designation. To recognize the differences in surrounding neighborhood character and intensity between the designated Community Commercial areas, two CC zones have been established: CC-1 and CC-2. The purpose of these zones is to establish areas for moderate intensity commercial uses that serve the community. The intent is to provide for a variety of goods and services in areas which are designed to encourage pedestrian and transit access, be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods, and be consistent with road and utility capacity. The CC-1 zone allows for lower-intensity uses in the Community Commercial-designated areas that are near downtown Burien and along 1st Avenue So. near S. 176th St., that could be compatible with the adjacent single-family and low density multi-family areas. The CC-2 zone allows for higher-intensity uses in the Community Commercial-designated area at Five Corners that could be compatible with the adjacent regional commercial, office, high density multi-family, and single-family areas.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE CC ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.035.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Outdoor storage is limited to accessory storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.035.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.035.2

Retail

Office

Recreational Facility	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. The following are not permitted: motor vehicle sales and rental; boat sales and rental; theater; recycling center; and self-service storage facility.

2. Vehicle repair activities must occur inside a building. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

3. For retail use in the CC-1 zone, maximum gross floor area per building is 25,000 s.f. Up to 30,000 s.f. may be approved through a Type 1 review process.

4. A kennel is allowed as an indoor accessory use to a veterinarian, provided that noise and odor impacts are adequately mitigated.

5. Distribution, wholesaling, repair or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

6. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

7. Development of retail use on parcel numbers 302304-9037, 302304-9089, 302304-9117, 302304-9271 and 302304-9376 (located east of Sylvester Middle School) must be part of a master site plan that includes property to the east of these lots. The master site plan shall include at least the following elements: coordinated access, site and building design, and signing. Through a Type 1 review the Director may approve a master site plan involving two or more parcels that does not include property to the east of these parcels, if the elements above are included in the plan.

	19.15.035.3

Eating and Drinking Establishment	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	13 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of dining or lounge area	1. Distribution, wholesaling or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

2. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.035.4

Lodging Facility

Cultural Facility

Community Facility School	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.035.5

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.035.6

Day Care Center	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.035.7

Mixed Use

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit

Community Residential Facility	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Maximum residential density in the CC-1 zone is: 18 dwelling units per acre in the CC-1 areas north of SW 152nd St. and around So. 176th St; and, 24 dwelling units per acre in the area south of SW 153rd St.

2. Maximum residential density in the CC-2 zone is 24 dwelling units per acre.

3. Shall provide retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses on the floor adjacent to a street, or if the site does not abut a street, on floor adjacent to parking lot. Eating and drinking establishment is permitted on any floor.

4. At least 25% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses.

5. Senior citizen assisted dwelling unit or community residential facility only allowed as part of a mixed use project.

	19.15.035.8

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None	None.	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

	19.15.035.9

Nursing Home	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	B	1 space for every 4 beds	 

	19.15.035.10

Government Facility

Private Club

Religious Facility

Funeral Home	Type 1	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.035.11

Public Utility	Type 1	None	30’	30’	80%	85%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.035.12

Essential Public Facility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.035.13

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.035.14

Uses permitted in King County Code (KCC) 21A.38.100 Special Overlay District – Commercial/Industrial, In Effect on 4/1/2010 with exception of Adult Entertainment [Ord. 533 § 1, 2010]	None	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Uses are only permitted in the CC-2 zoned area located on both sides of 16th Avenue SW between SW 112th Street and SW 116th Street.

	19.15.035.15

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.035.16

Marijuana Retailers(3)	Type 1	None	10’	0’	80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.035.17

Enhanced Services Facilities(4)	None	None	10’	0’	 80%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(4) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000



 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.040 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Regional Commercial (CR) zone implements the Regional Commercial Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish areas for commercial uses that serve the community, the region and the travelling public. The intent is to provide for larger scaled commercial uses that are typically land intensive and are not well-suited to being located downtown, which are designed to encourage pedestrian and transit access, be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods, and be consistent with road and utility capacity.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE CR ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE REGIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.040.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. SETBACKS

i. The required front setback shall be landscaped with Type III landscaping as described in Chapter 19.25. The depth of the landscaped area shall be increased 2 feet for each 10 feet (or portion thereof) building is setback greater than 10 feet. The Director may allow or require installation of pedestrian-oriented features or amenities in the setback. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]

ii. Parking and vehicular circulation areas are not allowed in the required front setback. One driveway or parking entrance per site is allowed in the front setback. For a site with a street frontage of 240 feet or less, the maximum width for a driveway or parking entrance within the front setback is 24 feet. For a site with a street frontage exceeding 240 feet, the maximum width for a driveway or parking entrance within the front setback is 30 feet. The Director may modify these requirements if additional landscaping area that exceeds the requirements of this Code is provided on or off-site.

iii. Outdoor use, activity or storage is not allowed in any required setback or required landscape area. The Director may approve use of a setback or landscaped area for vehicle display and sales, provided that such use will not create a public safety hazard and the remaining landscape areas are either expanded in area or planted with more vegetation.

B. PARKING

i. Parking lots shall not be located between the street and the building(s) on the site. The Director may waive or modify this requirement through a Type 1 review if no other feasible alternative exists, or if the proposed site plan provides adequate screening of the majority of the parking area from the street.

ii. The maximum width of a parking lot within 20 feet of a street shall not exceed the lesser of 63 feet or 75% of the frontage of the site.

C. BUILDING DESIGN

i. Each building wall or portion of a wall that is closer than 50 feet to any property line of the site must be screened or treated in at least one of the ways listed in Section 19.15.040.1.C.ii below if it meets either of the following criteria:

a. The wall or portion of the wall has a surface area of at least 400 square feet and has a length and a width of at least 10 feet without a window, door, facade modulation at least 4 feet in depth or other architectural feature; or,

b. The wall or portion of the wall is between 4 feet and 13 feet above finished grade level directly adjacent to the wall and has a horizontal dimension longer than 15 feet without a window, door, facade modulation at least 4 feet in depth or other architectural feature.

ii. At least one of the following techniques must be used to treat or screen building walls or portions of walls that meet either of the criteria in Section 19.15.040.1.C.i:

a. Installation of a vertical trellis with climbing vines or plant material in front of the wall. The trellis and its mounting system shall be of sufficient strength to support mature vegetation.

b. Providing a landscaped planting bed at least 5 feet wide or a raised planter bed at least 2 feet high and 3 feet wide in front of the wall and planted with materials that will obscure or screen at least 50% of the wall within 2 years. The planting bed is in addition to any landscaping required by other sections of this Code.

c. Use of alternative techniques to screen the wall, as approved through a Type 1 review process.

iii. The first floor walls of a building which are within 50 feet of and face toward a street shall include at least one public entrance to the building or window to provide visual access to the activity within the building, for each 50 feet of wall length. Alternative techniques to provide visual access to the activity within the building may be used, if approved through a Type 1 review process.

D. The following special regulations apply to property along the west side of Occidental Ave. So. between So. 136th St. and So. 138th St.:

i. Non-residential uses shall not use Occidental Av. So. for primary access.

ii. Type 1 landscaping shall be provided within the unused portion of the west half of the Occidental Av. So. right-of-way.

iii. Lighting shall be directed away from the adjacent residential zone.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.040.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.040.2

Retail

Office

Recreational Facility

Theatre

Kennel	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C

 

 

 

-----------

D	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000] 	1. The following are not permitted: recycling center; and self-service storage facility.

2. Distribution, wholesaling, or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

3. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.040.3

Eating and Drinking Establishment	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	13 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of dining or lounge area	1. Distribution, wholesaling or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

2. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.040.4

Lodging Facility	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	45’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.040.5

Community Facility

School

Day Care Center	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C

 

-----------

B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Day Care Center: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.040.6

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.040.7

Mixed Use	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Maximum residential density is 24 dwelling units per acre.

2. Shall provide retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses on the floor adjacent to a street, or if the site does not abut a street, on floor adjacent to parking lot. Eating and drinking establishment is permitted on any floor.

3. At least 25% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses.

	19.15.040.8

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None	None.	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

	19.15.040.9

Nursing Home	None	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	B	1 space for every 4 beds	 

	19.15.040.10

Government Facility

Private Club

Religious Facility

Funeral Home	Type 1	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.040.11

Public Utility	Type 1	None	30’	30’	85%	90%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.040.12

Indoor Shooting Range	Type 2	None	30’	30’	85%	90%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to mitigating noise impacts and designing the facility to protect non-users outside of the building from bullets that may penetrate the outer walls and ceiling of the use.

	19.15.040.13

Essential Public Facility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 3 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.040.14

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.040.15

Off-Site Commercial Parking	None. See Special Regulations 1 and 2.	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. This use is limited to property used for new and/or used automotive sales currently or in the twelve (12) month period preceding application.

2. This use is allowed only until July 12, 2012. After this date, the use is illegal and must be removed.

	19.15.040.16

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.040.17

Marijuana Retailers(3)	Type 1	None	10’	0’	85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.040.19

Enhanced Services Facilities(4)	None	None	10’	0’	 85%	90%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(4) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000



 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.045 OFFICE ZONE Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Office (O) Zone implements the Office Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish and preserve areas for professional service related offices and mixed-use developments. The intent is to provide areas where low to moderate intensity office development and small scale support services can be concentrated, and where impacts of this use on the surrounding residential neighborhoods can be minimized.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE O ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE OFFICE ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.045.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Drive-through facilities are not permitted.

B. Outdoor storage is limited to accessory storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

C. Non-residential vehicle access is prohibited from 2nd Avenue SW to and from the Office zone located north of SW 146th Street, south of the RM zone that fronts on SW 144th Street, is bordered on the west by 2nd Avenue SW and the RM zone, and is bordered on the east by the CR zone. [Ord. 559 § 3, 2012]

 

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.045.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.045.2:

Office	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	45’	C	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. Accessory uses may be allowed as a mixed use project (see BMC 19.15.045.3). 2. Kennels are not allowed.

	19.15.045.3:

Mixed Use

Senior Citizen Assisted Dwelling Unit

Community Residential Facility	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	45’ See Spec. Reg. 6	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. The following uses are permitted in a mixed use development: convenience retail, eating and drinking establishment, and dwelling units.

2. The following uses are prohibited: convenience auto service, auto repair, auto sales and pawn shop.

3. At least 75% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for office uses.

4. At least 75% of gross floor area of the floor adjacent to the public street, or if the property does not abut a public street, on the floor adjacent to parking lot, must be designed and used for office uses.

5. Maximum residential density is 48 dwelling units per acre in the O-zoned area around SW 160th St. and Sylvester Road, and 24 dwelling units per acre in other O-zoned areas.

6. Building height of 65’ may be allowed through a Type 1 review, if at least 25% of the required parking spaces are located within or beneath a building and are fully screened from public view.

7. Senior citizen assisted dwelling unit or community residential facility only allowed as part of a mixed use project.

	19.15.045.4

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.045.5

Day Care Center	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.045.6

Nursing Home	None	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	B	1 space for every 4 beds	 

	19.15.045.7:

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 3

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	10’. See Spec. Reg. 2	0’ See Spec. Reg. 2	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

2. Structures shall maintain a 50-foot setback from adjoining lots zoned RS. The Director may allow structures such as playground equipment, ball field backstops and tennis court fences closer than 50’ if compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and traffic safety considerations.

3. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.045.8:

Funeral Home	Type 1	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.045.9:

Hospital	Type 2. See Spec. Reg. 1

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	10’ See Spec. Reg. 2 [Ord. 467 § 1, 2007]	0’ See Spec. Reg. 2 [Ord. 467 § 1, 2007]	70%	85%	45’ See Spec. Reg. 2 [Ord. 467 § 1, 2007]	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. If development is consistent with a Master Plan approved through a Type 2 review, no land use review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

2. For any hospital use on a site of 5 acres or greater with an approved Master Plan, the maximum building height shall be 95’. Any portion of a structure over 45’ in height shall be set back an additional 2’ from any site boundary for each additional 1’ in height above 45’. For the purposes of this special regulation “site boundary” is defined as the property lines defining the exterior boundary of a contiguous site. [Ord. 467 § 1, 2007]

	19.15.045.10:

Community, Cultural, Religious or Government Facility

School

[Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	10’	0’	70%	85%	45’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.045.11:

Public Utility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	30’	30’	70%	85%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.045.12:

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.045.13

Community Garden(2)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.045.14

Enhanced Services Facilities(3)	None	None	10’	0’	 70%	85%	45’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000





 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.050 INDUSTRIAL ZONE

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Industrial (I) zone implements the Industrial Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish a concentrated employment area for heavy commercial or industrial uses which are not likely to have adverse impacts on nearby residential or commercial properties. The intent is to provide for areas where primarily industrial activities and support services can be concentrated and where traffic congestion, visual and other impacts on the surrounding environment can be minimized. Large retail uses and office buildings that are not associated with an industrial use are inappropriate in the I zone.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE I ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE INDUSTRIAL ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.050.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Up to 25% of gross floor area may be used for the following accessory uses that are related to or support the primary use: retail, office, eating & drinking establishment, recreational facility, or warehousing and wholesale trade. For high technology industry, up to 75% of gross floor area for an accessory office use is allowed. A higher percentage of accessory use may be allowed through a Type 1 review. Required parking for accessory uses shall be as follows: retail, office and recreational facility: 1.5 stalls per 1,000 s.f. net floor area; eating and drinking establishment: 7 stalls per 1,000 s.f. net floor area; warehousing and wholesale trade: 0.5 stalls per 1,000 s.f. net floor area. More or less parking for accessory uses may be allowed through a Type 1 review process. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]

B. The minimum lot area for new lots is 2 acres.

C. The outer 15 feet of the front setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

D. All uses must be located within buildings or approved outdoor use, activity or storage areas.

E. Repealed, Ord. 529, 2009

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.050.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	 

	19.15.050.2

High Technology Industry	None	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	See Spec. Reg. 2	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. Also see Sec. 19.15.050.1.A. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. Maximum building height is 35 feet. If at least 50% of the required parking stalls are located under or within the building, maximum building height is increased to 60 feet.

	19.15.050.3

Light Industry	None	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	See Spec. Reg. 2	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	1 space per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. Also see Sec. 19.15.050.1.A. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. Maximum building height is 35 feet. If at least 50% of the required parking stalls are located under or within the building, maximum building height is increased to 60 feet.

	19.15.050.4

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.050.5:

Day Care Center	None	None	25’	0’	70%	75%	35’	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.050.6:

Auto, boat or heavy equipment repair, services or washing	Type 1	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	C

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	1 space per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. Also see Sec. 19.15.050.1.A. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

	19.15.050.7:

Community or Religious Facility [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]	Type 1	None	25’	0’	70%	75%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.050.8

Government Facility	Type 1	None	25’	0’	70%	75%	See Spec. Reg. 1	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Maximum building height is 35 feet. If at least 50% of the required parking stalls are located under or within the building, maximum building height is increased to 60 feet.

	19.15.050.9

On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility	Type 1	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. Must comply with the state siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70.105.210.

	19.15.050.10

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None.	25’	0’	70%	75%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

2. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.050.11

Public Utility	Type 1	None	30’	30’	70%	75%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.050.12

Self Service Storage Facility	Type 1	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	1 space per 3,500 s.f. of storage area, plus 2 for any caretaker’s unit. Also see Sec. 19.15.050.1.A.	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in Sec. 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. May include one (1) accessory dwelling unit for resident security manager.

	19.15.050.13

Indoor Shooting Range	Type 2	None	30’	30’	70%	75%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to mitigating noise impacts and designing the facility to protect non-users outside of the building from bullets that may penetrate the outer walls and ceiling of the use.

	19.15.050.14

Kennel	Type 2	None	25’ See Spec. Reg. 1	0’ See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Outside runs and other outside facilities must be setback at least 25 feet from each property line (50 feet from a residential zone) and must be surrounded by a fence or wall sufficient to enclose the animals.

2. Must provide suitable shelter and a clean, healthful environment for the animals.

	19.15.050.15

Recycling Center	Type 2	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Fifty (50) feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. Shall mitigate all operational impacts, including noise, odor, visual and health and sanitary impacts.

3. May deal only in metal cans, glass, plastic and paper. Other materials may be recycled if the Hearing Examiner determines that the impacts are no greater than those associated with recycling metal cans, glass, plastic or paper. The applicant will have the burden of proof in demonstrating similar impacts.

	19.15.050.16

Any use not listed in the use column of any use zone chart	Type 2	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjoining uses. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate all adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Social card games are prohibited.

	19.15.050.17

Essential Public Facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process. 	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.050.18

Off-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility	Type 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None	50’	50’	70%	75%	35’	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009].

2. Must comply with the state siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70.105.210.

	19.15.050.19

Personal Wireless Service Facility(1)	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.050.20

Adult Entertainment Facility(2)	None	None	25’	0’	70%	75%	35’	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Sec. 19.17.030 for additional requirements.

	19.15.050.21

Secure Community Transition Facility [Ord. 363 § 1, 2002]	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	See Section 19.17.110	 

	19.15.050.22

Community Garden(3)	None	None	10’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.050.23

Marijuana Producers

Marijuana Processors(4)	Type 1	None	25’	See Spec. Reg. 1	70%	75%	35’	D

Also see Spec. Reg. 1	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. Fifty feet if adjoining a residential zone, otherwise, none. The outer 25 feet of the setback must be landscaped with Type I landscaping (as prescribed in BMC 19.25.050.1).

2. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

3. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

4. Marijuana producers and processors shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

5. Marijuana producers and processors may locate in the same building and all production and processing activities shall occur within an enclosed structure.

6. Marijuana producers and processors shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	(1) Amended, Ord. 265, 1999

(2) Amended, Ord. 291, 2000

(3) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(4) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000



 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.055 Special Planning Area 1: Old Burien Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: Old Burien has served as the historic commercial gateway to this unique residential and farming community, which was established over a century ago by enterprising pioneers. The SPA-1 zone implements the SPA-1: Old Burien Comprehensive Plan designation. To recognize the unique historic character of Old Burien, and to provide a transition between the Downtown zones and residential areas, the SPA-1 zone was created. The purpose of this zone is to establish areas for retail, restaurants, commercial, and office uses that serve the community. The intent is to enhance and expand the pedestrian-oriented character of Old Burien, and develop a gateway both to and from the downtown at the intersection of Ambaum Boulevard and SW 152nd Street. The SPA-1 zone is immediately adjacent to the DC Zone.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN SPECIAL PLANNING AREA 1, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN SPECIAL PLANNING AREA 1. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.055.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. Outdoor storage is limited to accessory storage of goods sold at retail on the premises. Outdoor storage areas shall be limited to five feet in height and shall not be located in any required landscape area.

B. DESIGN GUIDELINES: See BMC 19.49 for SPA-1 design standards and BMC 19.65.105 for information on the Administrative Design Review Process.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.055.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.055.2

Retail

Office

Recreational Facility	None	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. The following are not permitted: motor vehicle sales and rental; boat sales and rental; recycling center; and self-service storage facility.

2. For retail use, maximum gross floor area per building is 25,000 s.f. Up to 30,000 s.f. may be approved through a Type 1 review process.

3. Distribution, wholesaling, repair or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

4. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.055.3

Eating and Drinking Establishment	None	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	2 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. Distribution, wholesaling or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

2. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.055.4

Lodging Facility

Cultural Facility

Community Facility

School	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	4 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	 

	19.15.055.5

Family Day Care Home I and II	None	See Special Regulation 1	1. Must comply with requirements of the primary use.

2. Family Day Care Home II: Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

3. Use of the Fee-In-Lieu Parking Program in BMC 19.20.040.3.B is an option for this use.

	19.15.055.6

Day Care Center	None	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	2 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. Must provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.055.7

Mixed Use	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. Maximum residential density is 24 dwelling units per acre.

2. Shall provide retail and/or eating and drinking establishment uses on the floor adjacent to a street, or if the site does not abut a street, on floor adjacent to parking lot.

3. At least 25% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for retail, office and/or eating and drinking establishment uses.

	19.15.055.8

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None. See Spec. Reg. 2 [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	None. See Spec. Reg. 1	0’	0’	80%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

2. No special review process if project design is approved by the City Council through a public review process that includes posting a notice board at the site and notification to neighbors; otherwise a Type 2 review process is required. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

	19.15.055.9

Government Facility

Private Club

Religious Facility	Type 1	None	0’	0’	80%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	 

	19.15.055.10

Public Utility	Type 1	None	20’	30’	80%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 §1, 2010]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.055.11

Essential Public Facility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.055.12

Personal Wireless Service Facility	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.055.13

Community Garden(1)	None	None	0’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.055.14

Marijuana Retailers(2)	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040.3.B	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.055.15

Enhanced Services Facilities(3)	Type 1	None	0’	0’	85%	85%	3 stories	E	See Sec. 19.20.040	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(2) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000



 

 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.060 Special Planning Area 2: Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Special Planning Area 2 (SPA-2) zone implements the Special Planning Area 2 Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish and preserve areas for the Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center and the special uses associated with the Center’s activities. The intent is to provide for continued residential, home-based and community-based programs and services to families and children of the community through the activities of the Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center. Due to the unique nature and location of the Ruth Dykeman property, all use and development must be consistent with a City-approved Master Plan for the property.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE SPA-2 ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE SPA-2 ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.060.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. All uses and development in SPA-2 must be consistent with a City-approved Master Plan for the entire zone. The Master Plan must be approved through a Type 2 review. Modifications to the approved Master Plan may be allowed as follows:

i. Minor modifications may be approved by the Director. The following are minor modifications, if the Director determines that the modification will not have significantly more or different impact on the surrounding neighborhood than does the present development:

a. An increase of 20% or less in the gross floor area of any approved primary or accessory use.

b. An increase of 20% or less in the number of beds.

c. Up to 20% increase or decrease in the number of approved parking spaces.

ii. Major modifications may be approved through a Type I review process. Major modifications are those modifications that do not comply with Section 19.15.060.1.A.i above. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]

B. The primary use allowed in the zone is community residential facility. Any use listed in the Office zone (Section 19.15.045) may be allowed as an accessory use if it supports the primary use. Religious facilities are also allowed as a primary use. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007]

C. Development standards, such as lot coverage, building height, landscaping, signing and parking are established as part of the approved Master Plan. The standards in the Office zone (Section 19.15.045) shall be used as a guideline.

D. There shall be a minimum 20-foot landscape strip between SPA-2 and any adjoining RS zones. 

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.060.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.060.2

Enhanced Services Facilities(1)	May be permitted per Section 19.15.060.1	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.065 Special Planning Area 3: Gateway Revised 7/20

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Special Planning Area 3 (SPA-3): Gateway zone implements the SPA-3 Comprehensive Plan designation. The purpose of this zone is to establish an area that will develop a quality environment that identifies a primary entrance to the City from major transportation corridors. The intent of the zone is to encourage well-designed, quality development that reinforces a positive image as one enters adjacent downtown Burien and promotes economic development. Site design, building design and landscaping is also intended to encourage pedestrian activity and connectivity to downtown.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE SPA-3 ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE GATEWAY SPECIAL PLANNING AREA ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.065.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. SETBACKS

i. The required front setback shall be landscaped with Type III landscaping as described in Chapter 19.25. The depth of the landscaped area shall be increased 2 feet for each 10 feet (or portion thereof) building is setback greater than 10 feet. The Director may allow or require installation of pedestrian-oriented features or amenities in the setback. {Ord. 313 §1, 2000]

ii. Parking and vehicular circulation areas are not allowed in the required front setback. One driveway or parking entrance per site for each street frontage is allowed in the front setback. For a site with a street frontage exceeding 240 feet, or for a lodging facility with a circular passenger loading area, an additional driveway or parking entrance within the front setback is permitted. The Director may modify these requirements if additional landscaping area that exceeds the requirements of this Code is provided on or off-site.

iii. Outdoor use, activity or storage is not allowed in any required setback or required landscape area. The Director may approve use of a setback or landscaped area for vehicle display and sales, provided that such use will not create a public safety hazard and the remaining landscape areas are either expanded in area or planted with more vegetation.

B. PARKING

i. Parking lots shall not be located between the street and the building(s) on the site. The Director may waive or modify this requirement through a Type 1 review if no other feasible alternative exists, or if the proposed site plan provides adequate screening of the majority of the parking area from the street.

ii. The maximum width of a parking lot within 20 feet of a street shall not exceed the lesser of 63 feet or 75% of the frontage of the site.

C. BUILDING DESIGN

i. Each building wall or portion of a wall that is closer than 50 feet to any property line of the site must be screened or treated in at least one of the ways listed in Section 19.15.065.1.C.ii below if it meets either of the following criteria:

a. The wall or portion of the wall has a surface area of at least 400 square feet and has a length and a width of at least 10 feet without a window, door, facade modulation at least 4 feet in depth or other architectural feature; or,

b. The wall or portion of the wall is between 4 feet and 13 feet above finished grade level directly adjacent to the wall and has a horizontal dimension longer than 15 feet without a window, door, facade modulation at least 4 feet in depth or other architectural feature.

ii. At least one of the following techniques must be used to treat or screen building walls or portions of walls that meet either of the criteria in Section 19.15.065.1.C.i:

a. Installation of a vertical trellis with climbing vines or plant material in front of the wall. The trellis and its mounting system shall be of sufficient strength to support mature vegetation.

b. Providing a landscaped planting bed at least 5 feet wide or a raised planter bed at least 2 feet high and 3 feet wide in front of the wall and planted with materials that will obscure or screen at least 50% of the wall within 2 years. The planting bed is in addition to any landscaping required by other sections of this Code.

c. Use of alternative techniques to screen the wall, as approved through a Type 1 review process.

iii. The first floor walls of a building which are within 50 feet of and face toward a street shall include at least one public entrance to the building or window to provide visual access to the activity within the building, for each 50 feet of wall length. Alternative techniques to provide visual access to the activity within the building may be used, if approved through a Type 1 review process.

D. URBAN DESIGN ELEMENTS

i. New Development and/or substantial improvement shall

a. Conform with the Burien Gateway Design Report dated December 1998.

b. Underground any existing above-ground utilities in the right-of-way, if feasible, and if approved by the serving utility.

c. Underground all proposed utilities and any existing above-ground utilities located between any structures on the site and the right-of-way.

d. Dedicate adequate width for abutting substandard right-of-ways, based on the City’s adopted road standards, including the width of all improvements required to be located in the right-of-way.

ii. Repealed. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.065.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.065.2

Retail

Office

Recreational Facility

Theater	None. See Special Regulation 4.	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of net floor area. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]	1. The following are not permitted: recycling center; and self-service storage facility.

2. Distribution, wholesaling, or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

3. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

4. Retail uses shall not exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area, except through a Type 1 review.

	19.15.065.3

Eating and Drinking Establishment	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	13 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of dining or lounge area	1. Distribution, wholesaling or manufacturing that support the primary use are allowed as an accessory use.

2. An amusement arcade is allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.065.4

Day Care Center	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	B	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Must Provide State certification of safe passenger loading area.

	19.15.065.5

Lodging Facility	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	No limit	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.065.6

Community Facility	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.065.7

Mixed Use	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Maximum residential density is 24 dwelling units per acre.

2. Shall provide retail, office and/or eating and drinking establishment uses on the floor adjacent to a street, or if the site does not abut a street, on floor adjacent to parking lot.

3. At least 25% of the gross floor area must be designed and used for retail, office or eating and drinking establishment uses.

	19.15.065.8

Public Park and Recreation Facilities	None	None.	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas.

	19.15.065.9

Government Facility

Private Club

Religious Facility

Funeral Home	Type 1	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	 

	19.15.065.10

Public Utility	Type 1	None	30’	30’	85%	90%	3 Stories	D	See Sec. 19.20.030.2 [Ord. 292 § 6, 2000]	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.065.11

Essential Public Facility	Type 2

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.065.12

Nursing Home	None	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 Stories	B	1 space for every 4 beds	 

	19.15.065.13

Personal Wireless Service Facility	See Chapter 19.50	 

	19.15.065.14

Off-Site Commercial Parking	None. See Special Regulations 1 and 2.	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. This use is limited to property used for new and/or used automobile sales currently or in the twelve (12) month period preceding application.

2. This use is allowed only until July 1, 2012. After this date, the use is illegal and must be removed.

	19.15.065.15

Community Garden(1)	None	None	5’	0’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.065.16

Marijuana Retailers(2)	Type 1	None	5’	0’	85%	90%	3 stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in the Single-Family Residential (RS), Multi-Family Residential (RM), Professional Residential (PR), Office (O) or Ruth Dykeman Children’s Center zones.

4. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which any non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.

5. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

6. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	19.15.065.17

Enhanced Services Facilities(3)	None	None	5’	0’	 85%	90%	3 stories	C	See Sec. 19.20.030.2	1. See Section 19.17.310 – Enhanced Services Facilities

	(1) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(2) Added, Ord. 599, 2014

(3) Added, Ord. 734, 2020

Note: All landscape categories added by Ord. 293, 2000



 

	
[IMAGE]



19.15.070 AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL ZONES

PURPOSE AND INTENT: The Airport Industrial (AI) zone implements the Airport Industrial Comprehensive Plan designation within the Northeast Redevelopment Area. The purpose and intent of this designation is to facilitate economic development and provide flexibility for airport-compatible uses in a campus-like setting with internal circulation to minimize the number of access points to Des Moines Memorial Drive.

	
[IMAGE]


ONLY THOSE USES LISTED ON THE FOLLOWING USE ZONE CHARTS MAY BE ALLOWED IN THE AI ZONE, SUBJECT TO MEETING ALL APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ZONING CODE. THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLY TO ALL USES IN THE AI ZONE. BE SURE TO CHECK THE APPLICABLE USE ZONE CHART FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS THAT PERTAIN TO SPECIFIC USES. WHERE A SPECIAL REGULATION BELOW CONFLICTS WITH A SPECIAL REGULATION IN A USE ZONE CHART FOR A SPECIFIC USE, THE USE ZONE CHART SHALL APPLY.


19.15.070.1 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:

A. GENERAL.

i. Use and development within this zone may be affected by FAA regulations associated with SeaTac Airport operations.

ii. Uses shall conform with the following requirements (excluding reasonable construction activity):

a. Does not emit significant quantities of dust, dirt, cinders, smoke, gases, fumes, odors or vapors into the atmosphere.

b. Does not emit any liquid or solid wastes or other matter into any stream, wetland, or other waterway.

c. Does not emit radiation or discharges glare or heat, or emits electromagnetic, microwave, ultrasonic, laser or other radiation levels over what is considered safe by the FCC.

d. Does not emit radiation or discharges glare or heat, or emits electromagnetic, microwave, ultrasonic, laser or other radiation levels that would adversely impact electronic equipment of residences or businesses outside of the boundaries of the property the business is located.

e. Does not use heavy trucking as a principal use, such as truck terminals or heavy truck repair.

f. Does not produce excessive noise or ground vibration perceptible without instruments at any point exterior to any lot.

g. Is not considered an aviation hazard as defined in State and Federal law.

h. Does not use high intensity lighting or make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others; create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft; result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; create reflectivity that interferes with airport radar function; create smoke, dust or other particulates that would impair visibility for aircraft; allow the storage of highly flammable or explosive materials, create bird-strike hazards; or otherwise create a hazard which may in any way endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

B. DESIGN STANDARDS. Development within the AI zone is subject to compliance with the design standards in BMC 19.48.

C. BUILDING HEIGHT. No structure shall be permitted to be erected, altered or maintained that would constitute a hazard to air navigation, encroach into the limits of the FAA Part 77 imaginary surfaces, or cause an increase in minimum flight or approach procedure altitudes as determined by the FAA. An additional 12 feet of height is allowed for under-building or underground parking. A written certification of height compliance from the FAA may be required.

D. TRANSPORTATION IMPACT MITIGATION. In addition to providing street improvements on adjacent streets pursuant to BMC 12.05, the City may require off-site improvements necessary to mitigate transportation impacts of the proposal as part of the Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for the Northeast Redevelopment Area dated November 23, 2009, SEPA planned action or other SEPA review under BMC Title 14. Transportation impact fees also apply pursuant to BMC 19.35.

E. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE.

i. The maximum allowable impervious surface coverage is 95%.

ii. Public pedestrian and non-motorized facilities are excluded from impervious surface coverage.

iii. The City will give credit for low impact development techniques such as but not limited to pervious pavement and green roofs. The amount of credit shall be determined by the Public Works Director.

F. RESIDENTIAL USES. Existing residential uses may continue to exist pursuant to the standards located in BMC 19.55. New residential uses are prohibited.

	
[IMAGE]


USE


[IMAGE]
	REGULATIONS
[IMAGE]
	DIRECTIONS: FIRST, read down to find use... THEN, across for REGULATIONS

	Special Review Process (See Ch. 19.65)	MINIMUMS	MAXIMUMS	Landscape Category  (See Ch. 19.25)	Minimum Required Parking Spaces (See Ch. 19.20)	Special Regulations (See also Section 19.15.070.1 and Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Ch. 19.17)

	Lot Area	SETBACKS	Lot Coverage	Building Height

	Front Setback	Interior Setback	Building Coverage	Impervious Surface Coverage

	19.15.070.2

Air Cargo Facility

Distribution

Eating and Drinking Establishment

Flex-Industrial

Flex-Tech Flight

Kitchen Light Industry

Office

Off-Site Commercial Parking

Plant Nursery

Retail

Warehousing and Wholesale Trade	None	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. In the AI-1 zone, retail uses are allowed as primary or accessory uses. In the AI-2 zone, retail uses are allowed only as accessory uses related to or supporting the primary use of the site.

	19.15.070.3

New Car Auto Dealer

Auto Rental	None	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. This use is only allowed in the AI-1 zone. Sales of used vehicles and service facilities are only allowed as an accessory use.

	19.15.070.4

Community Facility

Government Facility

Public Park and Recreation Facilities

Recreational Facility

Religious Facility	None	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	 

	19.15.070.5

Public Utility	Type 1	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

	19.15.070.6

On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility

Off-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facility	Type 2	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. These uses are required to conduct an environmental review and mitigate all impacts. 2. Must comply with the state siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70.105.210.

	19.15.070.7

Essential Public Facility	Type 1	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. Shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with their surroundings and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light and glare impacts.

2. Shall comply with criteria for siting found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan.

	19.15.070.8

Any use not listed in the use column of any use zone chart	Type 2	Development standards shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the Type 2 review process.	1. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjoining uses.

2. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate all adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing noise, light, and glare impacts.

	19.15.070.9

Adult Entertainment Facility	Type 2	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’ See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. See Sec. 19.17.030 for additional requirements.

	19.15.070.10

Secure Community Transition Facility	Type 2	See Section 19.17.110

	19.15.070.11

Personal Wireless Service Facility	See BMC 19.50 for specific requirements.

	19.15.070.12

Community Garden(1)	None	None	10’	10’	15%	25%	12’	A	See Section 19.20.030.2.	1. A land use agreement approved by the Director shall be executed between the landowner and those who are interested in gardening on private land. The agreement shall include Community Garden Rules to maintain the property safely and prevent disturbances to neighboring property owners and residents.

	19.15.070.13

Marijuana Producers

Marijuana Processors(2)	Type 1	None	10’	10’	None	See BMC 19.15.070.1.E.	45’

See BMC 19.15.070.1	F	See Section 19.20.030.2	1.The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare and traffic impacts.

2. Must comply with all requirements of State law and Washington State Liquor Control Board’s regulations.

3. Marijuana producers and processors shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

4. Marijuana producers and processors may locate in the same building and all production and processing activities shall occur within an enclosed structure.

5. Marijuana producers and processors shall not locate within 1,000 feet as measured by the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the licensed premises to the property line of an elementary or secondary school, playground, recreational center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library or arcade where admission is not restricted to those age 21 and older.

	(1) Added, Ord. 560, 2012

(2) Added, Ord. 599, 2014


Chapter 19.17 Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

19.17.005    User Guide

19.17.010    Multi-Family Recreation Space

19.17.013    Residential Recreation Space

19.17.015    Transition Standards

19.17.020    Vendor Carts

19.17.030    Adult Entertainment Facilities

19.17.040    Cargo Containers

19.17.050    Repealed

19.17.060    Residential Accessory Uses – General

19.17.070    Accessory Dwelling Units Revised 1/20

19.17.080    Bed and Breakfast Establishments

19.17.090    Home Occupations

19.17.100    Keeping of Animals

19.17.110    Secure Community Transition Facilities

19.17.120    Building Height Measurement methods

19.17.130    Height – Exceptions to limits

19.17.140    Height – Limits near major airports

19.17.150    Calculations – Allowable dwelling units or floor area

19.17.160    Lot area – Prohibited reduction

19.17.170    Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction

19.17.180    Setbacks – Specific building or use

19.17.190    Setbacks – Modifications

19.17.200    Setbacks – Regional utility corridors

19.17.210    Setbacks – Alleys

19.17.220    Setbacks – Adjoining half-street or designated arterial

19.17.230    Setbacks – Projections allowed

19.17.240    Sight distance requirements

19.17.250    Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks

19.17.260    Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks

19.17.270    Mobile home parks – Alternative design standards

19.17.280    Storage space and collection points for recyclables

19.17.290    Fences

19.17.300    Trail corridors

19.17.310    Enhanced services facilities Added 7/20


19.17.005 User Guide.

This Chapter contains a variety of regulations and standards that apply to the use and development of land. The regulations in this Chapter do not apply to all uses or developments. The regulations are arranged alphabetically so that careful review of the table of contents is important to finding all pertinent regulations.


19.17.010 Multi-Family Recreation Space

1. New developments of 4 multiple family dwelling units or more shall provide a minimum of 200 square feet of required common recreation space per dwelling unit. The required common recreation space shall be in one or more areas on site that are available and accessible to all residents of the development.

A. Not more than 50% of the required common recreation space shall be indoors. Such areas must be located, designed and improved in a manner that provides recreational opportunities functionally equivalent to those recreational opportunities available outdoors.

B. At least 50% of the required common recreation space shall be designed and improved as play space for preadolescent children – environments that are designed to support and suggest activities that are an essential part of a child’s learning and development (social, emotional, cognitive, and physical). Unless otherwise approved by the Director, required play space for children shall be accessible from all dwelling units by pedestrian paths separate from vehicular areas. The requirement for play space for children shall not apply to developments devoted exclusively to senior citizens.

C. An area designated as required common outdoor recreation space shall:

i. Have a minimum size of 800 square feet and minimum width and depth of 25 feet.

ii. Not be located in the following critical areas or their buffers: wetlands, streams, and flood hazard areas.

iii. Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation.

iv. Be centrally located and accessible and convenient to all residents within the development.

v. Be connected by path, walkway or separated walkway across a parking area to any adjacent existing or planned public park, open space or trail system.

vi. Not be used for driveways, parking or other vehicular use. Adequate fence and/or plant screening, as approved by the Director, shall be provided to separate outdoor recreation areas from vehicular areas.

vii. Not be located in the required front setback or in an interior setback abutting a single-detached dwelling unit or single family residential zone.

2. All new developments shall provide a minimum of 80 square feet of outdoor private recreation space if provided as a patio and 60 square feet of outdoor private recreation space if provided as a deck or balcony, for each multiple family dwelling unit.

A. An area designated as required private outdoor recreation space shall:

i. Have a minimum width and depth of 8 feet for patios and 6 feet for decks or balconies.

ii. Not be located in the following critical areas or their buffers: wetlands, streams, or flood hazard areas.

iii. Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation.

iv. Be adjacent to and directly accessible from the corresponding dwelling unit.

v. Not be used for driveways, parking or other vehicular use. Adequate fence and/or plant screening, as approved by the Director, shall be provided to separate outdoor recreation areas from vehicular areas.

vi. Not be located in the required front setback or in an interior setback abutting a single-detached dwelling unit or RS zone.

B. Private and common recreation space in the downtown commercial (DC) zone.

i. Common Recreation Space: In the downtown commercial zone the total amount of required common recreation space shall be provided as follows:

Minimum 170 square feet per three or more bedrooms unit;

Minimum 130 square feet per two bedrooms unit; and

Minimum 100 square feet per one bedroom unit; and

Minimum 85 square feet per studio unit;

At least 10 percent of the required common recreation space shall be provided as indoor space including but not limited to exercise, recreation, meeting and hospitality facilities.

1) Design of common recreation space is subject to the minimum standards set forth in subsection (1) of this section and/or the design standards set forth in Chapter 19.47 BMC. The Director may modify the required amount of recreation space as specified in subsection (1)(B) of this section (play space for preadolescent children), if appropriately sized facilities are provided for the targeted housing market segment, as determined through the development review process.

ii. Private Recreation Space: Private recreation space shall be provided as follows:

1) A minimum of 30% of the total number of dwelling units shall have individual private recreation spaces (decks, balconies or patios) meeting the minimum dimensional standards of subsection (2)(B)(ii)(3) of this section. If the calculation results in a fraction the number shall be rounded to the nearest integer. No more than 30% of the required private recreation spaces may be in the form of patios.

2) A majority of the units that do not provide private recreation space as prescribed above shall provide alternative private recreation space. For the purposes of this section, alternative private recreation space includes: Juliette balconies, decks, balconies or patios and shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches and a minimum length of 6 feet.

3) Dimensions of private recreation space shall be no less than 48 square feet in area with a minimum width or depth of 5 feet.

Projects that achieve a calculated residential density of more than 50 units per net acre may reduce the size of private recreation space to 24 square feet in area with a minimum width or depth of 4 feet.

For the purposes of this section achieved residential density shall be calculated using the following method:

	Residential Density =	number of units

	(net lot area X % of floor area devoted to residential use)

3. Maintenance of recreation space shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity (such as a homeowners association) capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the Director. [Ord. 587 § 1, 2013, Ord. 437 § 12, 2005, Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.17.013 Residential Recreation Space

1. Except when fees-in-lieu of commonly owned recreation space are provided pursuant to this section, residential developments shall provide recreation space as follows:

A. Residential subdivision developed at a density of eight units or less per acre – 390 square feet per unit; and

B. Mobile home park – 260 square feet per unit.

2. Any recreation space located outdoors shall:

A. Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation;

B. Be on the site of the proposed development;

C. Contain at least 5,000 square feet in area; provided, that when more than one recreation space is proposed, only one of the proposed recreation spaces is required to meet the area requirement;

D. Have no dimensions less than 30 feet (except trail segments);

E. In single detached or townhouse subdivision development, have a street roadway or parking area frontage along 10 to 50 percent of the recreation space perimeter (except trail segments);

F. Be centrally located and accessible and convenient to all residents within the development; and

G. Be connected by trail or walkway to any existing or planned community park, public open space or trail system, which may be located on adjoining property.

3. Indoor recreation areas may be credited towards the total recreation space requirement when the city determines that such areas are located, designed and improved in a manner which provides recreational opportunities functionally equivalent to those recreational opportunities available outdoors. [Ord. 269 § 4, 1999; Ord. 252 § 3, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(374), 1993]

4. All single detached subdivisions shall provide tot/children play areas within the recreation space on-site, except when facilities are available within one-fourth mile that are developed as public parks or playgrounds and are accessible without the crossing of arterial streets.

5. If any play apparatus is provided in the play area, the apparatus shall meet Consumer Product Safety Standards for equipment, soft surfacing and spacing, and shall be located in an area that is:

A. At least 400 square feet in size with no dimension less than 20 feet; and

B. Adjacent to main pedestrian paths or near building entrances. [Ord. 28 § 1(375), 1993]

6. Unless the recreation space is dedicated to the city of Burien pursuant to subsection 7, maintenance of any recreation space retained in private ownership shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the city of Burien.



7. The city of Burien may accept dedication of required recreation space as a public park when the following criteria are met:

A. The dedicated area is at least 20 acres in size, except when adjacent to an existing or planned park; and

B. The dedicated land provides one or more of the following:

i. Shoreline access,

ii. Regional trail linkages,

iii. Habitat linkages,

iv. Recreation facilities, or

v. Heritage sites. [Ord. 28 § 1(376), 1993]

8. If on-site recreation space is not provided, the applicant shall pay a fee in lieu of actual recreation space. [Ord. 28 § 1(377), 1993]

The city of Burien acceptance of this payment is discretionary and may be permitted if:

A. The proposed on-site recreation space does not meet the criteria of BMC 19.17.013.2; or

B. The recreation space provided within a park in the vicinity will be of greater benefit to the prospective residents of the development. [Ord. 28 § 1(378), 1993]

9. Fees provided in lieu of on-site recreation space shall be determined annually by the city of Burien on the basis of the typical market value of the recreation space prior to development.

10. Any recreational space provided by the applicant shall be credited towards the land area upon which the required fees are calculated. [Ord. 28 § 1(379), 1993]

11. The fee in lieu of recreation space shall be:

A. Paid to the city of Burien at the time of:

i. Subdivision or short subdivision recording of single detached and townhouse developments, or

ii. Prior to issuance of building permits for all other residential or mixed use development;

B. Used by the city of Burien for the acquisition and improvement of parks or public recreational facilities to serve the development; and

C. Expended through council capital budget and program appropriations. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(380), 1993]


19.17.015 Transition Standards

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for creation of a buffer between a residential zone and a zone that permits development of higher intensity, and between an RM zone and an RS zone.

2. Applicability. This section applies to any lot located in a zone designated on the chart below as “Zone providing transition,” and that is located within 100 feet of a zone within the City of Burien designated on the chart as “Zone receiving transition”, or within 100 feet of a similar zone outside of the city limits. The requirements of this section must be met on the lot located within the zone providing transition.

TABLE 19.17.015-1  

	ZONE PROVIDING TRANSITION	ZONE RECEIVING TRANSITION

	RS	RM

	RM	◆	—

	CN	◆	◆

	CI	◆	◆

	CC	◆	◆

	CR	◆	◆

	O	◆	◆

	I	◆	◆

	SPA3	◆	◆

◆–     This symbol means that a lot in the zone listed on the left must provide transition to lots in the zone listed at the top of the column.

[Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

3. Transition Area Standards.

The following standards apply to any development activity within a transition area:

A. A landscape buffer, at least 20 feet in width, shall be provided along the entire street or alley frontage where any portion of the street or alley frontage is abutting a zone receiving transition and along the interior property line abutting the zone receiving transition. The landscape buffer shall comply with Type I landscaping, as described in Chapter 19.25. Driveways shall not be allowed within the landscape buffer area, unless, in the opinion of the Director, there is no feasible alternative for providing access. If allowed, driveway width shall be the minimum necessary to provide safe access. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008; Ord. 313 § 1, 2000]

B. Building height shall not exceed 35 feet.

C. Building facade modulation shall be provided on facades that exceed 60 feet in length and are oriented toward the zone receiving transition. The following standards shall apply:

i. The maximum wall length without modulation shall be 30 feet.

ii. The minimum modulation depth shall be three feet.

iii. The minimum modulation width shall be eight feet.

D. Roofline variation shall be provided on rooflines that exceed 60 feet in length and are oriented toward the zone receiving transition. Roofline variation shall be achieved by using one or more of the following methods: vertical or horizontal offset in ridge line, variation of roof pitch, gables, or any other technique approved by the Director that achieves the intent of this section. The following standards shall apply:

i. The maximum roof length without modulation shall be 30 feet.

ii. The minimum horizontal or vertical offset shall be three feet.

iii. The minimum variation length shall be eight feet.

E. Mechanical equipment shall be located as far away as possible from the zone receiving transition, but not in a front setback or required perimeter landscaping.

F. Truck loading spaces, and refuse collection areas shall be located as far away as possible from the zone receiving transition, but not in a front setback or required perimeter landscaping.

4. Administrative Adjustment.

The applicant may request and the Director may grant an adjustment to the standards in this section through a Type 1 review process upon a showing that the proposed adjustment:

A. Will not be detrimental to surrounding properties; and

B. Will comply with the purpose and intent of this section (BMC 19.17.015.1); and

C. Will provide equal or greater protection for the zone receiving transition than strict compliance with this section would provide.


19.17.020 Vendor Carts.

1. Vendor carts complying with all of the following criteria are allowed:

A. A City of Burien business license must be obtained.

B. Vending of food and beverages must meet all health and licensing standards established by the King County Health Department.

C. The vendor cart must comply with applicable requirements of the City of Burien Construction Code.

D. Any vendor cart proposed in the City right-of-way must also obtain a City street use permit.

E. Vendor carts are not allowed in residential zones.

F. The vendor cart shall not be located in any required parking, setback, or landscape area.

G. The vendor cart location shall minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular circulation and minimize traffic congestion.

H. Drive-up or drive-through vendor carts are not allowed.

I. The vendor cart shall not be more than eight (8) feet long, five (5) feet high, and four (4) feet wide. A five (5) foot clearance exclusively for pedestrian circulation shall be provided on the street side or parking lot side of the cart and accessory appurtenances, including seating areas.

J. The cart must have at least two (2) functional wheels and positive locking wheel devices. The wheels of the cart must be locked while the cart is outside of a building.

K. Mechanical audio or noise-making devices are not allowed.

L. The vending site must be kept clean at all times. The vendor must supply a refuse container.

M. One sign is permitted, not to exceed eight square feet, which may be double-sided. Portable signs (such as sandwich or A-frame signs) are not allowed.

N. The hours of operation shall be 5am to 12:00 midnight.

2. Vendor carts that do not comply with one or more of the criteria in BMC 19.17.020.1.D through 19.17.020.1.N may be allowed through a Type 1 review if the proposal:

A. Will be compatible with adjacent land uses and zones, and

B. Will be consistent with the purpose of the zone in which it is located, and

C. Will not be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.


19.17.030 Adult Entertainment Facilities

1. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of requiring standards for adult entertainment facilities is to mitigate the adverse secondary effect caused by such facilities and to maintain compatibility with other land uses and services permitted within the city.

2. Applicability. The standards in this section apply to all adult entertainment facilities, as defined in BMC 19.10.017 and are not subject to a variance.

3. Limitations. The standards in this section shall not be construed to restrict or prohibit the following activities:

A. A theater or performing arts institution that presents a play, opera, musical, dance or other dramatic work that is not distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct; or

B. A public or private educational institution, administered, licensed or recognized as a public or private educational institution by the State of Washington, that provides a modeling session or other class or seminar depicting nudity or sexual conduct.

4. Location and separation requirements.

A. An adult entertainment facility shall only be located in the I (Industrial) and Airport Industrial (AI) zones.

B. An adult entertainment facility shall not be permitted to locate within 330 feet of any of the following sensitive zones or uses in the City of Burien, or their equivalent sensitive zones or uses outside of the city limits:

i. Any RS zone, RM zone, or any dwelling unit;

ii. Any day care operation or recreational facility attended by minors;

iii. Any school, preschool or nursery school;

iv. Any public park and recreation facility;

v. Any religious facility;

vi. Any public library or community center; and

C. An adult entertainment facility shall not be permitted to locate within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment facility.

D. The 330 foot distance in BMC 19.17.030.4.B shall be measured by extending a straight line between the nearest boundary line of a sensitive zone or nearest property line of the lot containing the sensitive use, to the closest point of the structure containing an adult entertainment facility, whichever is the greater distance.

5. Waiver of separation requirements.

An applicant may obtain a waiver of the separation requirements required by BMC 19.17.030.4.B and C through a Type 3 review, only if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

A. The extent to which physical features would result in an effective separation between the proposed adult entertainment facility and any uses or zones identified in BMC 19.17.030.4.B in terms of visibility and access; and

B. The extent to which the proposed adult entertainment facility complies with the goals and policies of the Burien Comprehensive Plan; and

C. The extent to which the proposed adult entertainment facility is compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses; and

D. The availability or lack of alternative locations for the proposed adult entertainment facility; and

E. The extent to which the proposed adult entertainment facility can be avoided by alternative vehicular and pedestrian routes; and

F. The extent to which the applicant can minimize the adverse secondary effects associated with the proposed adult entertainment facility. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003, Ord. 291 § 2, 2000]


19.17.040 Cargo Containers

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote vibrant, attractive pedestrian mixed use areas while protecting residential neighborhoods and allow use of cargo containers by Burien businesses, contractors and community-related uses to provide secure, easily accessible accessory storage at relatively inexpensive levels.

2. Temporary Use. Cargo containers may be used for temporary storage of equipment and/or materials at a construction site during active construction that is authorized by a city permit.

3. Cargo containers are not allowed in the Downtown Commercial (DC), Office (O), Neighborhood Center (CN), Professional Residential (PR) and Special Planning Area 1 (SPA-1) zones, except as permitted in subsection (2) of this section.

4. Cargo containers are permitted as accessory uses in residential zones at a community facility, government facility, hospital, public park and recreation facility, or school.

A. All requirements, permits and approvals of BMC Titles 15 and 19 pertaining to structures shall apply, including but not limited to setbacks, lot coverage, critical area and transition area requirements.

B. Cargo containers located within a residential zone shall be no greater in size than ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet, and shall have a stick-built structure constructed to completely enclose the cargo container. Upon removal of the cargo container the screening structure shall also be removed. No stick-built structure shall be required if the cargo container is totally screened from abutting residential zone lots as determined by the Director.

C. Cargo containers shall not be stacked.

D. Cargo containers shall not occupy any required off-street parking spaces, vehicular access, pedestrian facilities or landscape areas for the site.

5. Cargo containers are permitted as accessory uses in the Industrial (I), Intersection Commercial (CI), Community Commercial (CC-1 and CC-2), Regional Commercial (CR), Special Planning Area 3 (SPA-3), Airport Industrial (AI) zones and in the SPA-2 zone as part of the master plan review (pursuant to BMC 19.15.060.1). Cargo containers in these zones are subject to the requirements below. Airplane unit load devices located in the I and AI zones are not regulated as cargo containers.

A. All requirements, permits and approvals of BMC Titles 15 and 19 pertaining to structures shall apply, including but not limited to setbacks, lot coverage, critical area and transition area requirements.

B. Cargo containers shall be screened from abutting rights-of-way and adjoining lots with a minimum of 10 feet of Type I landscaping. The Director may approve alternate screening that achieves the intent of a visual barrier. In reviewing alternate screening, the Director shall consider the proposed location of the cargo container, amount of usable space on the site for landscaping, view of the cargo container from abutting rights-of-way and adjoining lots, and the physical condition of the cargo container. All proposed screening shall be submitted for the review and approval by the Director.

C. Cargo containers shall not be located between a building and front property line. On a site with all front property lines, the cargo container shall be placed in a location that minimizes visual impact of the cargo container from surrounding streets and properties.

D. Cargo containers shall be painted to match the primary color of the adjacent building. If the cargo container is located within a building or not visible from abutting rights-of-way and adjoining lots as determined by the Director, painting is not required.

E. A cargo container located within 100 feet of a residential zone shall be no greater in size than ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet, and shall have a stick-built structure constructed to completely enclose the cargo container. Upon removal of the cargo container the screening structure shall also be removed. No stick-built structure shall be required if the cargo container is totally screened from abutting residential zone lots as determined by the Director.

F. Cargo containers shall not occupy any required off-street parking spaces, vehicular access, pedestrian facilities or landscape areas for the site.

G. Cargo containers may be stacked two-high in the Industrial (I) zone, and shall not be stacked in any other zone.

H. Cargo containers shall not be used for warehouse/storage as the primary use of the property.

I. Outdoor cargo containers shall not be refrigerated.

6. Legal Nonconforming Cargo Containers. Cargo containers that have been legally located on a site prior to November 12, 2002, shall be a legal nonconforming structure. In addition to the provisions for nonconforming structures in Chapter 19.55 BMC, cargo containers shall lose legal nonconforming status under the following circumstances:

A. Any legal nonconforming cargo container that is moved to a different location on a site shall comply with the requirements of this section.

B. If a legal nonconforming cargo container is removed from a site, any subsequent cargo containers placed on the site shall comply with the requirements of BMC Titles 15 and 19.

7. Illegal Cargo Containers. Cargo containers located on a site prior to {Effective date of ordinance} that do not have all required permits and approvals are considered illegal and shall have until {12 months after effective date of ordinance} to either come into compliance with BMC Titles 15 and 19 or be removed.

8. Permits for cargo containers shall include all necessary approvals from the Director, Building Official and Fire Marshal. Required permits include a building permit and a General Use Fire Permit. Use of the container shall not inhibit the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal from conducting all necessary inspections. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 §1, 2003, Ord. 369 §1, 2002; Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.17.050 Repealed. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007]


19.17.060 Residential Accessory Uses.

1. General. Uses, structures and activities that are customarily associated with residential uses are allowed in all residential zones and in any zone in which residential uses are allowed. The residential accessory use shall be subordinate and incidental to the residential use of the property. Such uses include but are not limited to: accessory living quarters; storage of yard maintenance equipment; storage of private vehicles and recreational equipment; pools, private docks and piers; antennae for private telecommunications services; on-site rental office for apartment complexes; and fallout/bomb shelters. Other residential accessory uses, such as accessory dwelling units, home occupations, bed and breakfast establishments and keeping of animals, are allowed subject to special regulations in Chapter 19.17. [Ord. 355 §1, 2002]

2. Residential Accessory Structures.

A. Accessory structures to a single detached dwelling unit shall not exceed the lesser of:

i. Fifteen percent of the total lot area; or

ii. Eighty percent of the footprint of the primary residential structure;

B. The maximum height of a residential accessory structure may not exceed 10 feet above the existing height of the primary residential structure or the maximum height allowed in the zone, whichever is less;

C. The Director may allow minor deviations to these dimensional requirements in order to accommodate industry standards for building dimensions. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]


19.17.070 Accessory Dwelling Units. Revised 1/20 Revised 7/20

1. Purpose. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) implement the housing policy provisions of Burien’s comprehensive plan by creating an affordable housing alternative and providing a choice of housing that responds to changing needs and lifestyles by offering rental income, security, and companionship to individuals and families. The purpose of the ADU regulations is to allow ADUs on lots with single detached houses while achieving the following:

A. Increase the number of affordable housing units;

B. Accomodate incremental growth in neighborhoods while preserving residential quality of life;

C. Provide for a variety of housing types that meet the needs of Burien’s diverse population at all stages of life; and

D. Encourage housing that allows residents to remain in their communities and neighborhoods as their needs change.

2. Requirements. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed as an accessory use to a single detached dwelling unit, provided the following requirements are met:

A. Number. A maximum of two accessory dwelling units are allowed per single detached house. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007]

B. A maximum of one detached accessory dwelling unit and one attached accessory dwelling unit is allowed per single detached house. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007]

C. For the purpose of this section “attached” shall mean that the primary unit and ADU have at least one common wall and appear to be contained within one structure. Connection through a breezeway or covered pathway shall not constitute an attached ADU. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]

D. Size.

i. Internal or attached ADUs shall not exceed 1,000 square feet and detached ADUs shall not exceed 800 square feet.

ii. The Director may make exceptions to size limitations to allow for the better utilization of existing spaces. Buildings must be at least five years old to be eligible for an exception to the size limitation.

E. Parking. In addition to the number of parking spaces required for the primary unit, a minimum of one off-street parking space must be provided for each accessory dwelling unit. Lots within one-quarter mile of a transit stop are exempt from the additional parking requirement for the accessory dwelling unit. The parking requirement exemption shall be in effect for a period of three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section in order to evaluate the impact of the parking requirement in single-family neighborhoods. Parking must be located at the rear or side of the lot if feasible.

F. Design. ADUs shall meet the following design requirements:

i. All new structures/additions must meet current development standards for the zone in which the property is located.

ii. Additions shall be consistent with the facade, roof pitch, siding and windows of the existing structure.

iii. Detached structures shall match (or complement) the design of the primary unit and must integrate well with the single-family character of the neighborhood. Trailers, recreational vehicles or other such accommodations shall not be allowed as an ADU.

3. Legalization of Nonconforming ADUs. ADUs existing without city approval may be legalized if the owner applies for the applicable permits. [Ord. 724 § 1, 2019; Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 560 § 1, 2012; Ord. 479 §1, 2007, Ord. 355 §1, 2002]


19.17.080 Bed and Breakfast Establishments

1. Purpose. The purpose of the bed and breakfast regulations is to provide small-business opportunities for Burien residents, provide an alternative form of lodging for visitors and to protect the residential character of neighborhoods in the City.

2. Applicability. The regulations of section 19.17.080 apply to bed and breakfast establishments in residential zones (RS and RM), Professional Residential (PR) and the Neighborhood Center (CN) zone. Bed and breakfast establishments in zones that allow lodging facilities are subject to those regulations.

3. Standards for operation of a bed and breakfast establishment.

A. Accessory Use. The bed and breakfast use must be accessory to the permanent residence of the operator.

B. Residential Character. Internal or external alterations of the structure that make the dwelling appear less residential in character are not allowed. Such changes may include paving of setbacks, constructing large parking areas visible from the street or neighboring properties and commercial type lighting.

C. Food Service. Food service may be provided only to overnight guests of the bed and breakfast.

D. Maximum Size. Bed and breakfasts are limited to three (3) bedrooms for guests. No more than ten (10) people total (including residents) may be accommodated overnight.

E. Parking. In addition to the required parking for the residential use, one on-site parking space is required for each room that is available for guests.



F. Employees. One non-resident employee is allowed on the premises at any one time. Occasional services provided by outside contractors, such as yard care or building maintenance, are not counted as non-resident employees.

G. Events. Meetings and social gatherings, including banquets, weddings, parties, retreats or other gatherings for direct or indirect compensation, are prohibited.

H. Business License. Bed and breakfast establishments are required to obtain a business license from the City Clerk’s office.

I. Signs. Signs for bed and breakfasts are subject to the standards in BMC 19.30 Signs, as now in affect, and as may be subsequently be amended. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 355 §1, 2002]


19.17.090 Home occupations

1. Purpose. The purpose of the home occupation regulations is to encourage flexibility in the work place and promote small-business opportunities in Burien by allowing home occupations. The further purpose of the regulations is to protect the residential character of neighborhoods by ensuring that home occupations are of a scale and intensity that is compatible with residential areas.

2. Home Occupation Types.

A. Type A home occupations are those that have no employees or customers come to the site and that do not use machinery or use or store hazardous substances on the premises. Type A home occupations may use equipment commonly found in a single-family home or professional office, such as computers, fax machines and copiers.

B. Type B home occupations are those that have one employee or any number of customers come to the site, use machinery, such as wood or metal shop tools, or use or store hazardous substances on the premises.

3. Licensing and Permits Required.

A. All home occupations (Type A and Type B) are required to obtain a City of Burien business license from the City Clerk’s Office.

B. Type B home occupations are required to obtain a home occupation permit from the Department of Community Development prior to issuance of a business license.

C. Home occupation permit procedures:

i. Home occupation permits are valid for a period of two years. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain a permit every two years.

ii. Permits for home occupations that utilize machinery and/or use or store hazardous substances shall obtain approval from the Building Official and Fire Marshall.

iii. Inspection may be required prior to the issuance of a home occupation permit or as necessary to ensure compliance with applicable codes and conditions of the permit.

iv. Upon approval of a Type B home occupation permit, the Department of Community Development shall issue a notice to residents abutting and across the street from the home occupation and within 300 feet along the street in both directions. The notice shall describe the approved home occupation and standards by which it must operate.

v. The Director shall take appropriate action to enforce the requirements of this section. Failure to comply with the regulations of this section or conditions of the permit may result in the home occupation permit being revoked or denial of an application for renewal of the permit.

D. Type B home occupations that have a valid City of Burien business license on April 23, 2002, shall be required to obtain a home occupation permit within 2 years. If the Type B home occupation does not comply with current standards, it shall be subject to the provisions of 19.55 BMC, Non-Conformance.

4. Permitted Home Occupations. Residents of a dwelling unit may conduct one or more home occupation as accessory activities, provided they comply with the standards of this section and are not prohibited by subsection A below or another section of this code. The rational for restricting the specific uses listed below is based on the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, which generally states that well established residential areas should be protected from encroachment of non-residential uses that may be detrimental to those residential areas. The following uses are inconsistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan and are restricted due to incompatibilities including but not limited to noise generation, visual appearance, odor and traffic impacts that are detrimental to residential areas:

A. Prohibited home occupations.

i. Automobile, truck and heavy equipment repair, body work or painting

ii. Large or small engine repair

iii. Large appliance repair

iv. Parking and storage of heavy equipment or vehicles

v. Storage of building materials for use on other properties

vi. Headquarters or dispatch centers where more than one employee comes to the site and are dispatched to other locations

vii. Commercial kennels, catteries and stables

viii. Commercial painting

ix. Religious facilities (see BMC 19.15 for specific zoning requirements)

x. Marijuana producers, processors and retailers. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014]

5. Standards for Operation of a Home Occupation.

A. Size. The total area devoted to all home occupation(s) shall not exceed 25 percent of the combined gross floor area of the primary residence and permitted accessory buildings, provided the floor area must be enclosed within a building to be counted.

B. Location. Home occupations may be conducted in the primary residence or a permitted accessory building. All the activities of the home occupation(s) shall be conducted indoors, except for those related to growing or storing of plants used by the home occupation(s). Exterior storage, display or repair of goods or equipment related to home occupation(s) is prohibited.

C. Employees. Home occupations shall have no more than one nonresident employee on the premises at any one time.

D. Parking. In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows:

i. One stall for a nonresident employee that will work on the premises; and

ii. One stall for customers when services are rendered on site.

E. Retail Sales. Retail sales shall be limited to items produced on site or incidental sales of items associated with a service provided by the home occupation.

F. Customers. Customer visits to home occupations are limited to the hours from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. No more than one customer may be at the residence at any one time and no more than 8 customer visits shall occur in any one day. For the purpose of this section, one customer may consist of more than one person, such as a family.

G. Vehicles. The home occupation(s) may use or store one (1) vehicle for pickup or delivery of materials used by the home occupation(s), provided:

i. Such vehicle shall not park on adjacent streets or within any required setback areas of the lot, with the exception of the driveway; and

ii. Such vehicle shall not exceed a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or capacity of one ton or similarly sized vehicle. The Director shall have the final determination authority on vehicle size and should consider potential impacts to the residential character of the neighborhood and/or surrounding properties.

H. Deliveries to the home occupation(s) are permitted between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. Vehicles used to deliver goods to the home occupation are limited to passenger vehicles, mail carriers and express carriers, such as UPS.

I. Operation of the home occupation(s) shall comply with all applicable regulations, including but not limited to the Burien Municipal Code, International Building Code and International Fire Code, and shall not:

i. Create vibrations, heat, glare, dust, odors or smoke that is discernible at the property lines and is offensive to a reasonable person;

ii. Create noise exceeding 55 decibels at the property line from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. or any noise discernible by the human ear at the property lines from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m. or noise considered a nuisance under Chapter 8.45 BMC;

iii. Change the building occupancy classification of the structure(s) used for the home occupation(s);

iv. Use or store hazardous substances in excess of those normally allowed in a residential area under the International Building Code and International Fire Code;

v. Create any electrical, magnetic or other interference off the premises; or

vi. Consume utility quantities that negatively impact the delivery of utilities to surrounding properties.

J. Residential Character. Internal or external alterations that make the property appear less residential in character are not allowed. Examples of such changes may include paving of setbacks, constructing large parking areas visible from the street or neighboring properties and commercial type lighting. Use of commercial mobile offices are not allowed.

K. Signs. Signage for home occupations is subject to the standards in BMC 19.30.050. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

6. Exceptions.

A. Telecommuting is not classified as a home occupation and is not subject to the regulations of this section. For the purpose of this section, telecommuting is work done from home on a part-time basis for a business that is based off the premises. Telecommuting does not allow for non-resident employees or customer visits.

B. Bed and breakfast establishments are not subject to the regulations of this section. Regulations for bed and breakfast establishments are in Section 19.17.080.

C. Family daycare homes are not subject to the regulations of this section. Regulations for family daycare homes are located in Chapter 19.15 BMC, Use Zone Charts. 

D. Garage sales, yard sales, temporary home boutiques or bazaars for handcrafted items, parties for display of domestic products, and other such uses are not subject to the regulations of this section, provided that any such use does not exceed three (3) days in duration and does not operate more than nine (9) days in a calendar year. [Ord. 620 § 1, 2016; Ord. 560 § 1, 2012; Ord. 355 §1, 2002]


19.17.100 Keeping of Animals

1. Purpose. The raising, keeping and breeding of animals are sources of enjoyment, recreation and learning for Burien residents. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the keeping of animals in residential areas that will enhance and preserve compatibility between neighboring properties, minimize nuisances and disturbances caused by animals, minimize the impact of livestock on the environment and prevent cruelty to animals.

2. Permitted accessory use. The raising, keeping and breeding of small animals, bees and livestock are allowed as an accessory use to residential uses in any zone or as an accessory use to any permitted use in a residential zone, subject to the regulations of this section and BMC Title 6, Animals.

3. Prohibited activities. Commercial kennels and catteries and fee boarding of small animals or livestock are not allowed unless specifically allowed in Chapter 19.15 BMC, Use Zone Charts. This prohibition does not apply to hobby kennels and catteries that comply with the requirements of this section and BMC Title 6, Animals.

4. Small animals. The maximum number of small animals are as follows, provided young of adult small animals on the premises under 3 months in age are excluded from the density limitations:

A. Small animals which are kept in a dwelling as household pets including those kept in aquariums, terrariums, cages or similar containers shall not be limited in number, except as may be provided in BMC Title 6.

B. Other small animals kept outside, except those otherwise regulated by this subsection, shall be limited to three per household on lots of less than 20,000 square feet, five per household on lots of 20,000 square feet, with an additional one allowed per 5,000 square feet of site area over 20,000 square feet up to a maximum of 20.

C. The total number of unaltered adult cats and dogs per household shall not exceed three, whether those animals are kept in a dwelling or outside, unless approved under a hobby kennel or cattery license.

D. Miniature potbelly pigs. That type of swine commonly known as the Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian Potbelly Pig (Sus scofa bittatus). One of the small animals allowed under subsection (4)(B) of this section may be a miniature potbelly pig, provided that it does not exceed 22 inches in height at the shoulder or more than 150 pounds in weight.

E. Miniature goats. The types of goats commonly known as Pygmy, Dwarf, and Miniature Goats. Up to two miniature goats may be kept in addition to the small animals allowed under subsection (4)(B) of this section, on any lot provided:

i. It does not exceed 24 inches at shoulder or more than 150 pounds in weight;

ii. A minimum of 800 square feet of outdoor space with a shelter enclosure shall be devoted for goat(s); and shall maintain a distance of not less than 10 feet to any property line;

iii. Nursing offspring of miniature goats may be kept until weaned, no longer than 12 weeks from birth.

F. Domestic fowl and rabbits. Any combination of three (3) domestic fowl and rabbits, with the exception of roosters, may be kept on any lot in addition to the small animals permitted in the preceding subsections. Five (5) on lots equal to or greater than 7,200 square feet, 1 additional domestic fowl or rabbit may be kept per each 2,000 square feet of lot area to a maximum of 15; over 15 domestic fowl may be kept on lots greater than 20,000 square feet if a farm management plan, developed with the King Conservation District, is implemented and maintained.

i. A suitable pen, structure or enclosure to house and safeguard domestic fowl and rabbits from predators shall be provided and located no less than 10-feet from the property line.

ii. Maintenance and upkeep of domestic fowl and rabbit areas shall meet the following United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) prevention measures to minimize public health concerns and nuisances:

a. Remove wet manure, bedding and feed to minimize odor, prevent bacterial growth and limit flies that can spread contamination;

b. Store feed in rodent-proof containers;

c. Properly compost chicken manure prior to using it for fertilizer to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria; and

d. Regularly clean and sanitize feeders and water dispensers.

G. Birds. Birds kept outside of a dwelling unit shall be kept in an aviary or loft that meets the following standards:

i. The aviary or loft shall provide one-half square foot for each parakeet, canary or similarly sized birds, one square foot for each pigeon, small parrot or similarly sized bird, and two square feet for each large parrot, macaw or similarly sized bird;

ii. Aviaries or lofts shall not exceed 700 square feet;

iii. The aviary is set back at least 10 feet from a separate owner’s property line, and 20 feet from any dwelling unit on adjacent properties.

H. Setbacks, maintenance and upkeep of animal areas. Except otherwise regulated by this subsection, setbacks, maintenance and upkeep of animal areas shall meet the following standards:

i. Any covered structure used to house or contain 4 or more small animals shall maintain a distance of not less than 10 feet to any property line and 20 feet from any dwelling unit on adjacent properties;

ii. All covered structures, confinement areas and open run areas shall be kept clean to prevent infestation of insects, rodents or disease as well as to prevent obnoxious or foul odors;

iii. Animal waste shall be properly disposed of and any accumulated animal waste must not be stored within the setback area. Any storage of animal waste must not constitute a nuisance as defined in Chapter 8.45 BMC, Nuisances;

iv. Manure when used as a fertilizer must be plowed or spaded under within 24 hours after application;

v. Store feed in rodent-proof containers; and

vi. Provisions shall be made to ensure that animal food stored outdoors will not attract rodents or insects.

I. Prohibited small animals. The keeping of roosters, mink, foxes and any exotic or wild animals that could pose a public threat or have an obnoxious nature which is a nuisance to the adjacent neighborhood are prohibited.

5. Beekeeping.

A. Beehives are limited to 2 hives on sites less than 10,000 square feet, 4 on sites between 10,000 and 20,000 square feet, 10 on sites between 20,000 square feet and 1 acre, 20 on sites between 1 and 1.5 acres, and 25 on sites between 1.5 and 5 acres.

B. Beehives shall be located at least 25 feet from any property line, except when placed behind a 6 foot high fence, which extends 25 feet beyond the hives in both directions, or placed at least 8 feet above the adjacent ground level.

C. Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives at all times.

D. Adequate space shall be provided in each hive to prevent overcrowding and swarming.

E. Colonies shall be requeened following any swarming or aggressive behavior.

F. All colonies shall be registered with the State Department of Agriculture.

G. Abandoned colonies, diseased bees, or bees living in trees, buildings, or any other space except in movable-frame hives shall constitute a public nuisance, and the City shall take appropriate legal action to abate the nuisance.

6. Livestock.

A. The minimum site that may be used to accommodate livestock shall be 35,000 square feet, provided that the portion of the total site area available for use by the livestock meets the requirements of this subsection.

B. The maximum number of livestock shall be as follows:

i. Horses, cattle and similar sized livestock animals: 1 per acre of area available for the animal’s occupancy;

ii. Llamas, donkeys, miniature horses and cattle and similar sized livestock animals: 1 per .5 acre available for the animal’s use;

iii. Sheep, full sized goats and similar sized livestock animals: 2 per .25 acre of area available for the animal’s occupancy;

iv. Young of adult livestock on the premises that are under six months of age are excluded from the density limitations; and

v. Livestock densities may be increased as follows if a farm management plan, developed with the King Conservation District, is implemented and maintained: Three (3) horses, cows, or similarly sized animals, six (6) llamas, donkeys, miniature horses and cattle or similarly sized animals or fifteen (15) sheep, goats or similarly sized animals per gross acre of total site area. The farm management plan shall incorporate best management practices for grazing and pasture management, manure management, watering and feeding area management, and stream corridor and wetland management. Such plans must include a schedule for implementation and shall be on file with the Department of Community Development. Any Indian tribe with tribal rights to protection of the fisheries habitat provided by the site shall have 60 days from plan submission to comment on the plan. The plan must, as a minimum, achieve 25-foot vegetated buffers for all streams and wetlands on the site, and assure that drainage ditches on the site do not channel animal waste to such streams or wetlands.

C. Critical areas. The keeping of livestock is subject to the review requirements for wetland and stream protection in Chapter 19.40 BMC, Critical areas.

D. Setbacks, maintenance and upkeep of animal areas. Except otherwise regulated by this subsection, setbacks, maintenance and upkeep of livestock areas shall meet the following standards:

i. Any building used to house, confine or feed livestock shall not be located closer than 35 feet to any boundary property line;

ii. Any building used to house, confine or feed livestock shall not be located closer than 35 feet to any dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises, except that a barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory living quarters;

iii. There shall be no uncovered storage of manure, shavings or similar organic material closer than 45 feet to any dwelling unit, accessory living quarters or boundary property line; and any storage of animal waste must not constitute a nuisance as defined in Chapter 8.45 BMC, Nuisances. Manure when used as a fertilizer must be plowed or spaded under within 24 hours after application;

iv. Provisions shall be made to ensure that animal food stored indoors or outdoors will not attract rodents or insects; and

v. Grazing and confinement areas may extend to the property line.

E. Prohibited livestock. The keeping of hogs is prohibited, with the exception of miniature potbelly pigs allowed under subsection (4)(D) of this section.

7. Categorization of animals. In the event that animals are proposed that do not clearly fall within the categories established by this code, the Director shall determine an appropriate category based on that which is most similar to the animal in question. [Ord. 636 § 1, 2016; Ord. 355 §1, 2002]


19.17.110 Secure Community Transition Facilities

1. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of requiring standards for secure community transition facilities (SCTFs) is to comply with RCW 71.09 while maintaining compatibility with other land uses and services permitted within the city.

2. Applicability. The standards in this section apply to all SCTFs proposed and approved pursuant to BMC 19.15 and are not subject to a variance.

3. Maximum number of residents: No SCTF shall house more than 3 persons, excluding resident staff.

4. Siting Criteria:

A. SCTFs shall locate in the Industrial zone or Airport Industrial (AI) zone.

B. SCTFs should be located in relationship to transportation facilities in a manner appropriate to their transportation needs.

C. No SCTF shall be allowed within the following distances from the following specified uses, areas or zones, whether such uses, areas or zones are located within or outside the City limits:

i. Within 330 feet of any residential zone;

ii. Adjoining, immediately across a street or parking lot from, or within the line of sight of a “risk potential activity” as defined in RCW 71.09.020, as amended.

iii. Within one mile from any existing SCTF, work release, prerelease, or similar facilities as defined in RCW 71.09.250(8) and (9).

D. The distances specified in subparagraph C of this subsection shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the building in which the SCTF is to be located, to the nearest point of the zoning boundary line or property line of the lot on which the use from which the proposed SCTF is to be separated is located.

5. On-Site Facilities Required: Each SCTF shall provide on-site dining, on-site laundry or laundry service, and on-site recreation facilities to serve the residents.

6. Application Materials: In addition to the regular application materials required for a Land Use Review pursuant to BMC 19.65.030.2, an application for an SCTF shall also include:

A. The siting process used for the SCTF, including alternative locations considered.

B. An analysis showing that utmost consideration was given to potential sites such that siting of the facility will have no undue impact on any one racial, cultural, or socio-economic group, and that there will not be a resulting concentration of similar facilities in a particular neighborhood, community, jurisdiction, or region.

C. Proposed mitigation measures including the use of extensive buffering from adjoining uses.

D. A general overview of planned security for the facility.

E. A schedule and analysis of all public input solicited or to be solicited during the siting process. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 §1, 2003, Ord. 363 §1, 2002]


19.17.120 Building Height measurement methods.

1. Building height shall be measured from the average natural grade to the highest point of the structure. To determine compliance with the height limit:

A. Review of plans and elevations provided by the applicant:

i. The site plan shall indicate the natural and proposed finished grade and building footprint, and

ii. Building elevations shall be provided for each side of the structure.

Site plan and building elevation submittal requirements shall be set forth in administrative procedures.

On sloping lots or when a structure is proposed within two feet of the height limit, the natural grade shall be evidenced by a topographical map and supporting information. A topographical map may not be required where the change in elevation of the lot is less than 15 feet in a horizontal distance of 100 feet within the proposed building lot (15 percent slope).

B. The average natural grade is measured by delineating the smallest square or rectangle which can enclose the building footprint and then averaging the elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle.

C. The height of a structure is measured from the average natural grade vertically to the highest point of the structure.

D. Compliance with the height limit shall be determined by:

i. Field verification by building official or designee of the establishment of the bench mark for a topographic map, if applicable,

ii. Review of building permit plans,

iii. Field verification at the completion of building framing.

On sloping lots or when the structure is within two feet of the height limit, certification by a licensed surveyor is required.

On all other structures, verification by the building official or designee is required at the time of the framing inspection. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 252 § 3, 1999; Ord. 103 § 6, 1994; Ord. 28 § 1(341), 1993]


19.17.130 Height – Exceptions to limits.

The following structures may be erected above the height limits of BMC 19.15.

1. Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance. Roof structures extending above the height limit shall be the minimum necessary to achieve the desired outcome and purpose of the building height projection; and

2. Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples, communication transmission and receiving structures, personal wireless service facilities regulated by BMC 19.50, utility line towers and poles, and similar structures. [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008; Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(353), 1993]


19.17.140 Height – Limits near major airports.

No building or structure shall be erected nor shall any tree be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit established by the airport height maps for the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1 (354), 1993]


19.17.150 Calculations – Allowable dwelling units.

1. The maximum allowed number of dwelling units, shall be computed by multiplying the net site area (in acres) by the applicable residential density. However in the RS zones, no lot shall be created less than the required minimum lot area except through the application of lot averaging as provided by BMC 19.15 and/or clustering as provided by BMC 19.40.230

2. Only whole numbers will be utilized in determining permitted number of units or floor area. When calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. [Ord. 269§ 1, 1999; Ord. 103 § 7, 1994; Ord. 28 § 1(343), 1993]

3. Submerged lands are not counted toward density or floor area calculations. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 252 § 5, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(344), 1993]


19.17.160 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was required to calculate and ensure compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(345), 1993]


19.17.170 Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

Except as provided for nonconformances by Chapter 19.55 BMC:

In the R or PR zones construction may be permitted on:

1. Any legally subdivided lot of record created by the City of Burien; or

2. Any legally subdivided lot of record created prior to February 28, 1993, or created prior to any annexation into the City; or

3. Any lot created prior to the enactment of any applicable state subdivision statute, provided the size of the lot was not reduced by more than 50 percent through acquisition for public purposes. On such lots new homes may be built and existing houses may be expanded and remodeled. Applicable setbacks, lot coverage, critical area restrictions, design review requirements (if any), height limits and other applicable regulations in the zoning code shall be met. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.17.180 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(347), 1993]


19.17.190 Setbacks – Modifications.

The following setback modifications are permitted:

1. When the common property line of two lots is covered by an existing building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line. When a building is substantially improved the director may require a lot line adjustment to adjust or remove the lot line from passing through a building.

2. When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming front setbacks, the required front setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required front setback, whichever results in the greater front setback. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(348), 1993]


19.17.200 Setbacks – Regional utility corridors.

1. In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

2. In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors.

3. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet from property or easement lines delineating the boundary of regional utility corridors, except for utility structures necessary to the operation of the utility corridor. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(349), 1993]


19.17.210 Setbacks – Alleys.

1. A setback is not required abutting an alley, except as provided in subsection (2).

2. Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be setback from the alley property line to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet from the access point to the opposite edge of the alley. No portion of the garage or the door in motion may cross the property line. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(350), 1993]


19.17.220 Setbacks – Adjoining half-street or designated arterial.

In addition to providing the standard front setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of front setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(351), 1993]


19.17.230 Setbacks – Projections allowed.

Projections may extend into required setbacks as follows:

1. Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project into any setback, provided such projections are:

A. Limited to two per facade;

B. Not wider than 10 feet; and

C. Not more than 24 inches into an interior setback or 30 inches into a front setback; and

D. Total projections on any one facade shall not exceed 50% of the building facade on which they are located.

2. Uncovered porches and decks which exceed 18 inches above the finished grade may project:

A. Eighteen inches into interior setbacks; and

B. Five feet into the front setback;

3. Uncovered porches and decks not exceeding 18 inches above the finished grade may project to the property line;

4. Eaves may not project more than:

A. Eighteen inches into an interior setback;

B. Twenty-four inches into a front setback; or

C. Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero-lot-line development; and

5. Fences with a height of six feet or less may project into any setback, provided that the sight distance requirements of BMC 19.17.240 are maintained. [Ord. 28 § 1(352), 1993]

6. Retaining structures no higher than 18-inches above finished grade, measured at the lowest point of the wall may be allowed in setbacks.

7. Retaining walls at any height may be located in the setback if it is retaining a cut into the natural grade.

8. Temporary structures may be located within a front or interior setback if 6-feet or less in height. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005]


19.17.240 Sight distance requirements.

Except for utility poles and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections and site access points:

1. A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection (2) of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade (see Figure 19.17.240-1);

Note: The area of a sight distance triangle between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade shall remain open.

Figure 19.17.240-1
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


2. The sight distance triangle at:

A. A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both front property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

B. A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the front property lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle; and

3. The director may require modification or removal of structures or landscaping located in required front setbacks, if:

A. Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway, and

B. No reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible. [Ord. 428 § 3, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(356), 1993]


19.17.250 Mobile home parks – Standards for existing parks.

1. Mobile home parks established prior to February 28, 1993 shall continue to be governed by all standards relating to density, setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking in effect at the time they were approved.

2. Placement of new accessory structures and replacement mobile homes, either standard or nonstandard, in these mobile home parks shall be governed by the dimensional standards in effect when the parks were approved, unless two or more replacement mobile homes are proposed to be installed adjacent to each other under the flexible setback option set forth in BMC 19.17.270. Where internal setbacks are not specified, the average of the prevailing setbacks on the pads to either side of the proposed new or replacement structure shall apply.

3. No spaces or pads in an existing mobile home park shall be used to accommodate recreational vehicles (RVs), except when the spaces or pads were specifically for RVs at the time the park was established.

4. An existing mobile home park may be enlarged, provided the proposed enlargement meets the standards set forth in BMC 19.17.270 and 19.17.280.

5. Only mobile homes meeting either the standards of the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development may be placed in a mobile home park in the city of Burien. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(371), 1993]


19.17.260 Mobile home parks – Standards for new parks.

New mobile home parks shall be developed subject to the following standards:

1. A mobile home park shall be at least three acres in area;

2. Residential densities in a mobile home park shall be the base density of the zone in which the park is located;

3. Only mobile homes meeting either the standards of the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development may be placed in a mobile home park in the city of Burien;

4. A mobile home park shall be exempt from the building coverage and impervious surface limits set forth in Chapter 19.15 BMC;

5. At least one of the off-street parking spaces required for each mobile home shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home pad;

6. Internal roads and sidewalks shall provide access to each mobile home space and shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted city of Burien road standards for residential minor access streets;

7. There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of separation maintained between all mobile homes on the site, unless the flexible setback option set forth in BMC 19.17.270 is used. Accessory structures shall be located no closer than:

A. Ten feet to mobile homes on adjacent spaces, unless constructed of noncombustible materials, in which case the minimum setback shall be five feet;

B. Five feet to accessory structures of mobile homes on adjacent spaces; and

C. Five feet to the mobile home or other accessory structures on the same space, except a carport or garage may be attached to the mobile home, and the separation may be waived when such structures are constructed of noncombustible materials;

8. All mobile homes and RVs supported by piers shall be fully skirted; and

9. A mobile home park may include a storage area for RVs owned by residents of the park, provided the storage area contains no utility hook-ups and no RV within the storage area shall be used as living quarters. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 3, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(372), 1993]


19.17.270 Mobile home parks – Alternative design standards.

As an alternative to the building separation and internal street standards of BMC 19.17.260:

1. Building separation requirements or setbacks between mobile homes and accessory structures on adjacent spaces may be modified, provided:

A. The common walls meet the fire protection standards set forth in the International Building Code and the standards set forth in the International Fire Code for duplexes, multifamily and condominium developments, as applicable; and

B. Rental agreement clauses, by-laws or other legal mechanisms stipulate maintenance responsibilities for structures, fences and yards;

2. Private streets may be used with a minimum driving surface of 22 feet in width, provided:

A. The streets comply in all other respects with the road standards;

B. All required parking is located off-street and as specified in BMC Title 12 and BMC 19.20; and

C. Such streets shall not:

i. Directly connect two or more points of vehicular access to the park; or

ii. Serve over 100 dwelling units within the park. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(373), 1993]


19.17.280 Storage space and collection points for recyclables.

Developments shall provide storage space for the collection of recyclables as follows:

1. The storage space shall be provided at the rate of:

A. One and one-half square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a city-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

B. Two square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

C. Three square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

D. Five square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments;

2. The storage space for residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

A. The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one building;

B. There shall be one collection point for every 30 dwelling units;

C. Collection points may be located within residential buildings, in separate buildings/structures without dwelling units, or outdoors;

D. Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building;

E. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic on-site, or project into any public right-of-way;

3. The storage space for nonresidential development shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

A. Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point;

B. Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas;

C. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic on-site, or project into any public right-of-way; and

D. Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours;

4. The collection points shall be designed as follows:

A. Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose containers for recyclables;

B. Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site;

C. Collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet;

D. A six-foot wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point, excluding collection points located in industrial developments that are greater than 100 feet from residentially zoned property;

E. Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet; and

F. Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area;

5. Only recyclable materials generated on-site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recyclables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off-site. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(381), 1993]


19.17.290 Fences.

Fences are permitted as follows:

1. Fences exceeding a height of six feet shall comply with the applicable street and interior setbacks of the zone in which the property is located;

2. The height of a fence located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall, or berm;

3. When a protective fence is located on top of a rockery within the required setback area, any portion of the fence above a height of six feet shall be an open-work fence;

4. Electric fences shall:

A. Be permitted in all zones, provided that when placed within RS or RM zones, additional fencing or other barriers shall be constructed to prevent inadvertent contact with the electric fence from abutting property;

B. Comply with the following requirements:

i. An electric fence using an interrupted flow of current at intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamp;

ii. An electric fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamp;

iii. All electric fences in RS or RM zones shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at 50-foot intervals stating that the fence is electrified; and

iv. Electric fences sold as a complete and assembled unit can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation are certified by an ANSI-approved testing agency; and

5. Except as specifically required for the necessary security related to a nonresidential use, no barbed or razor-wire fence shall be located in any RS or RM zone. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 5, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(382), 1993]


19.17.300 Trail corridors.

1. Trail easements shall be provided by any development, except for single detached residential permits, when such developments are located within any community or regional trail corridor identified by an adopted Burien functional plan or Burien comprehensive plan identifying community and/or regional trail systems. [Ord. 28 § 1(383), 1993]

2. Trail design shall be reviewed by the city of Burien for consistency with adopted standards for:

A. Width of the trail corridor;

B. Location of the trail corridor on the site;

C. Surfacing improvements; and

D. Use(s) permitted within the corridor. [Ord. 28 § 1(384), 1993]

3. Maintenance of any trail corridor or improvements, retained in private ownership, shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the parks division. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(385), 1993]


19.17.310 Enhanced services facilities. Added 7/20

1. Purpose. The purpose of these enhanced services facilities regulations is to provide for a needed community service while ensuring that adequate public facilities are available to the residents of these facilities, mitigate incompatibilities between dissimilar uses, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.

2. Applicability. The standards in this section apply to all enhanced services facilities as defined in BMC 19.10.141.5.

3. Licensing Requirements.

a. All ESFs are required to obtain a city of Burien business license as well as demonstrate compliance with all licensing requirements pursuant to Chapter 70.97 RCW, or as amended by the State Legislature.

b. A written management plan shall be provided for the director’s review and approval. At a minimum, a management plan shall address the following components:

i. Identify potential impact(s) on nearby residential uses and proposed methods to mitigate those impacts;

ii. Identify the project management or agency responsible for the support staff and who will be available to resolve concerns pertaining to the facility. The plan shall specify procedures for updating any changes in contact information;

iii. Identify staffing, supervision and security arrangements appropriate to the facility. A 24-hour on-site supervisor is required;

iv. Identify a communications plan in the event that information to the surrounding neighborhood would be needed throughout the time the ESF is in operation. [Ord. 734 § 2, 2020]


Chapter 19.18 Affordable Housing Demonstration Program

19.18.010    Purpose.

19.18.020    Applicability.

19.18.030    Zoning and regulatory standards.

19.18.040    Criteria for Affordable Housing Demonstration Projects.

19.18.050    Affordable housing requirements.


19.18.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

1. Facilitate, for a specified trial period, the construction of affordable housing by applicants who can demonstrate an ability to finance, manage, and monitor affordable housing units to assure permanent affordability, in accordance with the directives of the Growth Management Act, Housing Policy Act, and the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

2. Provide flexibility in certain development regulations in exchange for provision of affordable housing.

3. Promote thoughtful layout of buildings, parking areas, and circulation, service, landscaping and amenity elements that enhance Burien’s visual character, promote compatibility between developments and uses, and enhance the function of developments.

4. Implement an Innovative, Affordable Housing Demonstration program as described in this Chapter for a period of no more than three years from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5. Evaluate the results of the pilot projects to better understand potential changes needed to development regulations to support Burien housing needs. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.18.020 Applicability.

The Affordable Housing Demonstration Program applies to development of affordable housing units, by applicants meeting the qualifications within this Chapter, and shall be allowed in all zones that allow residential uses.

The City shall use a competitive selection process to determine which proposals will be allowed to apply for a Type 1 permit as an affordable housing demonstration project. The City may approve up to five affordable housing demonstration projects, with projects chosen to demonstrate a variety of housing types, to evaluate Burien’s existing development regulations, to use sites in ways that support innovative and affordable housing, and to provide housing affordable to households in the 0 – 30% and 30 – 50% AMI for King County.

The Planning Commission will make a recommendation to City Council and the Council shall determine which proposals will be allowed to submit a Type 1 application under this chapter using the following criteria:

1. Consistency with the intent of the affordable housing goals of providing affordable housing choices, specifically demonstrating those housing styles identified in this chapter and compatibility with surrounding development.

2. Affordable housing proposals must be at least 1,500 feet from any other affordable housing proposals under this chapter. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.18.030 Zoning and regulatory standards.

1. Project applicants who wish to participate in this program must demonstrate compliance with both the standards described in BMC 19.18.040 and the affordable housing requirements described in BMC 19.18.050.

2. In addition to complying with the approval criteria in Chapter 19.65 BMC, the applicant must demonstrate that:

A. The environmental impacts of the proposed development are consistent with City, State and Federal regulations.

B. The proposal is compatible with the character of surrounding development.

C. The proposal provides elements that contribute to a sense of community within the development by including elements such as front entry porches, common open space, and common buildings or common spaces within buildings.

D. Any proposed modifications to requirements of the Burien Zoning Code, other than those specifically identified in this chapter, are important to the success of the proposal as an affordable housing project.

3. In order to meet the goals of the affordable housing demonstration program, there will be flexibility with regard to certain normally applicable regulations and requirements. Standards listed in this chapter will apply to affordable housing demonstration projects and will prevail if they conflict with underlying zoning regulations. All other regulations and requirements of the City of Burien will continue to apply, except that applicants may propose additional modifications to the Burien Zoning Code, as provided for in this section.

A. Affordable housing demonstration projects are permitted in all zones where residential uses are allowed as provided for in Chapter 19.15 BMC.

B. In all zones where residential uses are allowed, the underlying development standards shall apply except for those standards identified in BMC 19.18.040.

C. The vehicular access and roadway standards of Chapter 12.05 BMC shall apply. The variance provisions of 2016 Road Design and Construction standards or their successor may be used to allow further flexibility to the vehicular access and roadway standards requirements for the proposed project.

D. The project shall be required to meet any minimum density requirements under Chapter 19.15 BMC.

E. Impact fees under Burien Municipal Code for the proposed project shall be assessed at the rates for multifamily dwelling units, as identified in Chapter 19.35 BMC.

F. Exceptions to the following development standards may be granted at the discretion of the Director if the project can demonstrate that the proposed design meets the intent of the underlying zone:

i. Front setbacks along arterial streets.

ii. Transition standards.

4. The City’s approval of an affordable housing project does not constitute approval of a subdivision, a short plat, or a binding site plan. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.18.040 Criteria for Affordable Housing Demonstration Projects.

The following standards apply to projects developed under these provisions:

	Housing Types	• Cottages

• Single-family

• Duplexes or triplexes designed to look like single-family as part of a development that includes at least one other housing type (the other housing type may be traditional single-family)

• Tiny houses

• Congregate housing

• Modular units

• Multi-family and mixed use structures

• Combinations of the above types

• Existing dwelling units may be incorporated into the development

	Locations	Citywide where residential uses are allowed. Projects must be located a minimum distance of 1,500 feet from another affordable housing proposal. Multi-story congregate housing units not designed within duplexes or triplexes shall be located within multi-family or mixed use zones.

	Number of Development Projects	Up to 5 projects citywide, with no more than two projects demonstrating the same housing type. Required affordability levels are identified in BMC 19.18.050.

	Access Requirements	Determine flexibility for road widths, and turn-around requirements with approval from Public Works and Fire Departments

	Neighborhood Meeting	Two Neighborhood meetings with City staff attendance is required.

The first neighborhood meeting shall occur at the initial concept development phase. The second neighborhood meeting shall occur during the land use review process.

Both meetings shall include a minimum notification requirement of property owners and residents located within 1,000 feet from the project site.

	Parking Requirement	To be determined with submittal of a parking demand study in compliance with BMC 19.20.030.

[Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


19.18.050 Affordable housing requirements.

Projects developed under this chapter must comply with the following requirements:

Income limit.

1. The average cost of units in each project will be affordable to households earning no more than 50% King County AMI.

2. In at least one project, the cost of all units will be affordable to households earning no more than 30% King County AMI.

3. “Affordable” means that the total housing costs, including basic utilities as determined by the City, must not exceed 30 percent of the household income.

4. Duration. Units must serve only income-eligible households for a minimum period of 50 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy.

5. Affordability agreement.

A. Prior to building permit issuance, an affordable housing agreement in a form approved by the Director and City Attorney must be recorded with the King County Recorder’s office as a covenant running with the land and binding on the applicant, assigns, heirs and successors.

B. The agreement must address the level and duration of affordability, income qualifications, reporting, monitoring, and any other topics related to the provision of the affordable housing units.

C. The City may, at its sole discretion, establish a monitoring fee for the affordable units to cover the costs to the City to review and process documents to maintain compliance with income and affordable restrictions of the agreement.

6. Project applicant qualifications. Applicants must meet the following requirements to qualify under this Chapter:

A. The applicant can demonstrate experience in providing affordable housing. Notwithstanding this requirement, an applicant who can demonstrate experience in providing housing and a mission statement of its intent to use that experience toward achieving the goal of providing permanently affordable housing may be deemed to have met this requirement.

B. The applicant can demonstrate the ability to employ a mechanism to retain all of the units as affordable for a minimum 50-year period for applicable income levels.

C. The applicant can demonstrate an ability and commitment to submit an annual report to the city documenting the status of all residential units. [Ord. 718 § 1, 2019]


Chapter 19.20 Parking and Circulation

19.20.010    User guide.

19.20.020    Purpose.

19.20.030    General requirements.

19.20.040    Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

19.20.050    Shared parking and access requirements.

19.20.060    Loading space requirements.

19.20.070    Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

19.20.080    Commute trip reduction.

19.20.090    Pedestrian circulation and access.

19.20.100    Off-street parking plan design standards.

19.20.110    Off-street parking construction standards.

19.20.120    Internal circulation road standards.

19.20.130    Maintenance.


19.20.010 User Guide

This Chapter contains information on vehicle and pedestrian circulation area, parking areas and related improvements. Information on the number of parking spaces required for a particular use can be found in the use zone charts, BMC 19.15. BMC 19.15 references this chapter for minimum required parking for the DC Zone. This chapter provides information on the number of required spaces for a particular use specifically for the DC Zone. This Chapter does provide a process for determining the case-by-case parking requirements for some uses. It also contains a process for increasing or decreasing the parking requirements of this Code, and a process for reducing/meeting the minimum off-street parking requirement through contribution to a parking Fee-in-Lieu program for commercial uses in certain land use zones. Finally, this Chapter contains requirements regarding the location and minimum dimensions of parking areas and other vehicular and pedestrian circulation areas. For regulations regarding vehicles parked on residential property, see Chapter 10.11 BMC. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 492 § 2, 2008, Ord. 292 § 1, 2000, Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]


19.20.020 Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses allowed in this Code; to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, rideshare and bicycles; and to increase pedestrian mobility by:

1. Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that assure safe, convenient and adequately sized parking facilities;

2. Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements;

3. Providing for parking and storage of bicycles;

4. Providing safe direct pedestrian access from public rights-of-way to structures and between developments;

5. Requiring uses which attract large numbers of employees or customers to provide transit stops; and [Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]

6. Providing for payment of a Fee-in-Lieu of providing off-street parking as otherwise required by BMC 19.20 for commercial uses in the DC and SPA-1 zones. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]


19.20.030 General requirements

1. Parking Plan Required. Prior to issuance of any permits for a new building, structure or use, or for the enlargement of an existing building, structure or use that requires off-street parking, the applicant shall submit a parking plan for approval by the Director. This plan shall contain all design features and elements necessary to show compliance with this Chapter.

2. Parking Requirement Not Specified. If this Code does not specify a parking requirement for a use, the Director shall establish the minimum requirement. Parking requirements shall be based on the operation of the proposed use, parking requirements established for similar zones or uses, or a study of anticipated parking demand submitted by the applicant. Sufficient information shall be provided to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, unless an equally qualified individual is authorized by the Director.

3. Fee-in-Lieu Option. The minimum number of stalls to be provided through payment of a Fee-in-Lieu of parking as allowed by this Chapter shall be based on a schedule derived from Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standard parking rates for Land Uses, as adjusted periodically to reflect Downtown Burien parking usage. This schedule may be amended as needed by the City Council. [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]

A. The decision to allow or require payment in lieu of construction will be made by the decision maker of the underlying land use review or by the Director if a land use review is not required.

B. Provision of required parking through the Fee-in-Lieu program shall be optional on the part of the applicant and City, except that Fee-in-Lieu payment shall be required for existing buildings with a change of use that requires parking in excess of that available on-site or through a shared parking agreement.

C. Per Space Fee. The per space parking fee for this program shall be uniform throughout the DC and SPA-1 zones. The fee shall be adjusted annually, based on changes in the State of Washington Department of Transportation’s Construction Cost Index.

D. Fee Payment. All applicants shall pay the Fee-in-Lieu Parking Program fee in accordance with provisions of this chapter at the time that the applicable building permit or certificate of occupancy when a building permit is not required is ready for issuance. The actual Fee-in-Lieu payment shall be based upon the schedule in effect at the time of permit issuance.

E. Accounting. The City shall maintain a record of all of the properties that have met their required parking space obligation by paying the appropriate fee for the spaces.

F. Future Obligation. Payment of the Fee-in-Lieu of parking shall not relieve the development or property owner from any future obligation to participate financially in construction of publicly accessible parking spaces through additional funding mechanisms (e.g. a local improvement district, business improvement district). Payment of the Fee-in-Lieu of parking does not guarantee the developer or property owner that parking spaces will be constructed for the sole use of or in the immediate proximity of that development.

G. Program Review. The fee-amount and performance of the Fee-in-Lieu program shall be reviewed biennially, with the initial report made to the City Council beginning in January of the second full calendar year following the effective date of the implementing ordinance.

4. If the site is in the DC zone, the requirements contained in Chapter 19.47 BMC supersede any conflicting provisions of this Chapter. The provisions of this Chapter that do not conflict with Chapter 19.47 BMC apply to DC-zoned properties.

5. Except as permitted with a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 19.75 BMC, required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger motor vehicles of customers, patrons, employees and residents only and shall not be used for any other purpose.

6. Parking Exemptions for Existing Buildings in DC and SPA-1 Zones.

A. For the purpose of calculating required off-street parking spaces, the gross floor area of all uses located in buildings existing as of November 20, 2017 and located in the Downtown Commercial (DC) and Old Burien (SPA-1) zones are exempt from providing additional off-street vehicle parking spaces.

B. Additions, expansions or reconstruction of buildings existing as of November 20, 2017 located in the DC and SPA-1 zones are exempt from providing additional off-street vehicle parking spaces for additions, expansions or reconstruction which are no greater than two (2) stories in height. Only the gross floor area of the portion of additions, expansions or reconstruction to existing buildings which are greater than two (2) story limit is subject to the provisions of BMC 19.20.040.

C. Dwelling units associated with additions, expansions or reconstruction of buildings existing as of November 20, 2017 located in the DC and SPA-1 zones are not exempt from providing required off-street vehicle parking spaces and are subject to the provisions of BMC 19.20.040.

D. Existing off-street vehicle parking spaces in excess of those required under the provisions of BMC 19.20.040, may be removed, provided that the quantity of off-street vehicle parking is not reduced below the minimum required for the uses located in the existing building. This only applies to buildings existing as of November 20, 2017 in the DC and SPA-1 zones.

E. These exemptions from providing additional off-street vehicle parking for existing buildings in DC and SPA-1 zones are in effect until November 20, 2020 and may be extended by the City Council for two additional years based on an evaluation of downtown parking availability. [Ord. 680 § 1, 2017; Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.040 Computation of required off-street parking spaces

1. Number of Parking Spaces. Off-street parking areas shall contain at a minimum the number of parking spaces as stipulated in BMC 19.15. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of .50 or greater rounding up and fractions below .50 rounding down. In the case of two or more uses on the same site, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for each use computed separately, except as permitted in BMC 19.20.050 pertaining to shared parking. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]

2. Guest Parking. For townhouse or apartment dwelling units, the Director may require additional parking spaces for guests if there is inadequate guest parking proposed on the site, and

A. Adequate, safe on-street parking is not available, or

B. The on-street parking is located in or adjacent to an RS zone.

3. Modification of Number of Required Parking Spaces.

A. An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by submitting a study of anticipated parking demand complying with BMC 19.20.030.2, proving that parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement. In such cases, the Director may approve a reduction of the minimum required number of parking spaces on a case-by-case basis.

B. In the DC and SPA-1 zone, the applicant may meet his/her parking obligation in one of the following ways: [Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]

i. By providing the required number of parking spaces in accordance with the Fee-in-Lieu of Parking Demand Rate Schedule for Downtown Burien Zones as shown on Table 19.20-2, and in accordance with the most recent parking occupancy supply of Downtown Burien Zones.

ii. By performing a study of anticipated parking demand in accordance with BMC 19.20.030.2. Fee-in-Lieu of parking is not available if required parking is determined through a parking demand study.

iii. In accordance with BMC 19.20.030.3, the applicant may meet a portion of his/her parking obligation through contribution to a parking Fee-in-Lieu program. The cost per parking space for the parking Fee-in-Lieu program shall be established by the City Council.

4. Parking for Shell Building Permits. When the city has received a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitations of the shell permit. When the range of possible uses results in different parking requirements, the Director will establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses. The Director may deny a certificate of occupancy for an individual use if the number of parking spaces required by BMC 19.15 and this chapter are not provided.

5. Bicycle Parking. At least one bicycle parking slot for every 12 required motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided in all non-residential developments. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified.

A. The Director may reduce bicycle parking facilities for patrons when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location;

B. Bicycle parking facilities for patrons shall be located within 100 feet of the building entrance and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement or building;

C. All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.



6. Handicapped Parking Requirements. Off-street parking and access for physically handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction.

7. Table 19.20-2 is used based on the results of the most recent occupancy study of publicly available parking supplies in Downtown Burien Zones to determine the required number of parking spaces for an applicant. A parking occupancy study should be completed every two years to determine the column on Table 19.20-2 that reflects the current occupancy. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.050 Shared parking and access requirements.

Shared parking and access between sites and between different uses is encouraged. To ensure the long-term availability of the shared parking and/or access, a covenant, easement or other contract for shared parking and/or access between the cooperating property owners shall be approved by the Director. This document must be recorded with King County records and elections divisions as a deed restriction on both properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the Director. If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the Director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless a satisfactory alternative remedy is approved by the Director. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.060 Loading space requirements.

1. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any public right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from required parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces.

2. Any loading space located within 100 feet of an RS or RM zone shall be screened and operated to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, berms, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.070 Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

A drive-through facility shall be designed and located so that sufficient stacking space is provided for handling of motor vehicles using such facility during peak business hours of the facility. A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to a service window of a drive-through facility. Stacking spaces and the entrance and exit for the drive-through facility shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other parking space areas. Stacking spaces shall not be counted as required parking spaces. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.080 Commute trip reduction.

All major employers (as defined by state law) shall demonstrate compliance with requirements of local and state laws on commute trip reduction (CTR). [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.090 Pedestrian circulation and access.

1. All uses, except single detached dwelling units, shall provide pedestrian access onto the site. Pedestrian access points shall be provided at all pedestrian arrival points to the development including the property edges, adjacent lots, abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and at transit stops. Pedestrian access shall be coordinated with existing development to provide circulation patterns between developments.

2. Pedestrian walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances, and between buildings.

3. Pedestrian access and walkways shall comply with City of Burien development standards and meet the following minimum design standards:

A. Access and walkways shall be well-lit and physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic;

B. Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 5 feet of unobstructed width and meet City standards for surfacing of walkways or sidewalks;

C. Access shall be usable by mobility impaired persons and shall be designed and constructed to be easily located by the sight-impaired pedestrian by either grade change, texture or other equivalent means;

D. A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles. Raised crosswalks or speed bumps may be required at all points where a walkway crosses the lane of vehicle travel. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.100 Off-street parking plan design standards.

1. Parking Area Location: Off-street parking shall be located on the same site as the development served by the parking. The Director may approve off-site parking for uses located in zones other than RS or RM, if:

A. The applicant provides an acceptable alternative plan in the event that the off-site parking does not work, and

B. Appropriate legal documents establishing the off-site parking area are submitted for Director approval pursuant to BMC 19.20.050, and

C. Off-street parking for a use must be located in a zone that allows that use. For example, off-street parking for a retail use is not allowed in an RS zone.

2. Driveway Location, Design and Construction. Access between off-street parking areas and abutting public streets shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with City of Burien development standards.

3. Dead-End Alley Access to Parking. No dead-end alley may provide access to more than eight required off-street parking spaces.

4. Driveways and Parking Areas in Setbacks.

A. Driveways and parking areas for single detached dwelling units and townhouse or apartment dwelling units with individual garages or carports shall not exceed 20 feet in width in any required setback, except if:

i. The driveway/parking area serves a 3-car or larger garage; and

ii. No more than 15 percent of the required setback area is displaced by the driveway.

B. Driveways for all other developments may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas abutting a public right-of-way in order to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street. Maximum width within the setback or landscaped area is 12 feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic. A wider encroachment may be allowed, provided no more than 20 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is displaced by the driveway.

5. Minimum Parking Space and Parking Lot Aisle Dimensions. The minimum parking space and parking lot aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on Table 19.20-1. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and parking lot aisle dimensions shall be determined by the Director.

6. Compact Parking Spaces. In any development containing more than 20 parking spaces, up to 50 percent of the total number of required parking spaces may be sized to accommodate compact cars. In any development containing more than 80 parking spaces, at least 20 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided shall be sized to accommodate compact cars. Each space shall be clearly identified as a compact car space by painting the word “COMPACT” in capital letters, a minimum of eight inches high, on the pavement at the base of the parking space and centered between the striping.

7. Landscaping Requirements. Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with BMC 19.25.070.

8. Additional Width Abutting Landscaped Area. Any parking spaces abutting a landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area.

9. Reduction of Parking Space Depth. The parking space depth may be reduced up to 18 inches when vehicles overhang a walkway if the remaining walkway provides a minimum of 60 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians.

10. Parking for Single Detached Dwelling Units.

A. Dwelling units may have tandem or end-to-end parking spaces for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas.

B. All vehicle parking and storage must be in a garage, carport or on an approved paved surface. Any paved surface used for vehicle parking or storage must have direct and unobstructed driveway access. Parking spaces for a single detached dwelling unit shall be adequately sized and located to accommodate a standard-sized vehicle without the vehicle extending into the public right-of-way or vehicular access easement or tract.

11. Vanpool and Carpool Parking Design Standards. Vanpool/carpool parking areas shall meet the following minimum design standards:

A. A minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet 3 inches shall be provided to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool/carpool parking spaces are located in a parking structure; and

B. A minimum turning radius of 26 feet 4 inches with a minimum turning diameter (curb to curb) of 52 feet 5 inches shall be provided from parking lot aisles to adjacent carpool/vanpool parking spaces.

12. Parking Area Lighting. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site, as required by the International Building Code. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The Director shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 659 § 7, 2016; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.110 Off-street parking construction standards.

1. Surfacing. Off-street parking areas shall have dust-free, all-weather surfacing. Off-street parking areas shall conform to City of Burien development standards.

2. Grading. Grading work for access and parking areas shall comply with City of Burien development standards.

3. Drainage. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with City of Burien development standards.

4. Parking Space Markings. Asphalt or concrete surfaced parking areas shall have parking spaces marked by surface paint lines or suitable substitute traffic marking material in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Standards. Wheel stops or curbing are required where a parked vehicle would encroach on adjacent property, pedestrian access or circulation areas, right-of-way or landscaped areas.

5. Curbing. All access and parking areas shall be enclosed with cast in place vertical curbs or functionally equivalent structural barriers. Curbs may be cut to allow surface water runoff to enter low impact development best management practices (LID BMPs).

6. Bicycle Parking. Where bicycle parking is provided, locate the bicycle parking over a permeable pavement where allowed in accordance with BMC Title 13. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 659 § 8, 2016; Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.120 Internal circulation road standards.

Internal access roads to off-street parking areas shall conform with the surfacing and design requirements for private commercial roads set forth in City of Burien development standards. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]


19.20.130 Maintenance.

The property owner shall maintain all off-street access and parking areas. Maintenance shall include removal and replacement of dead and dying trees, grass and shrubs, removal of trash and weeds, and repair and maintenance of traffic control devices, parking space striping, signs, light standards, fences, walls, surfacing materials, curbs, railings and landscaping. Parking area stormwater facilities, including permeable pavements, shall be maintained in accordance with BMC Title 13. [Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 659 § 9, 2016; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]

 

TABLE 19.20-1  

MINIMUM PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS 

	A	B	C	D	E

	Parking Space Angle	Minimum Parking Space Width	Minimum Parking Space Length	Minimum Parking Lot Aisle Width	Minimum Unit Width

	1-Way	2-Way	1-Way	2-Way

	0	Compact 7.5	18.0	10.0	20.0	25.0	35.0

	 	Standard 8.5	24.0	12.0	20.0	29.0	37.0

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	30	Compact 7.5	15.0	10.0	20.0	38.0	48.0

	 	Standard 8.5	16.5	10.0	20.0	42.0	52.0

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	45	Compact 7.5	15.0	11.0	20.0	42.82	51.82

	 	Standard 8.5	19.0	13.0	20.0	51.88	58.88

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	60	Compact 7.5	15.0	13.0	20.0	46.48	53.48

	 	Standard 8.5	19.0	17.5	20.0	58.9	61.4

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	75	Compact 7.5	15.0	16.5	20.0	49.36	52.86

	 	Standard 8.5	19.0	20.0	20.0	61.1	61.1

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	90	Compact 7.5	15.0	20.0	20.0	50.0	50.0

	 	Standard 8.5	18.0	23.0	24.0	59.0	60.0

[Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 659 § 9, 2016; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]

Also see Fig. 19.20-1
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 292 § 1, 2000]

 

TABLE 19.20-2  

FEE-IN-LIEU OF PARKING PARKING RATE DEMAND SCHEDULE FOR DOWNTOWN BURIEN ZONES 

	Land Use	Unit Variable	Parking Supply <55% occupancy	Parking Supply 55 – 65% occupancy	Parking Supply 66 – 75% occupancy	Parking Supply 76 – 85% occupancy	Parking Supply >85% occupancy

	Hotel	Room	0.4	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.8

	Business Hotel	Room	0.3	0.4	0.5	0.5	0.6

	Motel	Room	0.4	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.8

	Bowling Alley	Lane	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Movie Theater with Matinee	Seats	0.1	0.1	0.2	0.2	0.2

	Health/Fitness Club	1,000 sf. GFA	2.3	2.9	3.4	3.8	4.5

	Athletic Club	1,000 sf. GFA	1.7	2.1	2.5	2.8	3.3

	Church	1,000 sf. GFA	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.8	0.9

	Day Care Center	1,000 sf. GFA	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Museum	1,000 sf. GFA	0.4	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.7

	Library	1,000 sf. GFA	1.2	1.6	1.8	2.0	2.4

	Convention Center	Attendee	0.2	0.2	0.2	0.3	0.3

	Office Building	1,000 sf. GFA	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Medical-Dental Office Building	1,000 sf. GFA	1.6	2.0	2.3	2.6	3.1

	Government Office Building	1,000 sf. GFA	1.6	2.1	2.4	2.7	3.2

	US Post Office	1,000 sf. GFA	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Judicial Complex	1,000 sf. GFA	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Free-Standing Discount Store	1,000 sf. GFA	1.8	2.3	2.7	3.1	3.6

	Hardware/Paint Store	1,000 sf. GFA	0.9	1.2	1.4	1.5	1.8

	Shopping Center	1,000 sf. GFA	1.8	2.3	2.6	3.0	3.5

	Tire Store	1,000 sf. GFA	1.3	1.7	2.0	2.2	2.6

	Supermarket	1,000 sf. GFA	1.0	1.3	1.5	1.7	2.0

	Apparel Store	1,000 sf. GFA	0.6	0.7	0.8	0.9	1.1

	Pharmacy/Drugstore without Drive-Through Window	1,000 sf. GFA	0.9	1.1	1.3	1.4	1.7

	Pharmacy/Drugstore with Drive-Through Window	1,000 sf. GFA	0.9	1.2	1.4	1.5	1.8

	Furniture Store	1,000 sf. GFA	0.6	0.7	0.8	0.9	1.1

	Carpet Store	1,000 sf. GFA	0.6	0.8	0.9	1.0	1.2

	Video Rental Store	1,000 sf. GFA	1.2	1.5	1.7	2.0	2.3

	Walk-In Bank	1,000 sf. GFA	1.1	1.4	1.7	1.9	2.2

	Drive-In Bank	1,000 sf. GFA	1.2	1.5	1.7	2.0	2.3

	Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-Through Window	1,000 sf. GFA	4.5	5.9	6.8	7.7	9.0

	Dry Cleaners	1,000 sf. GFA	0.6	0.7	0.8	0.9	1.1

	Auto Sales/Services	1,000 sf. GFA	1.8	2.3	2.7	3.1	3.6

	Bar	1,000 sf. GFA	6.2	8.1	9.3	10.5	12.4

	Convenience/Gas	Pump	0.9	1.2	1.4	1.5	1.8

	Pool/Billiards, Martial Arts	1,000 sf. GFA	6.2	8.1	9.3	10.5	12.4

	General Retail	1,000 sf. GFA	1.4	1.8	2.0	2.3	2.7

	Strip Mall – commercial	1,000 sf. GFA	1.2	1.5	1.7	2.0	2.3

	Retail-Associated Night Use	1,000 sf. GFA	1.2	1.5	1.7	2.0	2.3

	High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant (No Bar or Lounge)	1,000 sf. GFA	2.6	3.4	3.9	4.4	5.2

	High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant (Bar or Lounge)	1,000 sf. GFA	6.2	8.1	9.3	10.5	12.4

	Fast-Food Restaurant without Drive-Through Window (Hamburger)	1,000 sf. GFA	5.8	7.5	8.7	9.9	11.6

	Fast-Food Restaurant without Drive-Through Window (non-Hamburger)	1,000 sf. GFA	3.9	5.0	5.8	6.5	7.7

[Ord. 652 § 1, 2017; Ord. 531 § 1, 2010]


Chapter 19.25 Tree Retention and Landscaping 

19.25.010    User Guide

19.25.020    Purpose.

19.25.030    Applicability.

19.25.040    Landscaping Categories.

19.25.050    Landscaping – Types and description.

19.25.060    Landscaping – Street frontages.

19.25.070    Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

19.25.080    Landscaping – General requirements. 

19.25.090    Landscaping – Alternative options.

19.25.100    Landscaping – Irrigation.

19.25.110    Landscaping – Installation.

19.25.120    Significant trees – Retention required. 

19.25.130    Significant trees – Retention plan. 

19.25.140    Significant trees – Incentives for retention. 

19.25.150    Significant trees – Protection. 

19.25.160    Significant trees – Replacement. 

19.25.170    Maintenance. 

19.25.180    Bonds/security. 


19.25.010 User Guide.

Chapter 19.15 of this Code containing the use zone charts assign a landscaping category to each use in each zone. This category is either “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” “E” or “F”. This Chapter contains the specific requirements that pertain to each category. This Chapter also establishes certain minimum requirements for all uses, and minimum requirements for landscaping of parking lots and retention of existing trees. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for tree retention and landscaping to foster a healthy and attractive community; to maintain a positive community image; to improve the aesthetic quality of the built environment; to enhance quality of life; to protect and enhance property values; to promote retention and protection of existing vegetation; to reduce the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats; to absorb wind and noise; to enhance air quality; to increase compatibility between different land uses; and to increase privacy for and within residential zones by:

1. Providing visual relief from large expanses of parking areas and reduction of perceived building scale;

2. Providing physical separation between residential and nonresidential areas;

3. Providing visual screens and barriers as a transition between differing land uses;

4. Retaining existing vegetation and significant trees by incorporating them into the site design; and

5. Providing increased areas of permeable surfaces to allow for:

A. Infiltration of surface water into ground water resources;

B. Reduction in the quantity of storm water discharge; and

C. Improvement in the quality of storm water discharge. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.030 Applicability.

This Chapter applies to all new development and to existing development with non-conforming landscaping that is required to comply based on BMC 19.55.035. In the event of a conflict or overlap between landscaping standards in this Code, the most stringent requirements shall apply, as determined by the Director. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.040 Landscaping Categories.

1. The use zone charts in BMC 19.15 establish a landscaping category for each use in each zone. Table 19.25.040-1 indicates the requirements that must be met for each landscape category. If different landscape categories apply to a site, the category that provides for the most landscaping shall apply. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

 

Table 19.25.040-1  

	Landscape Category	Along Property Line Abutting a Public Right-of-Way (Except a Freeway or Alley)	Along Property Line Abutting a Freeway*	Along All Other Property Lines (Except Along an Alley)	Along Building Facade Greater Than 35’ High or 50’ Wide	Surface Parking Area Landscaping Required? (see BMC 19.25.070)

	A	None	None	None	None	No

	B	10’ wide Type III	10’ wide Type II	None, except in a transition area (see BMC 19.17.015)	5’ wide Type IV	Yes

	C	10’ wide Type III	10’ wide Type II	None, except in a transition area (see BMC 19.17.015)	5’ wide Type IV	Yes

	D	15’ wide Type I	10’ wide Type I	10’ wide Type II, except when abutting an I zone, then none	5’ wide Type IV	Yes

	E	See BMC 19.47 and 19.49 for landscaping requirements in the DC and SPA-1 zones. The only sections of BMC 19.25 that apply to the DC and SPA-1 zones are: BMC 19.25.080, 19.25.100, 19.25.110, 19.25.170 and 19.25.180.

	F**	25’ wide, Type II (along 8th Ave. So. or Des Moines Memorial Dr.); otherwise, 15’ wide, Type III	None	50’ wide Type I (along northern perimeter of the AI zone); otherwise, 10’ wide Type III	5’ wide Type IV	Yes

*Landscaping abutting a freeway shall be installed within the freeway right-of-way, if permitted by the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT). If such approval is not granted, the landscaping shall be installed on the site.

** The required landscaping width can be reduced up to 50% through use of a landscape berm. Minimum berm width shall be equal to the amount of landscaping width reduction. Minimum berm height shall be 1 foot for each 3 feet of berm width or portion thereof.

The required landscaping width can be reduced up to 75% through use of a solid wall and landscaping. The wall shall use materials (such as wood or concrete) in the same architectural style of the building on the property. Minimum wall height shall be 8 feet. Required landscaping shall be on the outside of the wall.

2. Additional landscaping may be required in the use zone charts in BMC 19.15 and transition standards in BMC 19.17.015. [Ord. 396 § 1, 2003, Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.050 Landscaping – Types and description.

The four types of landscaping are described and applied as follows:

1. Type I Landscaping.

A. Type I landscaping is a “full screen” that functions as a visual barrier.

B. Type I landscaping shall consist of:

i. A mix of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs placed to form a continuous screen;

ii. At least 70 percent evergreen trees;

iii. Evergreen trees spaced no more than 25 feet on center;

iv. Deciduous trees spaced no more than 30 feet on center;

v. Evergreen shrubs spaced no more than four feet apart; and

vi. Groundcover pursuant to BMC 19.25.070;

2. Type II Landscaping.

A. Type II landscaping is a “filtered screen” that functions as a visual separator.

B. Type II landscaping shall consist of:

i. A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs spaced to create a filtered screen;

ii. At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees;

iii. Evergreen trees spaced no more than 25 feet on center;

iv. Deciduous trees spaced no more than 30 feet on center;

v. Shrubs spaced no more than five feet apart; and

vi. Groundcover pursuant to BMC 19.25.070;

3. Type III Landscaping.

A. Type III landscaping is a “see-through screen” that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations.

B. Type III landscaping shall consist of:

i. A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees spaced to create a continuous canopy;

ii. At least 70 percent deciduous trees;

iii. Evergreen trees spaced no more than 25 feet on center;

iv. Deciduous trees spaced no more than 30 feet on center;

v. Shrubs, that do not exceed a height of four feet, spaced no more than four feet apart; and

vi. Groundcover pursuant to BMC 19.25.070;

C. Type III landscaping areas may contain bioretention facilities where feasible in accordance with BMC Title 13. Where a bioretention facility is proposed to meet all or part of the Type III landscaping area:

i. The bioretention facility shall be landscaped in accordance with BMC Title 13; and

ii. The total Type III landscaping areas on the site shall be planted with at least 90% of the total number of required trees as calculated above.

4. Type IV Landscaping.

A. Type IV landscaping is “parking area landscaping” and “building facade landscaping” that provides shade and visual relief while maintaining clear sight lines within parking areas;

B. Type IV landscaping shall consist of:

i. Canopy-type deciduous trees spaced no more than 30 feet on center, or evergreen trees spaced no more than 25 feet on-center. At least 70 percent of the trees shall be deciduous.

ii. Shrubs that do not exceed a height of four feet;

iii. Plantings contained in planting islands or strips having an area of at least 75 square feet and with a narrow dimension of no less than four feet;

iv. Groundcover pursuant to BMC 19.25.090.

C. Type IV landscaping areas may contain bioretention facilities where feasible in accordance with BMC Title 13. Where a bioretention facility is proposed to meet all or part of the Type IV landscaping area:

i. The bioretention facility shall be landscaped in accordance with BMC Title 13; and

ii. The total Type IV landscaping areas on the site shall be planted with 100% of the total number of required trees as calculated above. [Ord. 659 § 10, 2016; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.060 Landscaping – Street frontages.

Perimeter landscaping along street frontages shall be provided as follows:

1. For single detached subdivisions:

A. Trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for every:

i. Fifty feet of frontage along a neighborhood collector street; and

ii. Forty feet of frontage along an arterial street.

B. The trees shall be:

i. Located within the right-of-way if permitted by the custodial state or local agency;

ii. No more than 20 feet from the right-of-way line when located within a lot;

iii. Maintained by the adjacent landowner unless part of a city maintenance program; and

iv. A species approved by the city.

C. The trees may be spaced at irregular intervals in order to accommodate sight distance requirements for driveways and intersections.

D. Mature and healthy native trees retained within the right-of-way or no more than 20 feet from the right-of-way line within a lot may substitute for the required street trees at a one-to-one ratio and may be spaced at irregular intervals. [Ord. 659 § 11, 2016; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.070 Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

1. Where feasible in accordance with BMC Title 13, perimeter and interior landscaping areas shall contain bioretention facilities to manage on-site stormwater runoff. A conceptual illustration is shown in Figure 19.25.070-1.
[IMAGE]


Figure 19.25.070-1

2. Perimeter Landscaping. A minimum 5’ wide Type IV landscape strip shall be provided on private property along the perimeter of a parking area. The width of the landscape strip shall be increased to 7’ if vehicle overhangs into the landscape strip are allowed. Where bioretention is used, the facility shall be landscaped in accordance with BMC Title 13.

3. Interior Landscaping. The following requirements apply to any surface parking area with 10 or more parking stalls. The interior landscape requirement is in addition to the perimeter landscape area required in BMC 19.25.070.2, and the landscaping required by BMC 19.25.040.

A. Uses requiring landscape category B shall provide interior planting areas at the rate of 20 square feet per parking stall;

B. Uses requiring landscape category C, D or F shall provide interior planting areas at a rate of:

i. Twenty square feet per parking stall when 10 to 30 parking stalls are provided; and

ii. Twenty-five square feet per parking stall when 31 or more parking stalls are provided;

C. Each interior planting area shall contain at least 75 square feet, with a narrow dimension of no less than four feet (six feet if vehicles are allowed to overhang into the landscaped area);

D. Evergreen or canopy-type deciduous trees shall be provided and distributed throughout the parking area at a rate of:

i. One tree for every 10 parking stalls for a use requiring landscape category C, D or F; or

ii. One tree for every five parking stalls for a use requiring landscape category B.

E. Groundcover shall be provided pursuant to BMC 19.25.080.

F. Landscaping islands shall be provided at the ends of each row of parking, except ends of rows that abut required perimeter landscaping.

G. The maximum distance between any parking stall and required interior parking area landscaping shall be no more than 65 feet.

H. Where bioretention is used to meet the interior landscaping requirement, the facility shall be landscaped in accordance with BMC Title 13 and the total interior landscaping areas on the site shall achieve at least 90% of the total number of trees required as calculated in 19.25.070(3)(D). [Ord. 659 § 12, 2016; Ord. 620 § 1, 2016; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.080 Landscaping – General requirements. 

1. A landscaping and irrigation plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director. Written requirements for the landscaping and irrigation plan shall be established by the Director. The landscaping and irrigation plan shall be prepared by a Washington State registered landscape architect, Washington Certified Nurseryman/Landscaper, or other qualified landscape designer as authorized by the Director. The irrigation plan may be prepared by a certified irrigation designer.

2. New landscaping materials shall include species native to the Pacific Northwest or non-native noninvasive species that have adapted to the climatic conditions of the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest in the following minimum amounts:

A. Seventy-five percent of groundcover and shrubs, and

B. Fifty percent of trees;

3. At least 60 percent of new landscaping materials shall consist of drought-tolerant species, except where site conditions within the required landscape areas assure adequate moisture for growth;

4. With approval of the Director, species and spacing requirements may be relaxed when existing native vegetation augments new plantings to meet the standards of this chapter;

5. Deciduous trees shall have a caliper of at least 1.75 inches at the time of planting. The caliper may be averaged, but no individual tree shall have a caliper of less than 1.5 inches;

6. Evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height measured from treetop to the ground at the time of planting;

7. When the width of any landscape strip is 20 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows;

8. Unless recommended by a Certified Arborist, no tree defined as a prohibited tree in BMC 19.10.408 shall be planted.

9. Shrubs shall be:

A. Two-gallon size at time of planting in Type II, III and IV landscaping,

B. At least 24 inches in height at the time of planting for Type I landscaping, and

C. Maintained at a height not exceeding four feet when located in Type III or IV landscaping;

10. Groundcovers shall be planted and spaced to result in total coverage of the required landscape area within three years as follows:

A. Four-inch pots at 18 inches on center, or

B. One-gallon or greater sized containers at 24 inches on center;

11. Turf grass may be used as groundcover only in Type III and IV landscape areas provided that the grass area:

A. Constitutes no more than 30 percent of such landscape areas; and

B. Is at least five feet wide at the smallest dimension;

12. Turf grass and groundcover areas shall contain at least two inches of composted organic material at finish grade;

13. All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping;

14. Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1);

15. Existing soils shall be augmented as follows:

A. For sites subject to drainage review in accordance with BMC Title 13, soil amendments shall follow the standards for restoring the soil moisture holding capacity of BMC Title 13, or

B. For sites not subject to drainage review in accordance with BMC Title 13, amend existing soils with a two-inch layer of fully composted organic material rototilled a minimum of six inches deep;

16. Landscape areas shall be covered with mulch to minimize evaporation as follows:

A. For sites subject to drainage review in accordance with BMC Title 13, mulching shall follow the standards for restoring the soil moisture holding capacity of BMC Title 13, or

B. For sites not subject to drainage review in accordance with BMC Title 13, a minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall consist of materials such as yard waste, sawdust and/or manure that is fully composted;

17. Drought-tolerant and nondrought-tolerant species shall be grouped separately and be served by separate irrigation systems, zones or controls;

18. Permanent cast in place concrete curbs or structural barriers shall be provided to protect landscape areas from damage by vehicles. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 659 § 13, 2016; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.090 Landscaping – Alternative options.

The following alternative landscape options may be allowed only if they accomplish equal or better levels of screening and are subject to Director approval:

1. The width of perimeter landscaping required by BMC 19.25.040 or BMC 19.25.070 may be reduced up to 25 percent along any portion where:

A. A development retains an additional 10 percent of significant trees or an additional 10 significant trees per acre on-site (above the requirements of BMC 19.25.120(3) and (4)), whichever is greater; or

B. Berms at least three feet in height or architectural barriers at least six feet in height (consistent with the style and materials of the building(s) on site) are incorporated into the landscape design; and

C. The landscape materials that would have been planted in the perimeter landscape area are planted along the street facing facade of the building(s) on the site. These landscape materials are in addition to the required building facade landscaping in BMC 19.25.040.

2. The landscaping requirements of BMC 19.25.040 or BMC 19.25.070 may be modified when:

A. Existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures or utilities would render application of this chapter ineffective or result in scenic view obstruction; or

B. The landscape materials are incorporated elsewhere on-site and the modification would result in comparable or superior landscaping than would result from compliance with the required standard. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.100 Landscaping – Irrigation.

All plantings shall receive sufficient water to ensure survival as follows:

1. Except for areas of undisturbed existing vegetation or low areas with existing high soil moisture conditions, all landscape areas shall have automatic temporary or permanent irrigation systems as described in this section. The applicant may request and the Director may approve a manual irrigation plan and schedule in lieu of automatic irrigation.

2. Temporary irrigation systems may be removed after 24 months or two growing seasons, whichever occurs first, provided that the plantings are established. Temporary irrigation systems are allowed for:

A. Areas of undisturbed existing vegetation that are being enhanced with additional plantings;

B. Areas where existing site conditions assure adequate soil moisture for growth, only as required to sustain new plantings;

C. Landscape areas consisting of drought-tolerant vegetation.

3. Permanent irrigation systems are required within all other required landscape areas, provided such systems shall be designed by a certified water use auditor and with:

A. Moisture or precipitation sensors;

B. Automatic timers set for operation during periods of minimum evaporation and that assure adequate moisture levels;

C. Head-to-head spacing, if sprinkler heads are proposed;

D. Pressure regulating devices;

E. Backflow prevention devices; and

F. Separate irrigation zones for:

i. Turf and planting beds; and

ii. Other drought-tolerant species. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.110 Landscaping – Installation.

1. Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase.

2. The time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of landscaping during the next appropriate planting season, provided that a bond or other financial guarantee pursuant to BMC 19.25.180 is submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.120 Significant trees – Retention required. 

Significant trees shall be retained as follows:

1. All significant trees on an undeveloped lot shall be retained. Tree removal or land clearing on an undeveloped lot for the purpose of future development is prohibited unless a land use permit is approved by the City.

2. Landscape category A: Thirty percent (30%) of the significant trees located on the site, excluding critical areas or their buffers.

3. Landscape category B: Ten percent of the significant trees located on the site, excluding critical areas or their buffers.

4. Landscape categories C, D and F: Five percent of the significant trees located on the site, excluding critical areas or their buffers.

5. If significant trees were previously located in a closed, forested situation, an adequate area of smaller trees shall be retained or replaced on the fringe of such significant trees;

6. A grouping of three or more existing trees with canopies that touch or overlap, may be substituted for each required significant tree, provided each tree has a diameter of at least three inches when measured four feet above grade;

7. Except as provided in BMC 19.25.120.8, significant trees to be retained shall not include significant trees that, according to a written evaluation prepared by a Certified Arborist, are:

A. Damaged or diseased; or

B. Safety hazards due to potential root, trunk or primary limb failure, or exposure of mature trees which have grown in a closed, forested situation.

8. At the discretion of the Director, damaged or diseased or standing dead trees may be retained and counted toward the significant tree requirement if demonstrated that such trees will provide important wildlife habitat and is not classified as a dangerous tree. [Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]

9. If the formula for determining the number of significant trees to be retained results in a fraction, the number of significant trees to be retained shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 620 § 1, 2016; Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]


19.25.130 Significant trees – Retention plan. 

The applicant shall submit a tree retention plan concurrent with a land use review application, grading permit application, building permit application, preliminary subdivision application or short subdivision application, whichever is reviewed and approved first. The Director shall compile and maintain a database of significant trees based upon the submitted and approved tree retention plans. The tree retention plan shall consist of:

1. A tree survey that identifies the location, size and species of all significant trees on a site. The tree survey may be conducted by a method that locates individual significant trees or by using standard timber cruising methods to reflect general locations, numbers and grouping of significant trees provided that, when using either method, the survey:

A. Shall also show the location and species of each significant tree that is intended to qualify for additional credit pursuant to BMC 19.25.140;

B. Any tree 18 inches or greater diameter for the purpose of establishing wildlife habitat value; and

C. Any tree designated as a Heritage tree.

2. A development plan identifying the significant trees that are proposed to be retained, transplanted or restored. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.140 Significant trees – Incentives for retention. 

Each significant tree that is retained may be credited as two trees for complying with the retention requirements of BMC 19.25.120, provided it meets one or more of the following criteria:

1. The tree exceeds 60 feet in height, or 24 inches in diameter for evergreen trees or 30 inches for deciduous trees;

2. The tree is located in a grouping of at least five trees with canopies that touch or overlap;

3. The tree provides energy savings through winter wind protection or summer shading as a result of its location relative to buildings;

4. The tree belongs to a unique or unusual species;

5. The tree is located within 25 feet of any critical area or required critical area buffer; and

6. The tree is 18 inches or greater and is identified as providing valuable wildlife habitat. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.150 Significant trees – Protection. 

To provide the best protection for significant trees:

1. No clearing shall be allowed on a site until approval of tree retention and landscape plans;

2. An area of prohibited disturbance, generally corresponding to the dripline of the significant tree shall be protected during construction with a temporary five-foot-high chain link or plastic net fence. The fencing shall be installed prior to issuance of development permits for the site;

3. No impervious surfaces, fill, excavation, or storage of construction materials shall be permitted within the area defined by such fencing;

4. A rock well shall be constructed if the grade level around the tree is to be raised by more than one foot. The inside diameter of the well shall be equal to the diameter of the dripline of the tree;

5. The grade level shall not be lowered within the larger of the two areas defined as follows:

A. The dripline of the tree(s); or

B. An area around the tree equal to one foot diameter for each inch of tree trunk diameter measured four feet above the ground; and

6. Alternative protection methods may be used if determined by the Director to provide equal or greater tree protection. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.160 Significant trees – Replacement. 

When the required number of significant trees pursuant to BMC 19.25.120 cannot be retained, the required number of significant trees that are removed shall be replaced with: [Ord. 484 § 1, 2008]

1. Transplanted significant trees; or

2. New trees measuring three-inch caliper or more, at a replacement rate of one and one-half (1.5) inches diameter for every one inch diameter of the largest caliper removed significant tree; or

3. New trees measuring less than three-inch caliper at a replacement rate of two inches diameter for every one inch diameter of the largest caliper removed significant tree on a space available basis in conjunction with the site plan. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.170 Maintenance. 

1. All landscaping and significant trees shall be maintained for the life of the project.

2. All landscape materials and significant trees shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent primary limb failure;

3. With the exception of dead, diseased or damaged trees specifically retained to provide wildlife habitat, other dead, diseased, damaged or stolen plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season; and

4. Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


19.25.180 Bonds/security. 

Performance bonds or other appropriate security (including letters of credit and set-aside letters) shall be required for a period of two years after the planting or transplanting of vegetation to insure proper installation, establishment and maintenance. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 293 § 1, 2000]


Chapter 19.30 Signs 

19.30.010    User Guide 

19.30.020    Purpose 

19.30.030    Definitions 

19.30.040    Exempt and prohibited signs 

19.30.050    Residential zones 

19.30.060    Non-residential zones 

19.30.070    General requirements for all signs 

19.30.080    Repealed

19.30.090    Billboards 

19.30.100    Sign permit – required 

19.30.110    Sign permit – submittal requirements 

19.30.120    Sign permit exemptions 

19.30.130    Master Sign Plan option 

19.30.140    Repealed

19.30.150    Sign maintenance 

19.30.160    Non-conforming signs 

19.30.170    Enforcement and Nuisance Declared 

Table    19.30-1    Table of permitted signs

NOTE: WORDS IN ITALICS ARE DEFINED TERMS. SEE DEFINITIONS IN SECTION 19.30.030 (IN THIS CHAPTER) OR IN THE MAIN DEFINITIONS IN THE ZONING CODE (CHAPTER 19.10).


19.30.010 User Guide 

This Chapter contains information and regulations relating to signs. This Chapter also contains requirements for sign permits, sign maintenance and the removal of abandoned or non-conforming signs. Please determine the zoning of your property, and consult the appropriate section of this Chapter for the requirements pertaining to signs allowed in that zone. Table 19.30.1 at the back of this Chapter contains a summary of the sign requirements. Also, please review the general permit provisions (BMC 19.30.100 through 19.30.150) to determine if a sign permit is required, and the requirements for sign permits. Finally, if you have a current sign that was legally installed, but does not comply with this Chapter, please refer to BMC 19.30.160 to determine what changes can be made to the sign. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.020 Purpose 

In pursuing the following purposes, the City recognizes the need for effective identification by business and government of goods and services, the timely conversion of existing signage to standards in this Chapter and the need to allow flexibility of design to meet these goals. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide sign regulations that are intended to:

1. Protect the general public health, safety, and welfare by regulating the size, placement and construction of signs.

2. Promote a positive, vital visual image of the city, which will enhance business opportunities and property values by providing for the utility and aesthetics of signs in an equitable manner.

3. Enhance the aesthetic appearance of the city by changing the visual focus from signage to a balance of architecture, landscaping, views and signage.

4. Encourage the installation of quality signs that are coordinated and complimentary with the buildings and uses to which they relate, and which are harmonious with their surroundings.

5. Provide for the timely elimination of legal, non-conforming signs.

6. Provide for the reduction in the number of billboard structures and for their relocation to higher traffic non-residential areas. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.030 Definitions 

1. Abandoned Sign: The following are abandoned signs, all of which are deemed to be a public nuisance:

A. Any sign, sign structure, advertising structure or display not maintained in accordance with the terms of this chapter for a period of 90 days or more;

B. Any on-site commercial sign that promotes or advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity that is no longer located on the site where the sign is displayed; or

C. Any permitted sign for which the required permit is expired; or

D. Any sign, sign face, sign frame or sign structure that is damaged, is in disrepair or vandalized; or

E. Any empty sign frame.

2. A-frame sign: A temporary, two-faced a-frame or sandwich board style sign which is readily movable and has no permanent attachment to a building, structure or the ground.

3. Awning: An architectural projection roofed with flexible material supported entirely from an exterior wall of a building.

4. Awning or canopy sign: Any sign that forms part of or is integrated into an awning or canopy and that does not extend beyond the limits of such awning or canopy. A marquee is not a canopy.
[IMAGE]


5. Banner: A temporary sign of flexible material designed to be displayed between two or more supports or against another surface.

6. Bench sign: a sign which is painted on or affixed to any portion of a bench placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way; a type of street furniture.

7. Billboard: A permanent off-site sign that meets one of the following dimensional classifications:

A. Type I-a billboard face (defined as that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable copy is displayed) with maximum area of 672 s.f., maximum height of 14 feet and maximum width of 48 feet; and

B. Type II-a billboard face (defined as that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable copy is displayed) with maximum area of 300 s.f., maximum height of 12 feet and maximum width of 25 feet.

C. Trivision-a billboard face (defined as that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable copy is displayed) with revolving panels that is allowed on Type I and Type II billboards.
[IMAGE]


8. Blade sign: A wall sign with no exposed legs or braces perpendicular to the building face designed to look as though it could have been part of the building structure rather than something suspended from the building. Also known as a shingle sign.
[IMAGE]


9. Blinking or flashing: Any light source, which varies in intensity by 50% or more over a period of 10 seconds or less.

10. Bus shelter sign. A sign lawfully placed inside a public bus shelter with the permission of the shelter’s owner.

11. Canopy: A permanent rooflike structure providing protection from the elements, such as a service station gas pump island that is either entirely freestanding or attached to a building on one side with posts supporting the opposite side.
[IMAGE]


12. Changeable copy: That portion of sign copy which may be easily changed by manual/mechanical means or lighting effects without reworking, repainting, or otherwise altering the physical composition of the sign, for the primary objective of displaying frequently changing copy.

13. Changeable copy sign: A reader board or sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical or electrical means.

14. Clearance (of a sign): The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.

15. Commercial sign. Any sign displaying the identification of or advertisement for a business, product, service or other commercial activity.

16. Daylight, statutory: For the purposes of this Chapter, an amount of visible sunlight resulting in a light meter reading of f16 at 1/250th second as measured reflected off a Kodak white card using a setting of ISO 100 or equivalent.

17. Diffused light: A light source(s) that provides less than a 10% variation in intensity across a viewing angle of 45 degrees any direction from the axis of the light source and no increase in intensity outside that range. Diffusion may be achieved by the interposition of a translucent panel of not more than 50% transmissivity, by reflection off a surface of not greater than 50% reflectivity or by such other means as the Director may approve.

18. Directed beam: Any light which has an exposed source and including reflectors, lenses and diffusers which reflect or transmit with greater than 50% efficiency.

19. Directory sign: A sign listing the names, uses, addresses or locations of the various businesses or activities conducted within a multi-tenant building or multi-tenant complex for the purpose of identification and direction only, and containing no advertising.
[IMAGE]


20. Double faced sign: A sign with two (2) faces on opposite sides of each other.

21. Electronic Message Center (EMC): A variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LED’s, LCD’s or PDP’s.

22. Erect: To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, and also includes the painting of exterior wall signs.

23. Flag: A flexible cloth or cloth-like material hoisted on a pole permanently affixed to the ground or displayed via a pole bracket which is permanently affixed to a building. If any single dimension of a flag is more than three times greater than any other single dimension, for the purposes of this chapter such flag is classified and regulated as a banner, regardless of how it is anchored or supported.

24. Freestanding sign: A non-movable self-supporting sign supported in a fixed location by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or on the ground, and not attached to any building, wall or fence. Freestanding signs include monument and pole signs.

25. Height of sign: For a freestanding sign, the vertical distance measured from the curb grade (or edge of pavement if no curb exists) of the nearest street to the highest point of the sign, including sign structure.

26. Illuminated sign: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.

27. Informational sign: An on-site wall or freestanding sign which is incidental and necessary for public safety and convenience and general information that has a purpose secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, such as restrooms, telephone, help wanted, hours of operation, acceptable credit cards, recycling containers, no trespassing, parking space designations (compact, handicapped, no parking, etc.), and vehicle impound signs required under RCW 46.55.070.

28. Land use and construction notice sign: A public notice sign required by a governmental agency that is used for notification of land use or construction activity.
[IMAGE]


29. Marquee: A permanent roof like structure extending from part of a wall of a building and supported solely by the building.

30. Marquee sign: Any sign that forms part of or is integrated into a marquee and that does not extend beyond the limits of such marquee.

31. Monument sign: A freestanding sign that is above ground level and is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign and the ground.
[IMAGE]


32. Multi-tenant complex: All of the following: A group of separate buildings operating under a common name or ownership; a group of separate buildings which share a common lot, access and/or parking facility; a group of separate buildings on adjoining lots, for which the property owners have requested in writing to be considered as a multi-tenant complex; or a single building containing multiple tenant spaces where there are specific exterior pedestrian entrances for individual tenants.

33. Murals: Painted designs or patterns applied directly to the exterior of a building wall or roof which do not contain a commercial message. Murals that meet this definition are considered artwork (see BMC 19.10.037), and may be subject to permitting and oversight by the City of Burien Arts Commission.

34. Neon: A class of gas-filled tubes which emit light solely from ionized rarefied gases without the use of fluorescent materials and typified by glass tubing of approximately 1/2 inch diameter formed in such a manner as to produce the graphic or text content of the sign principally from the bright tubing.

35. Noncommercial sign. Any sign that is not a commercial sign.

36. Nonconforming sign: A sign legally existing at the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance or amendments thereto codified in this chapter, which could not be built under the terms of this chapter.

37. Off-site sign: Any sign which relates to an activity, good, product, service, place, thing, event, or meeting that is offered, sold, traded, provided, located or conducted at a site other than that upon which the sign is posted or displayed. Off-site signs include, but are not limited to, billboards and other outdoor structures that are related to a particular site other than that upon which the sign is posted or displayed.

38. On-site sign: Any sign which relates to an activity, good, product, service, place, thing, event, or meeting that is lawfully offered, sold, traded, provided, located, or conducted at the site upon which the sign is posted or displayed. On site signs also include all non-commercial signs, which are intentionally displayed by the owner of the property or site upon which the sign is displayed.

39. Parapet: That portion of a building wall, which extends above the roof of a building.

40. Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.

41. Point of purchase display or sign: An advertisement for an item accompanying its display indicating only instructions and the contents or purpose of the item (e.g. an advertisement on a product dispenser, tire display, recycling containers, collection containers, gas pumps, phone booths, etc.).
[IMAGE]


42. Pole sign: A freestanding sign that is supported by one or more uprights, poles, pylons or braces in or on the ground, and is not defined as a monument sign.

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	POLE SIGNS

43. Primary building facade: The side of the building providing the main vehicle and/or pedestrian access, and/or the business primary orientation as determined by the Director.

44. Public service information sign: A sign posted and displayed by a governmental agency that is necessary to protect and regulate the public health and safety. Public Service signs include traffic signs, signs for public health and safety facilities (such as hospitals, police stations, governmental offices etc.) and public safety warning or hazard signs.

45. Public Agency sign: An on- or off-site sign promoting a governmental activity sponsored by a governmental entity, for designation or identification of public property, or directions for public buildings such as public schools, libraries, hospitals, or other similar public facilities.

46. Readerboard: A sign or part of a sign on which the letters are readily replaceable such that the copy can be changed from time to time at will.

47. Revolving or rotating sign: Any sign which in its entirety or in part turns in motion by electrical or mechanical means in a circular or repetitive pattern.

48. Searchlight: An apparatus containing an electric light and reflector on a swivel for projecting a far-reaching beam in any desired direction.

49. Secondary building facade: The sides of the building other than the primary building facade, as determined by the Director.

50. Sign: A communication design, device, structure, or fixture that incorporates graphics, graphic designs, symbols, colors, figures, logos, trademarks, or written copy, for the purpose of conveying a particular message to public observers. Painted designs, murals, or patterns located on a building wall or roof which do not represent a product, service or registered trademark/copyright, and which do not identify the user, are not considered signs.

51. Sign area: The sum of all display areas as viewed from any single vantage point as determined by circumscribing the exterior limits on the mass of each display erected on one (1) sign structure with a circle, triangle, or quadrangle connecting all extreme points. Sign structure, architectural embellishments, framework, decorative features, awnings, canopies and marquees which contain no written or advertising copy, logos or registered trademarks/copyrights are not included in sign area. Individual cutout or channel letters using a wall as a background, without added decoration or change in wall color shall have sign area calculated by measuring the area of the smallest quadrilateral shape enclosing each letter (except ascenders and descenders) and totaling the square footage of each of these.

52. Sign area, neon: Neon tubes shall be deemed to be 6" wide, centered on the tube, for the purpose of determining sign areas and/or sign size. Any neon used in or as part of a sign shall be included in area calculations. These standards are in addition to, not a replacement of, other size standards.

53. Sign structure: Any structure that supports or is designed to support any sign as defined in this chapter.

54. Temporary signs: Signs intended and designed to be displayed for a limited period of time, made of cloth, paper, cardboard or similar lightweight material and installed to be easily removed.

55. Wall sign: Any permanent sign attached to or erected on the exterior wall of the building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the exterior wall of the building, projecting less than 12 inches and not extending above the eave line. The top of a parapet wall shall be considered the eave line. The lowest part of a mansard-style roof shall be considered the eave line. Where a parapet wall is combined with a mansard roof, the eave line shall be the top of the parapet.

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	WALL SIGNS

56. Window sign: Any sign that is painted or mounted onto either side of an exterior windowpane. Also, any sign that is hung inside the window with the intent of being visible from the exterior in a more than incidental manner, including advertisements for services or products in the form of decals, emblems, paint, exposed neon, banners, etc. If inside the window, the sign message must be visible from the exterior to be considered a window sign. The term does not include merchandise located within three (3) feet of a window. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.040 Exempt and prohibited signs 

1. Exempt Signs: This chapter applies to all signs erected or altered after the effective date of this code. This chapter does not apply to the following:

A. Public Agency signs, Public Service signs, and Traffic signs.

B. Point-of-purchase advertising displays such as product dispensers.

C. Gravestones.

D. Historical site plaques and memorial signs not exceeding two (2) square feet per sign face.

E. Structures or improvements intended for a separate use, such as phone booths, donation containers and newspaper recycling boxes.

F. Building addresses with numbers and letters not more than 12 inches in height.

G. Exterior signs or displays not visible from streets or ways open to the public.

H. Artwork, including murals meeting the definition thereof herein.

2. Prohibited signs: Prohibited signs are listed in this section. The prohibited signs listed in this section are not subject to a variance or Master Sign Plan. Prohibited signs are as follows:

A. Any sign that is not specifically permitted by this Chapter.

B. Blinking and/or flashing lights, except for the time and temperature portion of an otherwise permitted sign as permitted in Table 19.30-1.

C. Signs affixed to natural features, such as trees, rocks and other natural features.

D. Any new sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or that projects above the highest point of the roof line, parapet or fascia of a building, including a sign affixed to any structure erected upon a roof, such as structure housing building equipment.

E. Signs affixed to or painted on utility poles, street sign poles, traffic signal equipment and poles, garbage receptacles (except signs placed by the waste company), bridges, railings, fences, and other types of street furniture and fixtures. Traffic signs, utility signs and other governmental signs are permitted.

F. Off-site signs, except as specifically permitted by this Chapter.

G. Signs in the public right-of-way, except as specifically permitted by this Chapter or applicable law.

H. Revolving or rotating signs, except barber poles, numerical signs indicating parts of clocks or thermometers, tri-vision billboard faces, or as specifically permitted by this Chapter.

I. Signs posted or displayed upon a movable chassis or support with or without wheels.

J. Signs mounted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, except signs mounted upon vehicles that are being primarily used for normal day-to-day commercial or non-commercial transportation purposes and not primarily for advertising or display purposes and except for signs advertising for sale the vehicle upon which the sign is posted.

K. Graffiti as defined in BMC Chapter 8.55.

L. Signs that create a traffic hazard or public nuisance, including but not limited to:

1. Signs with copy which imitates official traffic signs or signals, or use such words as “stop,” “look,” “danger,” “caution,” “warning,” or “go slow.”

2. Signs that may confuse motorists or detract from any legal traffic control device.

3. Any sign placed in such a manner that it obscures the vision of a motorist.

M. Wind signs or devices that flutter, wave, sparkle, or otherwise move from the pressure of the wind except as permitted under BMC 19.30.060(C). [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.050 Residential zones 

1. Mixed-Use Zones or Districts. In any zone where both residential and nonresidential uses are allowed, the sign-related rights and responsibilities applicable to any particular parcel or land use shall be determined as follows: residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where a use of that type would be allowed as a matter of right, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process.

2. Permitted Permanent signs. The following types of permanent signs are allowed on-site within the residential zones, subject to the permitting requirements in this Chapter and pursuant to all other requirements in this Chapter, including the requirements of Table 19.30-1, [provided such signs do not display a commercial message except as permitted below]:

A. Wall signs:

1. Each individual dwelling unit is permitted one wall sign no greater than two (2) square feet in size.

2. Each subdivision or neighborhood development is permitted one (1) wall sign or a freestanding sign (but not both) no greater than ten (10) square feet in size, with a maximum height of six (6) feet, per vehicular entrance to the development, provided the sign must conform to applicable design standards or specific City Council approved design concepts for the sign, whichever is applicable.

B. Freestanding signs (including pole and monument signs):

1. Each subdivision or neighborhood development is permitted one (1) wall sign or a freestanding sign (but not both) no greater than ten (10) square feet in size, with a maximum height of six (6) feet, per vehicular entrance to the development, provided the sign must conform to applicable design standards or specific City Council approved design concepts for the sign, whichever is applicable.

2. Non-residential uses (excluding Home-Based Businesses) on property zoned residential are permitted one additional freestanding sign no greater than ten (10) square feet in size, with a maximum height of six (6) feet.

3. Each residential property actively under construction shall be permitted one additional freestanding sign no greater than (10) square feet in size with a maximum height of six (6) feet, subject to the following limitations:

i. Sign shall not be displayed prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be removed prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy, or one (1) year after installation of the sign, whichever occurs first.

ii. Public works projects are allowed to install signs at the ends of a project.

4. Each individual dwelling unit actively for sale or lease in single-family residential zones shall be permitted one on-site freestanding sign per street frontage, and multi-family development shall be permitted one on-site freestanding sign per building and street frontage, subject to the following limitations:

i. The sign shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign face (with up to two sign faces), and shall not exceed six feet in overall height.

ii. Signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the dwelling unit.

iii. If no street frontage, sign may be placed on adjacent right-of-way, provided it must be displayed in a manner where it will not constitute a hazard by blocking vision or blocking safe movement of vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians. If in the opinion of the City, the sign constitutes a hazard, the sign may be removed by city staff at the sign owner’s expense.

iv. The sign must be professionally prepared and maintained in good condition.

v. No sign permit is required, except as provided in this Chapter.

C. Changeable copy signs (including reader boards, but not Electronic reader boards) may be permitted, subject to the following limitations:

1. Each subdivision or neighborhood development is permitted one freestanding sign no greater than ten (10) square feet in size. If part of a freestanding sign, shall not exceed 50% of the total sign area of the sign and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

2. Non-residential uses on property zoned residential are permitted one changeable copy sign no great than ten (10) square feet in size. If part of a freestanding sign, shall not exceed 50% of the total sign area of the sign, and shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.

3. Allowed Temporary signs. The following types of temporary signs are allowed within the residential zones, pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter and Table 19.30-1 [provided such signs do not display a commercial message except as provided below]:

A. Lawn signs, bag signs, and similar signs made of a corrugated plastic, poly bag, paperboard or similar material, may be displayed for up to one-hundred and eighty (180) days in any one year period, provided:

1. Size shall not exceed to six (6) square feet per sign face, and signs shall be limited to two faces on private property in residential zones with the consent of the property’s owner(s), and in public rights-of-way, other than paved vehicular travel lanes, roundabouts, paved parking areas, sidewalks, or pedestrian paths, driveway aprons and center medians.

2. Signs shall not be affixed to public utility poles, lamp posts, traffic signals, traffic signs, public buildings, public structures or public property other than public rights-of-way as listed above.

3. Signs shall not be placed in parking spaces or identified pedestrian or bicycle routes.

B. A-Frame signs may be displayed on-site during daylight hours, and may only be displayed for up to five (5) days in any one month period, subject to the following limitations:

1. A-Frame signs shall be limited in quantity to no more than six signs per open house, business or event.

2. Size shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face (limited to two faces).

C. Carnival-like devices (Balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, and other similar moving, revolving or fluttering devices) may be displayed on-site during daylight hours, and for up to three (3) consecutive days in any one month period.

D. Flags, not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet in size, may be displayed on-site, provided flag poles will be treated as a structure for setback and height limit purposes.

E. Public service signage, including but not limited to land use and construction notice signs, and traffic signage, may be displayed on-site or on public property. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 484 § 1, 2008; Ord. 359 § 1, 2002; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.060 Non-residential zones 

1. SPA-2 zone: Signs in the SPA-2 zone will be reviewed and approved as part of a City-approved Master Plan for the zone, as described in BMC 19.15.060.

2. Permitted signs: Signs allowed on private property (both on and off-site) in non-residential zones are described herein and in Table 19.30-1. For signs allowed in the right-of-way, see the requirements stated herein, as well as in Table 19.30-1.

3. Allowed Temporary signs. The following types of temporary signs are allowed within the non-residential zones, pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter and Table 19.30-1:

A. Lawn signs, bag signs, and similar signs made of a corrugated plastic, poly bag, paperboard or similar material, may be displayed for up to one-hundred and eighty (180) days in any one year period, provided:

1. Size shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face, and signs shall be limited to two faces, on private property with the consent of the property’s owner(s), and in public rights-of-way, other than paved vehicular travel lanes, roundabouts, paved parking areas, sidewalks, or pedestrian paths, driveway aprons and center medians.

2. Signs shall not be affixed to public utility poles, lamp posts, traffic signals, traffic signs, public buildings, public structures or public property other than public rights-of-way.

3. Signs shall not be placed in parking spaces or identified pedestrian or bicycle routes.

B. A-Frame signs may be displayed on-site during daylight hours or while the business is operational (whichever is longer), subject to the following limitations:

1. Each business shall be permitted one A-Frame signs no greater than six (6) square feet per sign face (limited to two faces).

2. Businesses without street frontage may place an A-frame sign off-site (but not in the public right of way) with the off-site property owner’s permission, provided the sign does not block pedestrian or vehicle travel.

C. Carnival-like devices (Balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, and other similar moving, revolving or fluttering devices) may be displayed on-site during daylight hours, and for up to three (3) consecutive days in any one month period.

D. Flags, not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet in size, may be displayed on-site, provided flag poles will be treated as a structure for setback and height limit purposes.

E. Public service signage, including but not limited to land use and construction notice signs, and traffic signage may be displayed on-site or on public property.

4. Building-mounted sign area: Certain permitted signs in Table 19.30-1 are included in total sign area allowed. The building-mounted sign area allowed is determined as follows:

A. Primary building facade: Only one building facade is defined as the primary building facade. Each business or tenant with frontage on the primary building facade is allowed up to one (1) square foot of signage for each linear foot of primary building facade, to be located on the tenant’s primary building facade. Every business or tenant is entitled to a minimum sign area of 30 square feet. No single sign face shall be greater than 240 square feet, except through the addition of bonuses in sections 19.30.060.4.F and G.

B. Secondary building facade: Each business or tenant is allowed up to 1/4 square foot of signage for each linear foot of secondary building facade.

C. Multi-tenant building or multi-tenant complex: For a multi-tenant building or multi-tenant complex, the calculation of building facade for an individual tenant shall be related to the proportion of the building facade owned or leased by that tenant.

D. Businesses or tenants with no building facade: In those cases where a business or tenant has no building facade, that business or tenant is allowed a maximum sign area of 30 square feet to be located on the primary building facade or 8 square feet to be located on a secondary building facade.

E. Businesses or tenants on second floors and above: In those cases where a business or tenant is located on the second floor or above, that business or tenant is allowed a maximum sign area of 30 square feet to be located on the primary building facade or 8 square feet to be located on a secondary building facade. A Master Sign Plan is required for signs on a building facade more than 2 stories high with more than one wall sign on any facade.

F. If the site does not have any freestanding signs (except for directional signs or multi-tenant complex identification signs), the amount of signage allowed in BMC 19.30.060.4.A and B may be increased by 25%.

G. If all building-mounted signs on the site are logos, individual cutout/channel letters (lighted or non-lighted) or are non-internally illuminated signs, the amount of signage allowed in BMC 19.30.060.4.A and B may be increased by 25%.

5. Freestanding signs: Certain permitted signs in Table 19.30-1 are included in total sign area allowed for a freestanding sign. The following standards apply to freestanding signs:

A. Freestanding sign area allowed: The maximum freestanding sign area allowed is 1 s.f. of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage per site, subject to the limitations below. The property owner shall allocate the amount of sign area allowed in this section to his or her tenants. This allocation shall be made in writing as part of the tenant’s sign permit application. Minimum letter height for signs identifying more than one business or tenant shall be 10 inches.

i. DC, CN, PR and SPA-1 zones: Maximum 32 s.f.

ii. CI, CC-1, O and I zones: Maximum 48 s.f.

iii. AI, CC-2, CR and SPA-3 zones: 50 s.f. plus 1 additional square foot of signage for each three (3) linear feet of street frontage (or portion thereof) up to a maximum total of 200 s.f.

B. Maximum height allowed: The maximum allowable height for a freestanding sign is as follows:

i. DC, CN, PR and SPA-1 zones: 5 feet.

ii. CI, CC-1, O and I zones: 8 feet.

iii. AI, CC-2, CR and SPA-3 zones: 20 feet plus 1 additional foot of height for each 25 linear feet (or portion thereof) of street frontage, up to a maximum total height of 35 feet.

C. Number of freestanding signs allowed: One (1) freestanding sign per site per street frontage. An additional monument sign is allowed on a site’s street frontage of 400 feet or greater. On a site with multiple street frontages, each street frontage shall be considered independent of the other street frontages. Multiple freestanding signs shall be separated by at least 150 feet, drawn in a straight line between the closest edges of the signs. The additional monument sign shall comply with the following standards:

i. DC, CN, PR and SPA-1 zones: Maximum 32 s.f. and 5 foot height.

ii. CI, CC-1, O and I zones: Maximum 48 s.f. and 8 foot height.

iii. AI, CC-2, CR and SPA-3 zones: Maximum 64 s.f. and 12 foot height.

D. Multi-tenant complex identification signs: In addition to the sign area allowed in BMC 19.30.060.5.A and number of signs allowed in BMC 19.30.060.5.C, each multi-tenant complex encompassing at least 8 acres of land may have an additional 32 square feet to be used for the name of the complex. This signing may be displayed on a building within the complex, combined as part of other signing in the complex or on an additional monument sign complying with height limits of BMC 19.30.060.5.B along the street frontage that provides direct vehicular access to the complex. The multi-tenant complex identification sign shall not identify individual tenants unless the name of the complex is the name of one of the tenants.

E. In the DC, CN and SPA-1 zones, the following additional requirements must be met for the display of a freestanding sign:

i. There must be usable motor vehicle access to the customer parking for the site from the street to which the sign is oriented.

ii. The sign must be located within 20 feet of the vehicular access point to the site. The Director may modify this requirement for sight distance or safety reasons.

iii. The site must have at least 100 feet of street frontage.

iv. The building(s) which are identified on the sign must be setback at least 25 feet from the property line along the street to which the sign is oriented.

F. Minimum setback allowed: The minimum setback for a freestanding sign is 5 feet, except no setback is required in the DC, CN and SPA-1 zones.

G. Sign quality: The color, shape, material, lettering and other architectural details of the sign and sign structure must be consistent and compatible with the color, shape, material, lettering and other architectural details of the primary structure.

H. Pole covers. A pole sign must have a cover over the pole that is consistent and compatible with the color, shape, and material of the sign structure. The width of the cover parallel to a sign face shall be at least 25% of the width of the sign face. No copy other than the property address shall be placed on the pole cover.

I. Auxiliary projections or attachments that are not part of a single, integrated design are prohibited.

J. An area around the base of each freestanding sign erected after July 23, 2002 at least equal to the area of all sign faces must be landscaped to improve the overall appearance of the sign and to reduce the risk of automobiles hitting the sign or its supports. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs and groundcover complying with the standards of Type IV landscaping as described in BMC Chapter 19.25. The landscape area shall be enclosed with a cast concrete curb. The Director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement if:

i. The required landscaping would cause a reduction of the number of existing parking spaces below the number required in BMC 19.15 or BMC 19.20; or

ii. The required landscaping would interfere with proper storm drainage; or

iii. The required landscaping would not be visible to the general public; or

iv. The sign is incorporated into pedestrian-oriented features in the DC, CN, or SPA-1 zones.

K. The following figure illustrates the dimensional standards for monument signs:

FIGURE 19.30-1: MONUMENT SIGN
[IMAGE]


A: Maximum height of sign per Table 19.30-1 (for residential zones) and BMC 19.30.060 (for non-residential zones)

B: Maximum=200% of A

C: Minimum=20% of A

D: Minimum of 100% of B

Minor deviations from these dimensional standards for monument signs, except for sign area and height, may be approved by the Director if the resulting sign does not significantly change the relative proportion of the sign base to the sign face.

6. Non-residential (such as commercial or industrial) property for sale, lease or rent are permitted one additional wall or freestanding sign during the time that the property is for sale, lease or rent, that shall comply with the following requirements:

1. One sign per street frontage is allowed.

2. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per sign face (16 square feet per sign face if the face is visible from more than one direction), and shall not exceed 10 feet in overall height.

3. The sign shall be removed upon closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

4. If greater than 6 square feet in area per sign face, a sign permit is required. The sign permit shall be valid for a one year period, at which time the sign shall be removed. The permit is renewable annually for up to a maximum of three years.

5. Signs must be professionally prepared and maintained in good condition. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.070 General requirements for all signs 

1. Sight distance: In addition to any setbacks required by this Chapter, all signs (except for public service signs related to traffic safety) shall comply with the sight distance requirements in BMC 19.17.240, as amended.

2. Structural components: To the maximum extent possible, signs should be constructed and installed so that angle irons, guy wires, braces and other structural elements are not visible. This does not apply to structural elements that are an integral part of the overall design such as decorative metal or woods.

3. Illumination: Except as specifically allowed in Table 19.30-1, no sign may contain or utilize any of the following:

A. Illumination that exceeds 1/2 statutory daylight measured directly from any distance greater than three feet. Neon is exempt from this standard.

B. Illumination that exceeds 1/16 statutory daylight (1/32 for undiffused neon) measured directly with a 1 degree spot meter at 20 feet from the light source or the closest property line, whichever is closer to the light source.

C. Any continuous or sequential blinking or flashing operation.

D. Light sources that are not diffused (other than neon as permitted above).

4. All signs shall comply with applicable City design standards or manuals.

5. Permanent and temporary signs shall be constructed out of durable materials able to withstand typical northwest weather. Temporary signs shall be made of a corrugated plastic, poly bag, paperboard or similar durable material. Signs and copy shall be of professional quality.

6. Exterior wall signs shall not cover or interfere with architectural building details, windows, doors, fire escapes, stairways, or other opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 620 § 1, 2016; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.080 Repealed [Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.090 Billboards 

1. No new billboards shall be erected, and no existing permitted billboards shall be altered or relocated within the City of Burien, except as permitted in this section.

2. Alteration of existing, permitted billboards.

A. Billboards shall not be altered with regard to size, shape, orientation, height, or location without the prior issuance of a sign permit. All such permits require full compliance with this chapter.

B. Ordinary and necessary repairs which do not change the size, shape, orientation, height, or location of a billboard or billboard face shall not require a sign permit. Billboard copy replacement may occur at any time and is exempt from the requirement for a sign permit.

C. Temporary cut-out extensions are allowed if the extensions do not exceed 20% of the area of the billboard face. A sign permit is not required for temporary extensions. With Director approval, extensions shall be allowed for multiple copy changes.

D. Single Type I billboard faces may be replaced with two side-by-side Type II billboard faces, and likewise two side-by-side Type II billboard faces may be replaced with a single Type I billboard face, provided each resulting billboard face complies with the requirements of this chapter.

E. Trivision billboard faces may be installed on Type I and Type II billboards.

3. Relocation of existing, permitted billboards. Relocation of billboards requires the issuance of a demolition permit for the removal of the existing billboard and a sign permit for erection of the new billboard. If a billboard owner owns two (2) or more billboards in Burien, removal of two (2) billboards is required for the installation of each relocated billboard. If only one (1) billboard in Burien is owned by a billboard owner, that billboard may be relocated. Billboard demolitions shall be completed prior to installation of the relocated billboard.

4. Number of permitted billboards. The total number of billboards within the city of Burien shall not exceed 30. This number shall be reduced by one (1) for each relocated billboard erected.

5. Location. Relocated billboards shall only be located in the following areas:

A. In the CR and CC-2 zones, north of 146th St. and south of 154th St.

B. In the I zone south of So. 176th St.

C. One (1) billboard may be located in a non-residential zone in the area between 8th Av. So. and Des Moines Memorial Dr., within 1,000 feet of the SR-518 right-of-way.

6. Setbacks. Relocated or altered billboards shall comply with the following setbacks:

A. Billboards shall observe the same setbacks as required for the primary use of the site. If the site is undeveloped, billboards shall comply with the setbacks required for the closest adjacent use in the same zone.

B. Type II billboards shall be at least 100 feet from any residential zone. Type I billboards shall be at least 330 feet from any residential zone.

C. No billboard shall extend beyond a property line unless written approval is provided to the city from the adjacent property owner.

7. Height.

A. Billboards located in the CC or CR zone shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above the average height of all buildings within 330 feet of the billboard or 35 feet, whichever is less; and

B. Billboards located in the I zone shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above the average height of all buildings within 330 feet of the billboard or 45 feet, whichever is less; and

C. Billboards located in the non-residential zone between 8th Av. So and Des Moines Memorial Dr. within 1,000 feet of the SR-518 right-of-way shall not exceed a height of:

i. 25 feet above the average grade of SR-518, if the billboard face(s) is oriented to SR-518; or

ii. 15 feet above the average height of all buildings within 330 feet of the billboard or 45 feet, whichever is less, if the billboard face(s) is not oriented to SR-518.

8. Transition standards. The transition standards in BMC 19.17 apply to relocation or alteration of billboards, and may have the effect of increasing the required setbacks in BMC 19.30.090.6 and/or reducing the maximum allowable height in BMC 19.30.090.7.

9. Number and type of billboard faces.

A. No single relocated or altered billboard shall support a total of more than two Type I billboard faces or the equivalent, and no single relocated or altered billboard shall orient more than one Type I billboard face or the equivalent in any single direction. A tri-vision billboard face shall be considered a single billboard face.

B. The Director may allow use of billboard face shapes other than a horizontal rectangle if:

i. The area of such shape does not exceed the maximum allowable area for the type of billboard face allowed at that location, and

ii. The horizontal and vertical dimensions of the face do not exceed 150% of the maximum allowable horizontal and vertical dimensions for the type of face allowed at that location, and

iii. All other requirements of this chapter are met.

10. Type of billboard. Relocated billboards shall be monopole-type. The Director may allow multi-pole billboards in locations where a monopole is not feasible due to existing development.

11. Orientation. In the CR and CC-2 zones, no more than two (2) relocated billboards shall be visible from SR-509. In the I zone, no more than one (1) relocated billboard shall be visible from SR-509.

12. Mt. Rainier view protection. No billboard shall be erected, altered or relocated in a manner that is within the direct line-of-sight of views of Mt. Rainier from adjacent public roadways. All applications for billboard alteration or relocation shall be certified by the applicant as meeting this provision. Any billboard subsequently found to violate this provision shall be removed within 90 days.

13. Vegetation protection. No billboard owner or his agent shall remove, cut, or otherwise alter any vegetation on public property or private landscaping required by code as a condition of permit approval in order to improve the visibility of a nearby billboard, without Director approval. Should such an unauthorized alteration occur, any billboard so benefited shall be removed within 90 days. In exchange for allowing vegetation removal, the Director may require replanting of equivalent or greater amount of landscaping on public property and/or the affected private property.

14. Billboard-free areas. No billboard shall be relocated in any of the following areas:

A. Sites listed in either the Washington State or National Register of Historic Places or on sites designated as county or city landmarks.

B. Open space and scenic resource sites identified in the adopted the city of Burien Comprehensive Plan.

C. Within 660 feet of any public park.

15. Maintenance. If a billboard is not maintained pursuant to BMC 19.30.150, the City may suspend the business license of the billboard owner. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 359 § 1, 2002]


19.30.100 Sign permit – required. 

1. No sign shall be placed, erected, re-erected, attached, structurally altered, relocated, or the sign face changed by any person, firm or corporation, or displayed without first obtaining a sign permit issued by the Director and payment of a fee, set by resolution of the Council, unless exempt under this Chapter. No permit shall be required for repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a permitted sign, or for sign face and copy changes that do not alter the size or structure of the sign. Temporary signs as regulated in this Chapter do not require a permit unless otherwise noted.

2. If the sign permit is denied, the Director shall send the applicant a brief written statement of the reasons for denial, along with the deadline for filing an appeal of the denial. A sign permit decision may be appealed by the applicant, sign owner or property owner, using the process for appealing a Type 1 land use review found in BMC 19.65.065. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 523 § 1, 2009; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.110 Sign permit – submittal requirements 

1. The Director shall prepare written submittal requirements, including type, detail, and numbers of copies for a sign permit application to be complete. At a minimum, all sign permit applications shall contain the following information:

A. Name and address of the owner and user of the sign.

B. Name and address of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located.

C. A scaled site plan showing the location of the sign, dimensioned setbacks from the nearest right-of-way and property line dimensions.

D. Drawings or photographs showing the design and dimensions of the sign and for building-mounted signs, dimensioned width of facade on which the proposed sign will be located.

E. The property owner shall sign the sign permit application. An agent of the property owner may sign the application if written authorization is provided acceptable to the Director.

F. A letter from the property owner allocating sign area as described in BMC 19.30.060.

G. Other pertinent information required by the Director to insure compliance with this Chapter.

2. The first sign permit application on a site shall include a complete listing and mapping of all signs on the site, containing the type of sign, area in square feet, height and location of each sign. The applicant will update this information as each new sign permit is sought.

3. All applicants seeking to place a permanent sign on or over public property are required to provide evidence of liability insurance as follows:

A. Excluding wall signs projecting twelve inches (12") or less over a public right-of-way, the owner of any permanent sign located on or over a public right-of-way may at the time of sign permit application be required to file with the Building Official a certificate of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Washington. The City shall be named as an additional insured, and notified of lapses or changes to the insurance policy in advance of such change. The insurance shall be in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.

B. If liability insurance is required, an annual sign registration is required for any signs projecting over the right-of-way, excluding wall signs projecting twelve inches (12") or less. The annual permit shall be issued upon a determination that liability insurance remains in effect, and that the sign and supporting sign structure are secure. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.120 Sign permit exemptions 

1. A sign permit is not required for cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign. Please refer to section 19.30.160 for limitations on changes to non-conforming signs.

2. The area, number and type of signs that do not require a sign permit (see Table 19.30-1) shall not be included in the area, number and type of signs permitted for the use. This shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of the sign’s erection and maintenance and the sign’s compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. Other permits may be required, such as an electrical permit.

3. Except as otherwise provided herein, lawfully placed temporary signs do not require a sign permit. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.130 Master Sign Plan option. 

1. General. A Master Sign Plan in intended to integrate signs into the framework of a building or buildings, landscape, topography and other design features of the property, utilizing an overall design theme. The Director may allow deviations from the requirements and restrictions of this Chapter for signs that comply with the criteria listed in section 19.30.130.4.

2. Required Review Process. An application for a Master Sign Plan will be reviewed and decided upon by the Director. The Director’s written decision may be appealed using the appeal process for a Type 1 land use review (BMC 19.65.065). [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

3. Required Information. In addition to the items required for a sign permit in BMC 19.30.110.1, the applicant shall submit the following information:

A. A narrative describing how the proposal is consistent with the criteria listed in section 19.30.130.4, and

B. A written description of the proposed design theme, and

C. A minimum of five (5) color copies of a colored rendering or computer simulation of the proposed sign(s) in relation to development in the area and on the site.

4. Criteria. The Director may approve a Master Sign Plan if all of the following criteria are met:

A. The proposal manifests exceptional visual harmony between the sign, buildings and other components of the site through the use of a consistent design theme, including but not limited to color, materials, location, scale and/or type of sign proposed.

B. The proposed deviations are the minimum necessary to create readable identification (not advertising) signs from the rights-of-way providing direct vehicular access to the site, based on traffic speeds and patterns in the area of the site.

C. The proposal promotes and compliments the planned land use in the area of the site and enhances the aesthetics of the surrounding area.

D. The proposal is compatible with the scale, character, design and lighting of the adjacent neighborhood or business district. Existing non-conforming signs shall not be used as a measure of compatibility. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

E. The proposal does not obstruct natural scenic views from public rights-of-way or public property.

F. If applicable, the proposal complies with Downtown Burien Design Standards (BMC 19.47), Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan, Burien Gateway Design Report or other City-adopted design-related documents.

5. Minor Modification of Approved Master Sign Plan. The Director may approve a minor modification to an approved Master Sign Plan if:

A. The change does not increase the maximum sign area allowed under the Master Sign Plan, and

B. The change maintains visual harmony with those elements specifically identified in the original Master Sign Plan as integral to the approved design theme, including but not limited to color, materials, location, scale and/or type of sign proposed.

C. The change complies with Downtown Burien Design Standards (BMC 19.47), Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan, Burien Gateway Design Report or other City-adopted design-related documents. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.140 Repealed [Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.150 Sign maintenance 

All signs must be kept in a safe and secure manner at all times. Any sign determined by the Director to be unsafe, shall be removed or adequately repaired by the owner and/or occupant of the site on which the sign is located within five (5) days after receiving notice from the Director. The area surrounding freestanding signs must be kept free of weeds, litter and debris at all times. All signs must be maintained in a clean condition including, but not limited to: non-peeling paint, working light bulbs, and unbroken plastic. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.160 Non-conforming signs 

1. Loss of Nonconforming Status. A nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its nonconforming designation if:

A. In the DC, CN and SPA-1 zones, the sign face is replaced for any reason (except for normal maintenance described in BMC 19.30.160.2, change of tenant names on a directory or multi-tenant complex identification sign according to BMC 19.30.160.1.G, or change of copy on a billboard); or

B. In all zones except DC, CN and SPA-1, the type of business or establishment changes. For example, changing from a hair salon to a book store or changing from a real estate office to a dentist office; or

C. The sign is altered in any way in structure or copy which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with the requirements of this code than it was before the alteration; or

D. The sign is relocated; or

E. The business or tenant associated with the sign undergoes substantial improvement; or

F. The sign is altered, damaged or destroyed and the value of the alteration, damage or destruction exceeds 50% of the value of the sign; or

G. For a directory or multi-tenant complex sign, cumulatively more than 50% of the number of individual tenant names are changed ten years from the effective date of this code.

If a sign loses its nonconforming status, any permit or designation for what had been designated as a nonconforming sign shall become void. The Director shall notify the sign user, sign owner or owner of the property upon which the sign is located of cancellation of the permit or designation, and the sign shall immediately be brought into compliance with this code and a new permit secured therefore, or shall be removed.

2. Nonconforming Sign Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this section 19.30.160 shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this code regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs, contained in BMC 19.30.150 and from the provisions on prohibited and abandoned signs, contained in BMC 19.30.040. Any nonconforming sign that is maintained or repaired in a manner in which the sign loses its nonconforming status pursuant to BMC 19.30.160.1 shall immediately be brought into compliance with this code and a new permit secured therefor, or shall be removed.

3. Exemption. The city may elect not to apply any provisions of this section 19.30.170 if the removal of a sign would require the city to pay compensation under any federal, state or other law, including RCW ch. 47.42. 

4. Temporary signs, that do not conform with the regulations provided herein with regard to type, number, size, height, illumination, or location of signs, shall be brought into conformance with all applicable standards no later than 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


19.30.170 Enforcement and Nuisance Declared 

1. Compliance with Other Applicable Codes. All signs erected or altered under this chapter must comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations relating to signs, including without limiting the provisions of the International Building Code as adopted by the City. If any provision of this code is found to be in conflict with any provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.

2. Inspection. The Director or his/her representative is empowered to enter or inspect any building, structure, or premises in the City upon which any sign is located for the purpose of inspection of the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter as consistent with applicable law. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours, unless an emergency exists.

3. Bond. The City may require a bond to ensure compliance with any aspect of this chapter.

4. Violation. Any Person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction, and shall be processed according to the procedures of Chapter 15 BMC.

5. Public Nuisance. Any sign or sign structure that is erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, demolished, equipped, used, or maintained in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.

6. Abatement. In addition to the issuance of a civil infraction, and the abatement authority provided by proceedings under BMC 1.15.210, the City or its agents may summarily remove any sign placed on a right-of-way or public property in violation of the terms of this chapter under the following circumstances:

1. When a sign is determined by the City engineer or Director to present an immediate threat to the safety, health, and welfare of the public;

2. When a sign is illegally placed pursuant to this Chapter, within the public right-of-way, within a landscape median, landscape island, traffic circle, attached to a utility pole or city traffic sign, upon public sidewalks or roadway, or on any public building or structure when such facilities are located on public property or within public right-of-way;

3. When a sign is determined by the City to be abandoned; provided, that the City must first provide 14 days’ notice to the underlying property owner or business owner that the sign is deemed abandoned.

4. All signs abated by the City shall be available for recovery by the owner of said sign for a period of 14 calendar days and upon payment of the costs of removal and storage, if any, after which time the sign will be destroyed. The City shall not be responsible for damages or loss incurred during removal and/or storage of any sign.

7. Additional Remedies. In addition to the other remedies provided by this chapter, the City may abate said public nuisance or seek any other equitable relief authorized by the Chapter 1.15 BMC and the laws and regulations of the State of Washington.

8. Joint and Several Liability. The property owner(s) and each tenant or occupant shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of and penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 708 § 1, 2019]

TABLE 19.30-1 

TABLE OF PERMITTED SIGNS 

	TYPE OF SIGN (as determined by the Director)	APPLICABLE ZONES	TYPE OF PERMIT REQUIRED (1)	MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SIGNS	MAXIMUM SIGN AREA OR SIZE	PERMITTED LOCATION	ILLUMINATION ALLOWED?	SPECIAL REGULATIONS

	A-frame signs	All	None	Residential zones: (1) 2 per property for sale or lease, and (2) 1 per residentially zoned property with a non-residential use

 

Non-residential zones: 1 per business	6 square feet, per sign face (limit two faces)	On-site or off-site (see BMC 19.30.050 and 19.30.060)	No	Residential zone: Permitted duration limited to daylight hours, and may only be displayed for up to five (5) days in any one month period.

 

Non-residential zone: see BMC 19.30.060

	Awning or canopy sign	Non-residential	Sign Permit; Right-of-way permit (if over public right-of-way)	1 per business per facade	Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site or over public right-of-way	Yes	1. Minimum clearance 8 feet.

2. In multiple-tenant or multiple-building complex, must have consistent design.

3. There shall be no visible angle irons or support structures.

	Banner	Non-residential	None	1 per business	6 square feet, per sign face (limit two faces)	On-site	External only	This limitation does not apply to city-owned banners affixed to city property.

	Barber poles	Non-residential	None; Right-of-way permit if over public right-of-way	No maximum	No maximum	On-site	Yes	None

	Bench sign	Non-residential	None	1 per bench	1 square foot	On bench	No	 

	Billboard	See BMC 19.30.090

	Blade sign	Non-residential	Sign Permit; Right-of-way Permit, if over public right-of-way	1 per business per street frontage	4 square feet per side; Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site; may extend over public right-of-way	No	1. Minimum clearance 8 feet.

2. Maximum height 12 feet.

3. Minimum setback is 2 feet from curb.

4. Shall not project beyond building awning, canopy or marquee.

	Bus shelter sign	All	None	No maximum	No maximum	No limitation	Yes	In residential zones, only non-commercial signs are allowed.

	Carnival-like devices:

• Balloons

• Pennants

• Ribbons

• Streamers

• Spinners

• Other similar moving, revolving or fluttering devices	All	None	None	None	On-Site	No	May be displayed on-site during daylight hours, and for up to three (3) consecutive days in any one month period.

	Changeable copy sign, including readerboard	All	Sign Permit	No maximum	Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	See Special Regulations	Yes	1. Signs must be on-site.

2. If part of a freestanding sign, shall not exceed 50% of the total sign area of the sign.

3. Not allowed for dwelling units.

	Changeable image sign	Non-residential	Sign permit	1 per tenant space	8 square feet; Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site	Yes	1. Must be oriented for pedestrians and on-site viewing only.

2. Maximum light level shall be 1/4 of the level allowed for an illuminated sign pursuant to BMC 19.30.070.3.

3. Changes in copy and/or graphics shall dissolve over a period of not less than 10 seconds.

4. In the opinion of the Director, shall not be a traffic distraction.

	Flags	All	None	1 per property	Not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet in size	On-site	Yes	Flag poles will be treated as a structure for setback and height limit purposes.

	Freestanding sign	All	Sign permit	See BMC 19.30.050 and 19.30.060	Included in total sign area allowed (see sect. 19.30.050 and 19.30.060)	On-site	Yes	See BMC 19.30.050 and BMC 19.30.060

	Integral design features	All	None	No maximum	No maximum	On-site	Yes	Must be an essential part of the architecture of a building (including religious symbols) and not represent a product, service, or registered trademark.

	Land use and construction notice sign	All 	None	No maximum	No maximum	On and off-site; Public right-of-way	No	None

	Marquee sign	Non-residential	Sign Permit; Right-of-way Permit if over right-of-way	1 per business	Included in total sign area allowed (see sect. 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site; may extend over public right-of-way	Yes	1. Minimum clearance 8 feet.

2. In multiple-building or multi-tenant complex, must have consistent design.

	Monument sign	All	Sign Permit	See BMC 19.30.050 and BMC 19.30.060	Included in total sign area allowed (see sect. 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site	Yes	See BMC 19.30.050 and 19.30.060

	Projecting sign	DC, CN and SPA-1	Sign Permit; Right-of-way Permit if over right-of-way	1 per business per facade	Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site or over public right-of-way	Yes	1. Shall attach to and project horizontally more than one foot from the wall of a building.

2. Swinging projecting signs are prohibited.

	Public Agency sign	All	None; Right-of-way Permit if in public right-of-way	No maximum	No maximum	On and off-site; Public right-of-way	Yes	None

	Public service information sign	All	None; Right-of-way Permit if in public right-of-way	No maximum	No maximum	On and off-site; Public right-of-way	Yes	None

	Shingle sign	Non-residential	Sign Permit; Right-of-way Permit if over public right-of-way	1 per business per facade	4 square feet per sign face	On-site or over public right-of-way	No	1. Shall be a sign suspended from and located entirely under a covered porch, covered walkway or an awning.

2. Minimum clearance 8 feet.

	Temporary signs, in non-residential zones (excluding A-signs)	Non-residential	None	BMC 19.30.060	See BMC 19.30.060	On private property with the consent of the property owner	No	See BMC 19.30.060

	Temporary signs, residential zones (excluding A-frame)	Residential	None	See BMC 19.30.050	See BMC 19.30.060	On private property with the consent of the property owner	No	See BMC 19.30.050

	Umbrella sign	Non-residential	None	No maximum	No maximum	On table umbrellas in conjunction with outdoor table seating	No	Shall apply to a commercial/ product type sign placed on umbrellas with outside dining tables.

	Vendor cart sign	Non-residential	None; Right-of-way Permit required in public right-of-way	1 per vendor	8 square feet per sign face	Mounted to the vendor cart	Yes	Must be a permanent sign.

	Wall sign	All	Sign Permit; Master Sign Plan for building facade more than 2 stories high with more than one wall sign on any facade.	No maximum	Included in total sign area allowed (see sections 19.30.050 and 060)	On-site	Yes	See sections 19.30.050 and 19.30.060

	Window sign	Non-residential	None	No maximum	Any portion greater than 25% of the total window area of the facade shall be included in total sign area allowed (see BMC 19.30.060).	On-site	Yes	Maximum 20 feet above finished grade.

(1) Any electrical sign may require an electrical permit.

[Ord. 708 § 1, 2019; Ord. 358 § 1, 2002]


Chapter 19.35 Transportation Impact Fees

19.35.010    Authority

19.35.020    Purpose

19.35.030    Definitions

19.35.040    Applicability

19.35.050    Geographic scope

19.35.060    Imposition of transportation impact fees

19.35.070    Service area

19.35.080    Exemptions

19.35.090    Assessment of transportation impact fees

19.35.100    Independent fee calculations

19.35.110    Credits

19.35.120    Project list

19.35.130    Time of payment of fees

19.35.135    Option for deferred payment of impact fees

19.35.140    Impact fee account

19.35.150    Use of funds

19.35.160    Refunds

19.35.170    Appeals

19.35.180    Authorization for interlocal agreements

19.35.190    Relationship to State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA)

19.35.200    Relationship to concurrency management

19.35.210    Necessity of compliance


19.35.010 Authority

This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Washington State Growth Management Act codified at Chapters 36.70A and 82.02 RCW et seq., which authorizes cities planning under the Growth Management Act to assess, collect, and use impact fees to pay for capital projects related to transportation facilities needed to accommodate growth. The City of Burien is required to plan under the Growth Management Act and has adopted a Comprehensive Plan which includes a Capital Facilities Program which complies with RCW 36.70A.070(3) and 82.02.050(4), and all other applicable requirements. The City’s Comprehensive Plan identifies the objective to pursue a transportation impact fee as part of the overall transportation financing mechanism. Consequently, the City of Burien is authorized to impose, collect, and use impact fees. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.020 Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to:

1. Develop a transportation impact fee program consistent with the Burien Comprehensive Plan for joint public and private financing of transportation improvements necessitated in whole or in part by development in the city;

2. Create a mechanism to charge and collect fees to ensure that all new development pays a proportionate share of the capital costs of off-site transportation facilities necessitated by new development;

3. Ensure that the city pays its fair share of the capital costs of transportation facilities necessitated by public use of the transportation system; and

4. Ensure fair collection and administration of such impact fees. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.030 Definitions

The following are definitions provided for administering the transportation impact fee program. The public works director shall have the authority to resolve questions of interpretation or conflicts between definitions.

“Applicant” means any property owner, developer, or other person who seeks a building permit from the City of Burien.

“Building permit” means the official document or certification that is issued by the building department and that authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, tenant improvement, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure or other construction permits in those instances where a building permit is not required.

“Capital facilities plan” means the capital facilities plan element of the city’s Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as amended.

“City Council” or “Council” means the City Council of the City of Burien.

“Development activity” means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use of land, that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.

“Director” means the director of the department of public works of the City of Burien or his/her designee.

“Encumbered” means the anticipated expenditure or funds restricted for anticipated expenditures on a transportation project.

“Finance director” means the finance director of the City of Burien or his/her designee.

“Impact fee” or “transportation impact fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for system improvements needed to serve new growth and development, and that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for system improvements, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the system improvements, and that is used for system improvements that reasonably benefit the new development.

“Impact fee account” or “account” means the account established for the system improvements for which impact fees are collected. The account shall be established pursuant to this chapter, and shall comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.

“Interlocal agreement” or “agreement” means a roads interlocal agreement, authorized in this chapter, by and between the city and other government agencies concerning the collection and expenditure of impact fees, or any other interlocal agreement entered by and between the city and another municipality or public agency to implement the provisions of this chapter.

“Jurisdiction” means a municipality or county.

“Project improvements” mean site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in the capital facilities plan approved by the city council shall be considered a project improvement.

“Project list” means system improvements included in the transportation impact fee program as defined in BMC 19.35.120 and Table 19.35-1 which is herein incorporated by reference.

“Proportionate share” means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of new development.

“Schedule” means the list of adopted transportation impact fees for development activity that is subject to impact fees which is based upon a formula or other calculation method consistent with RCW 82.02.060. The schedule of impact fees is defined in Table 19.35-2 which is herein incorporated by reference.

“Service area” means a geographic area defined by the city or interlocal agreement, in which a defined set of system improvements provide service to development within the area. Service areas shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles. Development in a service area may, and will likely be found to, impact and be served by system improvements outside of the service area, and the resulting transportation impact fee will reflect a proportionate share charge based on those impacts.

“System improvements” mean public streets or roads that are included in the capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service areas within the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

“Trip generation manual” means the most current edition of the report entitled “Trip Generation” produced by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.040 Applicability

1. The requirements of this chapter apply to all development activity in the City of Burien for which a building permit or other construction permit is issued after the effective date of this ordinance.

2. Mitigation of impacts on transportation facilities located in jurisdictions outside the city will be required when there is an interlocal agreement between the city and the effective jurisdiction specifically addressing transportation impact identification and mitigation per BMC 19.35.180. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.050 Geographic scope

The boundaries within which impact fees shall be charged and collected are co-extensive with the corporate city limits, and shall include all unincorporated areas annexed to the city on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. A revision of this chapter will be required prior to charging impact fees for developments in the annexed area(s). [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.060 Imposition of transportation impact fees

Any person who receives a building permit or other construction permit for any development activity or who undertakes any development activity within the city’s corporate limits for which a building permit, or other construction permit if a building permit is not required, shall pay the transportation impact fees as set forth in this chapter to the city. The impact fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of the permit, unless the applicant applies for deferred payment of impact fees pursuant to BMC 19.35.135. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.070 Service area

For the purpose of this chapter, the entire city shall be considered one service area. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.080 Exemptions

1. The transportation impact fees referenced in this chapter shall not apply to the following:

A. Alteration, expansion, enlargement, remodeling, rehabilitation, or conversion of an existing unit where no additional units are created and the use is not changed.

B. A change in use that results in no additional impact to the city’s transportation system.

C. The construction of accessory structures that will not create additional transportation impacts on system improvements.

D. A structure moved from one location within the city to another location within the city. The vacated lot will not be exempted from paying all appropriate impact fees upon development.

2. The director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development for a proposed building permit, or certificate of occupancy if no building permit is required, falls within an exemption of this chapter. Determinations of the director shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in BMC 19.35.170. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.090 Assessment of transportation impact fees

1. An impact fee schedule setting forth the amount of the transportation impact fees to be paid by a development is set out in Table 19.35-2 and incorporated herein by this reference.

2. The impact fee schedule, as set out in Table 19.35-2, shall be updated annually at a rate adjusted in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Construction Cost Index (CCI) to establish revised fee schedules for each subsequent year.

3. The impact fee amount is calculated by using the following formula:

	Amount of Transportation Impact Fee that shall be paid for that development use	=	Number of units of each use	X	Transportation Impact Fee per unit amount for the service area in which the development is located

A. The number of units of each use is determined as follows: (i) for residential uses it is the number of dwelling units for which a building permit application has been made and (ii) for office, retail, or manufacturing uses it is the gross floor area of building(s) to be used for each use expressed in square feet divided by 1,000 square feet, or in the units defined in the schedules.

B. Using the formula in subsection (3) of this section, transportation impact fees shall be calculated separately for each use. The transportation impact fees that shall be paid are the sum of these calculations.

C. If a development activity will include more than one use in a building or site, then the transportation impact fee shall be determined using the above formula by apportioning the space committed to the various uses specified on the schedule in Table 19.35-2.

D. If the type of use or development activity is not specified on the transportation impact fee schedules in Table 19.35-2, the director shall use the transportation impact fee applicable to the most comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. The director shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the most recent Trip Generation manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers) or other recognized national standard.

E. In the case of a change in use, development activity, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use, the transportation impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee for the new development activity as compared to the impact fee that would have applied to the previous development activity. The director shall be guided in this determination by the sources and agencies listed above.

4. As described in this section, the impact fees set forth in the schedule included in Table 19.35-2 shall be presumed valid and appropriate, unless revised pursuant to the following provisions:

A. An applicant may request a credit following the procedures set forth in BMC 19.35.110.

B. An applicant may submit an independent fee calculation following the procedures set forth in BMC 19.35.100. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.100 Independent fee calculations

1. If, in the judgment of the director, none of the land use categories set forth in the fee schedule in Table 19.35-2 accurately describes the proposed land use, the applicant shall provide to the department for its review and evaluation an independent fee calculation, prepared by a traffic engineer approved by the director and paid for by the applicant. The independent fee calculation shall show the basis upon which it was made and shall include, but not limited to, trip generation characteristics. The director may accept this calculation and impose an impact fee based on this calculation, or it may obtain a second independent fee calculation and then decide which impact fee calculation is more appropriate. The second independent fee calculation will be paid for by the city.

2. If an applicant requests not to have the impact fees determined according to the schedule in Table 19.35-2, then the applicant shall submit to the director an independent fee calculation, prepared by a traffic engineer approved by the director and paid for by the applicant. The independent fee calculation shall show the basis upon which it was made and shall include, but not be limited to, trip generation characteristics.

3. When an independent fee calculation is sought under subsection (2) of this section, the city may issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy when no building permit is required for a change in use, prior to completion of the independent fee calculation; provided, that the impact fee must be collected based on the fee schedule in Table 19.35-2, at the time of issuance. If the director ultimately approves the independent fee calculation, the city shall refund the portion of the fee that exceeds the approved independent fee calculation.

4. Any independent fee calculation proposed under this section shall be accompanied by a study that complies with the following standards:

A. The study shall follow accepted traffic impact fee assessment practices and methodologies and be consistent with the methods used in developing the city’s transportation impact fee schedules.

B. The study shall use acceptable data sources and the data shall be comparable with the uses and intensities proposed for the proposed development activity.

C. The study shall comply with the applicable State laws governing impact fees including RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.100 as these statutes may be amended from time to time.

D. The study, including any data collection and analysis, shall be prepared and documented by a professional traffic engineer.

E. The study shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

5. The director shall consider the independent fee calculation study and related documentation submitted by the applicant, but is not required to accept the calculation if the director decides that the study is not accurate or reliable. If the director finds the study to be unreliable, the director may require the applicant to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If the director decides that third-party engineers are needed to review the calculation and related documentation, the applicant shall pay for the reasonable cost of a review by such engineers. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the applicant shall pay the transportation impact fees based upon the process and schedules referenced in this chapter. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the director may adjust the fee to an appropriate amount.

6. Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section may be appealed to the hearing examiner subject to the procedures set forth in BMC 19.35.170. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.110 Credits

1. An applicant may request a credit for the value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction if the land and/or the facility constructed are (a) required as a condition of development approval; and (b) included within the project list entitled, Transportation Impact Fee Project List, which is attached to this ordinance as Table 19.35-1, and incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full.

2. Each request for a credit or credits shall include a legal description of land donated, a detailed description of improvements or construction provided, and a legal description or other adequate description of the development to which the credit will be applied.

3. The credit shall not exceed the impact fee payable by the applicant.

4. For each request for a credit, the land value or costs of construction shall be determined as follows:

A. The amount of credit for land dedicated shall be the higher of either the value of the land established in the impact fee project list, if such value is identified, or by an appraisal conducted by an independent professional appraiser chosen by the fee payer from a list of at least three such appraisers provided by the city. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the fee payer. For purposes of this section, the date of value shall be the date the land was dedicated to the county. The appraisal shall only value the land dedicated and not any alleged damages to any abutting property.

B. The amount of credit for facilities constructed shall be based upon the actual cost of construction at the time of construction.

5. After the director has determined the amount of the credit, the department shall include the determination with issuance of the building permit along with a statement setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the basis for the credit, where applicable, the description of the land dedicated and the date of the determination.

6. Any credit must be requested before payment of the impact fee and prior to issuance of the building permit or other construction permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.

7. No credit shall be given for project improvements.

8. Determinations made by the director pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in BMC 19.35.170. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.120 Project list

1. The project list for the city’s transportation impact fee program is established in Table 19.35-1 and is herein incorporated by reference.

2. Transportation impact fees shall only be imposed for system improvements that are reasonably related to the new development.

3. Transportation impact fees shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of system improvements that are reasonably related to the new development.

4. Transportation impact fees shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development.

5. Transportation impact fees must be spent on system improvements included in the project list (Table 19.35-1).

6. The director shall periodically review the project list and costs for the transportation impact fee program and shall recommend updates, if any, as part of an amendment to this chapter. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.130 Time of payment of fees

1. All applicants shall pay an impact fee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at the time that the applicable building permit or certificate of occupancy when a building permit is not required, is ready for issuance, unless the applicant applies for deferred payment of impact fees pursuant to BMC 19.35.135. The impact fee paid shall be based upon the schedule in effect at the time of the issuance.

2. If the development is modified or conditioned in such a way as to alter the land uses or unit count for the development after issuance of the building permit or certificate of occupancy, the impact fee will be recalculated accordingly, based on the provisions of this chapter. If the recalculated fee is greater than the previously paid fee, the city shall withhold or revoke the certificate of occupancy until the updated fee is paid. If the recalculated fee is less than the previously paid fee, then the city will refund the difference, unless the fees have already been spent or encumbered by the city.

3. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the impact fee is paid, unless the applicant applies for deferred payment of impact fees pursuant to BMC 19.35.135.

4. Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a permit or other approval of development activity.

5. The city may impose an application fee, as provided for in the city’s adopted Permit Fees and Engineering Review Deposit Schedule, to cover the reasonable cost of administration of the impact fee program. The fee is not refundable and is collected from the applicant of the development activity permit at time of permit issuance. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.135 Option for deferred payment of impact fees

1. An applicant may request, at any time prior to building permit issuance, and consistent with the requirements of this section, to defer to the final inspection the payment of an impact fee for a single-family residential dwelling unit. The following shall apply to any request to defer payment of an impact fee pursuant to this section:

A. The applicant shall submit to the city a written request to defer the payment of an impact fee for a specifically identified building permit for a single-family residential dwelling unit. The applicant’s request shall identify, as applicable, the applicant’s corporate identity and contractor registration number, the full names of all legal owners of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur, the legal description of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur, the tax parcel identification number of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur, and the address of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur. All applications shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as provided for in the city’s adopted Permit Fees and Engineering Deposit Schedule.

B. The impact fee amount due under any request to defer payment of impact fees shall be based on the schedule in effect at the time the applicant provides the city with the information required in subsection (1)(A) of this section.

C. Prior to the issuance of a building permit that is the subject of a request for a deferred payment of impact fee, all applicants and/or legal owners of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur must sign and record a deferred impact fee payment lien in a form acceptable to the city attorney. The deferred impact fee payment lien shall be recorded against the property subject to the building permit and be granted in favor of the city in the amount of the deferred impact fee. Any such lien shall be junior and subordinate only to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property subject to the building permit. In addition to the administrative fee required in subsection (1)(A) of this section, the applicant shall pay all fees necessary for recording the lien agreement with the King County recorder.

D. The city shall not approve a final inspection until the transportation impact fees identified in the deferred impact fee payment lien are paid in full.

E. In no case shall payment of the impact fee be deferred for a period of more than 18 months from the date of building permit issuance.

F. Upon receipt of final payment of the deferred impact fee as identified in the deferred impact fee payment lien, the city shall execute a release of lien for the property. The property owner may, at his or her own expense, record the lien release.

G. In the event that the deferred impact fee is not paid within the time provided in this subsection, the city shall institute foreclosure proceedings under the process set forth in Chapter 61.12 RCW.

H. An applicant is entitled to defer impact fees pursuant to this section for no more than 20 single-family dwelling unit building permits per year in the city. For the purposes of this section, an “applicant” includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016]


19.35.140 Impact fee account

1. There is created and established a special purpose, non-lapse transportation impact fee fund. As necessary, the city shall establish separate accounts within such fund and maintain records for each such account whereby transportation impact fees collected can be segregated by service area in accordance with this chapter.

2. All interest shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were imposed.

3. The city shall provide a report for the previous calendar year on each impact fee account showing the source and amount of moneys collected, earned or received and system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

4. The transportation impact fees paid to the city shall be held and disbursed as follows:

A. The transportation impact fees collected shall be placed in a deposit account within the impact fee fund;

B. When the council appropriates capital improvement project (CIP) funds for a project on the project list, the fees held in the transportation impact fee fund shall be transferred to the CIP fund. Any non-impact fee moneys appropriated for the project may comprise both the public share of the project cost and an advancement of that portion of the private share that has not yet been collected in transportation impact fees;

C. The first money spent by the finance director on a project after a council appropriation shall be deemed to be the fees from the impact fee fund;

D. Fees collected after a project has been fully funded by means of one or more council appropriations shall constitute reimbursement to the city of the public moneys advanced for the private share of the project.

E. Projects shall be funded by a balance between transportation impact fees and public funds, and shall not be funded solely by transportation impact fees.

F. Transportation impact fees shall be expended or encumbered for a permissible use within six years of receipt, unless an extraordinary or compelling reason exists for the fees to be held longer than six years. The finance director may recommend to the council that the city hold fees beyond six years in cases where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist. Such reasons shall be identified in written findings by the council. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.150 Use of funds

1. Transportation impact fees shall only be used for transportation system improvements identified in the capital facilities plan and on the project list as set forth in Table 19.35-1.

2. Transportation impact fees referenced in this chapter may be spent for public improvements, including but not limited to planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to planned facilities, and any other expenses which can be capitalized.

3. Transportation impact fees may also be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

4. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of public improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay the principal on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.160 Refunds

1. An applicant may request and shall receive a refund when the developer does not proceed with the development activity for which transportation impact fees were paid, and the applicant shows that no impact has resulted, and the city has not yet spent or encumbered the fees; however, the impact fee administrative fee shall not be refunded. If the city has spent or encumbered the fees, no refund shall be made to the applicant.

2. If an owner appears to be entitled to a refund of transportation impact fee under RCW 82.02.080, the finance director shall notify the owner by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at their last known address. The owner must submit a request for a refund to the finance director in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date the notice is given, whichever is later. Any transportation impact fees that are not expended or encumbered within the time limitations established by this chapter and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained and expended on any transportation project.

3. In the event that transportation impact fees must be refunded for any reason, they shall be refunded with interest earned to the owners as they appear of record with the King County assessor at the time of refund.

4. When the city seeks to terminate any or all impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail to the last known address of claimants. Claimants shall request refunds as in subsection (2) of this section. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended on the system improvements included in the project list (Table 19.35-1). This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within an account or accounts being terminated. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.170 Appeals

An applicant may appeal the amount of an impact fee determined by the director as provided in BMC 19.65.065, Type 1 Decision Appeal Provisions. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.180 Authorization for interlocal agreements

The city council is authorized to execute, on behalf of the city, an interlocal agreement with other local governments for the collection, expenditure, and reporting of impact fees. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.190 Relationship to State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA)

1. All development shall be subject to environmental review pursuant to SEPA and other applicable city ordinances and regulations.

2. Further mitigation in addition to the impact fee shall be required for identified adverse impacts appropriate for mitigation pursuant to SEPA that are not mitigated by an impact fee.

3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the city’s authority to deny development permits when a proposal would result in significant adverse transportation impacts identified in an environmental impact statement and reasonable mitigation measures are insufficient to mitigate the identified impact. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.200 Relationship to concurrency management

Neither compliance with this chapter or the payment of any fee hereunder shall constitute a determination of transportation concurrency under this chapter. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]


19.35.210 Necessity of compliance

A building permit, or other construction permit in those instances where a building permit is not required, issued after the effective date of this ordinance shall be null and void if issued without substantial compliance with this chapter by the department, the approving authority and the director. [Ord. 646 § 1, 2016; Ord. 493 § 1, 2008]

Table 19.35-1 

Transportation Impact Fee Project List 

	 

	ID	Project Name	Project Limits	Total Cost	Impact Fee Cost	Impact Fee Project

	1	1st Ave S – Phase 1	SW 146th St to SW 163rd Pl	$11,535,100	$9,035,100	PARTIAL

	2A	1st Ave S – Phase 2	SW 140th St to SW 146th St	$7,527,800	$2,258,300	PARTIAL

	2B	1st Ave S – Phase 3	SW 128th St to SW 140th St	$15,000,000	$2,500,000	PARTIAL

	3	Sylvester Rd SW	SW 160th St to 6th Ave SW	$1,000,000	$0	No

	4	SW 160th St	Sylvester Rd SW to 1st Ave S	$1,500,000	$1,500,000	YES

	5	Ambaum Blvd SW/SW 148th St	Intersection	$168,900	$0	No

	6	4th Ave SW/SW 148th St	Intersection	$254,400	$0	No

	7	4th Ave SW/SW 153rd St	Intersection	$354,800	$354,800	YES

	8	Ambaum Blvd SW Corridor Study	SW 116th St to 1st Ave S (116th, 126th, 128th, 136th, 156th)	$240,000	$0	No

	9	1st Ave S Interim Left-Turn Signals	SW 136th St & SW 143rd St. Intersections	$150,000	$0	No

	10	21st Ave SW	15700 Block of 21st Ave S	$492,520	$0	No

	11	16th Ave S	 	$40,000	$0	No

	12	Maplewild Ave SW	29th Pl SW to 33rd Ave SW	$5,700,000	$0	No

	13	Overlay Projects	CITYWIDE – Arterials and Neighborhood Streets	$2,432,670	$0	No

	14	Downtown Street and Sidewalk Improvements	Downtown Burien	$6,500,000	$0	No

	15	8th Ave S	S 128th St to S 152nd St	$7,602,655	$2,280,800	Partial

	16	4th Ave SW Pedestrian Safety Project, Phase 2	SW 153rd St to SW 156th St (east side of street)	$1,355,015	$0	No

	 

	 	 	Total City Costs	$61,853,860	$17,929,000	 

	 

	Sources: City of Burien Long-range Transportation Improvement Program, City of Burien 2008 Adopted Budget, and City staff

[Ord. 646 § 1, 2016]

Table 19.35-2 

Schedule of Transportation Impact Fees  

	Land Use Category – Trip Generation, 7th Edition*	Notes	ITE Land Use Code	ITE Average PM Peak Hour Trip Rate (1)	Unit**	Pass-By Trip Reduction Factor *** (2)	Net New Trip Rate (3)	 Impact Fee Per Unit (4)

	 

	RESIDENTIAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single-Family Detached Housing	3	210	1.01	Dwelling Unit	1.00	1.01	957

	Apartment	3	220	0.62	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.62	588

	Low-Rise Apartment (1-2 Floors)	3	221	0.58	Occupied Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.58	550

	High-Rise Apartment (>10 floors)	3	222	0.35	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.35	332

	Mid-Rise Apartment (3-10 floors)	3	223	0.39	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.39	370

	Residential Condominium/Townhouse	3	230	0.52	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.52	493

	Mobile Home Park	3	240	0.59	Occupied Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.59	559

	Senior Adult Housing – Detached	3	251	0.26	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.26	246

	Senior Adult Housing – Attached	 	252	0.11	Occupied Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.11	104

	Congregate Care Facility	1	253	0.17	Occupied Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.17	161

	Assisted Living	 	254	0.22	Bed	1.00	0.22	209

	Recreational Homes	1	260	0.26	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.26	246

	Residential Planned Unit Development (PUD)	3	270	0.62	Dwelling Unit	1.00	0.62	588

	 

	INSTITUTIONAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	County Park	1	412	0.06	Acre	1.00	0.06	57

	Beach Park	1	415	1.30	Acre	1.00	1.30	1,232

	Regional Park	1	417	0.20	Acre	1.00	0.20	190

	Golf Course	1	430	0.30	Acre	1.00	0.30	284

	Multipurpose Recreational Facility	1	435	3.35	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	3.35	3,176

	Bowling Alley	1	437	3.54	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	3.54	3,356

	Movie Theater with Matinee	1	444	0.07	Seat	1.00	0.07	66

	Casino/Video Lottery Establishment	 	473	13.43	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	13.43	12,732

	Tennis Courts	1	490	3.88	Tennis Court	1.00	3.88	3,678

	Recreational Community Center	1	495	1.64	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.64	1,555

	Health/Fitness Club	1	492	4.05	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	4.05	3,839

	Elementary School	4	520	n/a (see note)	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	 n/a	n/a

	Middle School/Junior High School	 	522	1.19	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.19	1,128

	High School	 	530	0.97	1000 sf GFA	1.00	0.97	920

	Church	 	560	0.66	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.66	626

	Day Care Center	 	565	13.18	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	13.18	12,495

	Library	 	590	7.09	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	7.09	6,721

	Hospital	 	610	1.18	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.18	1,119

	Nursing Home	1	620	0.42	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.42	398

	Clinic	1	630	1.23	Employee	1.00	1.23	1,166

	 

	BUSINESS & COMMERCIAL	 

	Hotel	 	310	0.59	Room	1.00	0.59	559

	All Suites Hotel	1	311	0.40	Room	1.00	0.40	379

	Motel	 	320	0.47	Room	1.00	0.47	446

	Resort Hotel	3	330	0.42	Room	1.00	0.42	398

	Building Materials and Lumber Store	2(a), 3	812	4.49	1,000 sf GFA	0.75	3.37	3,192

	Free-Standing Discount Superstore	 	813	3.87	1,000 sf GFA	0.72	2.79	2,642

	Specialty Retail Center	1, 2(b), 3	814	2.71	1,000 sf GLA	0.66	1.79	1,696

	Free-Standing Discount Store	 	815	5.06	1,000 sf GFA	0.83	4.20	3,981

	Hardware/Paint Store	3	816	4.84	1,000 sf GFA	0.74	3.58	3,395

	Nursery (Garden Center)	2(a)	817	3.80	1,000 sf GFA	0.72	2.74	2,594

	Nursery (Wholesale)	2(a)	818	5.17	1,000 sf GFA	0.72	3.72	3,529

	Shopping Center	5	820	n/a (see note)	1,000 sf GLA	0.66	n/a	n/a

	Factory Outlet Center	2(b)	823	2.29	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	1.51	1,433

	New Car Sales	2(a)	841	2.64	1,000 sf GFA	0.75	1.98	1,877

	Automotive Parts Sales	1,3	843	5.98	1,000 sf GFA	0.57	3.41	3,231

	Tire Store	 	848	4.15	1,000 sf GFA	0.72	2.99	2,833

	Tire Superstore	2(e)	849	2.11	1,000 sf GFA	0.72	1.52	1,440

	Supermarket	3	850	10.45	1,000 sf GFA	0.64	6.69	6,340

	Convenience Market (Open 24 Hours)	 	851	52.41	 1,000 sf GFA	0.39	20.44	19,377

	Convenience Market (Open 15-16 Hours)	1, 2(i)	852	34.57	1,000 sf GFA	0.39	13.48	12,781

	Convenience Store with Gasoline Pumps	 	853	19.22	Vehicle Fueling Position	0.34	6.53	6,195

	Discount Supermarket	3	854	8.90	1,000 sf GFA	0.77	6.85	6,497

	Discount Club	2(f)	861	4.24	1,000 sf GFA	0.77	3.26	3,095

	Home Improvement Superstore	 	862	2.45	1,000 sf GFA	0.52	1.27	1,208

	Electronic Superstore	1	863	4.50	1,000 sf GFA	0.60	2.70	2,560

	Toy/Children’s Superstore	1, 2(b)	864	4.99	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	3.29	3,122

	Pet Supply Superstore	1, 2(b)	866	4.96	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	3.27	3,103

	Office Supply	1, 2(f)	867	3.40	1,000 sf GFA	0.77	2.62	2,482

	Book Superstore	1, 2(b)	868	19.53	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	12.89	12,220

	Discount Home Furnishing Superstore	1, 2(b)	869	4.01	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	2.65	2,509

	Apparel Store	2(b)	870	3.83	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	2.53	2,396

	Art and Craft Store	1, 2(f)	879	6.21	1,000 sf GFA	0.77	4.78	4,533

	Pharmacy/Drug Store without Drive-Through	 	880	8.42	1,000 sf GFA	0.47	3.96	3,752

	Pharmacy/Drug Store with Drive Through	 	881	8.62	1,000 of GFA	0.51	4.40	4,168

	Furniture Store	 	890	0.46	1,000 sf GFA	0.47	0.22	205

	Video Rental Store	2(b), 3	896	13.60	1,000 sf GFA	0.66	8.98	8,509

	Walk-in Bank	1, 2(d) 	911	33.15	1,000 sf GFA	0.53	17.57	16,656

	Drive-in Bank	 	912	45.74	1,000 sf GFA	0.53	24.24	22,982

	Quality Restaurant	 	931	7.49	1,000 sf GFA	0.56	4.19	3,976

	High Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant	 	932	10.92	1,000 sf GFA	0.57	6.22	5,901

	Fast Food Restaurant without Drive-Through	1, 2(g)	933	26.15	1,000 sf GFA	0.50	13.08	12,395

	Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through	 	934	34.64	1,000 sf GFA	0.50	17.32	16,419

	Quick Lubrication Vehicle Shop	2(c)	941	5.19	Servicing Position	0.57	2.96	2,804

	Automobile Care Center	1, 2(c)	942	3.38	1,000 sf GLA	0.57	1.93	1,826

	Automobile Parts and Service Center	1, 2(c)	943	4.46	1,000 sf GLA	0.57	2.54	2,410

	Gasoline/Service Station	 	944	13.86	Vehicle Fueling Position	0.58	8.04	7,621

	Gasoline/Service Station w/ Convenience Market	 	945	13.38	Vehicle Fueling Position	0.44	5.89	5,581

	Gasoline/Service Station w/ Convenience Market & Car Wash	2(h)	946	13.33	Vehicle Fueling Position	0.44	5.87	5,560

	Self-Service Car Wash	2(h)	947	5.54	Wash Stall	0.44	2.44	2,311

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	OFFICE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	General Office Building	3	710	1.49	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.49	1,413

	Corporate Headquarters Building	3	714	1.40	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.40	1,327

	Single Tenant Office Building	3	715	1.73	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.73	1,640

	Medical-Dental Office Building	3	720	3.72	1.000 sf GFA	1.00	3.72	3,527

	Government Office Building	1	730	1.20	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.20	1,138

	United States Post Office	 	732	10.89	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	10.89	10,324

	Office Park	3	750	1.50	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.50	1,422

	Research and Development Center	3	760	1.08	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.08	1,024

	Business Park	3	770	1.29	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	1.29	1,223

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	INDUSTRIAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	General Light Industrial	3	110	0.98	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.98	929

	General Heavy Industrial	1	120	0.88	Employee	1.00	0.88	834

	Industrial Park	 	130	0.86	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.86	815

	Manufacturing	3	140	0.74	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.74	702

	Warehousing	3	150	0.47	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.47	446

	Mini-Warehouse	 	151	0.26	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.26	246

	Utilities	1	170	0.76	1,000 sf GFA	1.00	0.76	720

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	PORT and TERMINAL	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Truck Terminal	1	30	0.55	Employee	1.00	0.55	521

	Park-and-Ride Lot with Bus Service	3	90	0.62	Parking Space	1.00	0.62	588

*    Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 7th Edition, 2003

**    Abbreviations include: GFA = Gross Floor Area, sf = square feet, and GLA = Gross Leasable Area

***    The Pass-By Trip Reduction Factor reduces the Average Trip Rate based on average Pass-By trip percentages in the ITE Trip Generation Handbook (2nd Edition, 2004)

	NET NEW TRIP RATE CALCULATION	ITE Trip Rate	X	Pass-By Reduction Factor	=	Net New Trip Rate

	 	(1)	(2)	(3)

	IMPACT FEE CALCULATION	Net New Trip Rate (3)	X	$948	X	=	Impact Fee per Unit of Development (4)

	 	Per New PM Peak Hour Trip

NOTES:

(1)    Trip Generation (7th Edition, 2003) has less than 6 studies supporting this average rate. Applicants are strongly encouraged to conduct, at their own expense, independent trip generation studies in support of their application.

(2)    No pass-by rates are available. Pass-by rates were estimated from other similar uses.

	Code	Land Use	Pass-By Trip Reduction Factor

	2 (a)	No Data Available 25% Estimated Pass-by	0.75

	2 (b)	Shopping Center (850)	0.66

	2 (c)	Auto Parts Sales (843)	0.57

	2 (d)	Bank/Drive-in (912)	0.53

	2 (e)	Tire Store (848)	0.72

	2 (f)	Discount Supermarket (854)	0.77

	2 (g)	Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through (934)	0.50

	2 (h)	Gasoline/Service Station w/ Convenience Market (945)	0.44

	2 (i)	Convenience Market (24 Hr) (851)	0.39

(3)    Alternatively, the PM peak hour trip regression equation in Trip Generation can be used instead of the average trip rate identified in the table. However the equation must be used according to the instructions in Trip Generation.

(4)    No Average PM peak hour trip rate available. Need to perform own PM peak hour traffic count for the identified land use to calculate impact fee.

(5)    ITE Trip Generation (7th Edition, 2003) equation used instead of trip rate.

[Ord. 646 § 1, 2016]


Chapter 19.40 Critical Areas

PURPOSES AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

19.40.010    User guide.

19.40.020    Purposes and Goals.

19.40.030    Relationship to other regulations.

19.40.040    Applicability.

19.40.050    Protection of critical areas.

19.40.060    Best available science.

19.40.070    Exemptions and exceptions.

19.40.080    Nonconforming uses and structures.

CRITICAL AREA REVIEW

19.40.090    Critical area review.

19.40.100    Review criteria.

CRITICAL AREA STUDY

19.40.110    Critical area study – waiver.

19.40.120    Critical area study requirements.

19.40.130    Critical area study – modifications to requirements.

CRITICAL AREA DETERMINATION

19.40.140    Determination.

19.40.150    Appeal of determination.

GENERAL CRITICAL AREA REQUIREMENTS

19.40.160    Notice on title.

19.40.170    Mitigation requirements.

19.40.180    Vegetation management plan.

19.40.190    General development standards.

19.40.200    Construction requirements.

19.40.210    Critical area markers and signs.

19.40.220    Permanent protection of critical areas and buffers.

19.40.230    Bonds.

FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS

19.40.240    Frequently flooded areas – Designation.

19.40.250    Frequently flooded areas – General Standards.

19.40.260    Floodway – Development standards and permitted alterations.

GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS

19.40.280    Geologically hazardous areas – Designation.

19.40.290    Geologically hazardous areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

WETLANDS

19.40.300    Wetlands – Designation and Classification.

19.40.310    Wetlands – Development standards.

19.40.320    Wetlands – Permitted Alterations.

19.40.330    Wetlands – Additional Mitigation Requirements.

STREAMS

19.40.340    Streams – Designation and Classification.

19.40.350    Streams – Development Standards.

19.40.360    Streams – Permitted Alterations.

19.40.370    Streams – Additional mitigation requirements.

FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS

19.40.380    Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Designation.

19.40.390    Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Development Standards.

19.40.400    Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Permitted Alterations.

19.40.410    Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Specific Habitats.

CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS

19.40.420    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Designation and Classification.

19.40.430    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development Standards.

PURPOSES AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS


19.40.010 User guide.

This chapter establishes regulations pertaining to the development within or adjacent to critical areas. Many areas of Burien have been or may become classified as critical areas by the City or other public agencies. The following critical areas are found in the City of Burien and regulated under this chapter:

A. Frequently flooded areas (BMC 19.40.240); 

B. Geologically hazardous areas (BMC 19.40.280), including: 

i. Erosion hazard areas, 

ii. Landslide hazard areas, and 

iii. Seismic hazard areas;

C. Wetlands (BMC 19.40.300); 

D. Streams (BMC 19.40.340);

E. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (BMC 19.40.380); and

F. Critical aquifer recharge areas (BMC 19.40.420). [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.020 Purposes and Goals.

1. The City finds that critical areas provide a variety of valuable and beneficial biological and physical functions that benefit the City and its residents, and/or may pose a threat to human safety or to public and private property. The beneficial functions and values of critical areas include, but are not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation of storm runoff, groundwater recharge and discharge, wave attenuation, aesthetic value protection, and recreation. Hazards include landslides, flooding and excessive erosion.

2. This chapter is to be administered with flexibility and attention to site-specific characteristics. It is not the intent of this chapter to make a parcel of property unusable by denying its owner reasonable use of the property.

3. Purposes. The purposes of this chapter are to:

A. Implement the goals, policies, guidelines and requirements of the Washington State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW and the City of Burien comprehensive plan which call for protection of the natural environment and the public health, safety and welfare, and allowing for appropriate urban development within the region’s urban growth area.

B. Designate, classify, and regulate the use of critical areas in accordance with the Growth Management Act and through the application of best available science, as determined according to WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925, as amended, and in consultation with state and federal agencies and other qualified professionals.

4. Goals. By regulating development and alteration of critical areas and their buffers, this chapter seeks to:

A. Preserve and enhance the ecological value of critical areas to maintain the functional integrity of the natural environment;

B. Protect public health, safety and welfare by minimizing adverse impacts and risks associated with development in critical areas;

C. Preserve the quality of life in Burien;

D. Minimize public and private expenditures to correct future misuses of critical areas;

E. Provide City officials with sufficient information, direction and authority to identify and if necessary, regulate development of critical areas; mitigate impacts on critical areas and enforce critical area regulations and permit conditions;

F. Encourage flexibility and creativity in the development of property containing or adjacent to critical areas, to meet the requirements and goals of this chapter while preserving property rights; and

G. Educate the community about the hazards, risks, functions, and value of Burien’s critical areas and the responsibility of the City to protect and preserve the natural environment for future generations. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.030 Relationship to other regulations.

1. Greater restrictions. When any provision of this code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the provision that provides more protection to critical areas shall apply, unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or unless such provision conflicts with federal or state laws or regulations.

2. Multiple buffers. When more than one critical area affects a site and multiple buffers are required, all required buffers must be provided, unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. Where buffers overlap, the most restrictive buffer applies.

3. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not constitute compliance with other federal, state, and local regulations and permit requirements that may be required. The applicant is responsible for complying with these requirements, apart from the process established in this chapter. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.040 Applicability.

1. Compliance required. Alteration, development, use, and/or activities proposed within or adjacent to critical areas and their required buffers shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Critical areas and their required buffers shall not be altered except as allowed by this chapter.

2. Identification and classification of critical areas. The Director shall identify and classify critical areas as follows:

A. Critical Areas Map. The locations of many critical areas in Burien are displayed on the City of Burien’s Critical Areas Map, which is hereby adopted by reference. This map is used to alert the public of the potential location of critical areas in Burien. As new environmental information related to critical areas becomes available, the Director is hereby designated to periodically make such changes as necessary to the Critical Areas Map.

B. Actual site conditions. Regardless of whether a critical area is shown on the Critical Areas Map, the actual presence or absence of the features defined in this code as critical areas shall govern. The Director may require the applicant to submit technical information to indicate whether critical areas actually exist on or adjacent to the applicant’s site, based on the definitions of critical areas in this code.

3. Adjacency. For the purposes of this chapter, land is “adjacent” to a critical area if it is:

A. Land that contains the required critical area buffer width and building setback;

B. Land within one hundred (100) feet upland from a stream or lake;

C. Land within three hundred (300) feet of a wetland; 

D. Land within 660 feet of a bald eagle nest;

E. Land within two hundred (200) feet of a designated critical aquifer recharge area; or

F. Land within the floodway or floodplain. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.050 Protection of critical areas.

Any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall result in equivalent or greater functions and value of the critical areas associated with the proposed action, as determined by the best available science. All actions and developments shall be designed and constructed in accordance with mitigation sequencing (BMC 19.40.170) to achieve no net loss of critical area functions and values. Applicants must first demonstrate an inability to avoid or reduce impacts, before restoration and compensation of impacts will be allowed. No activity or use shall be allowed that results in a net loss of the functions or value of critical areas. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.060 Best available science.

1. Criteria for best available science. The best available science is that scientific information applicable to the critical area prepared by local, state or federal natural resource agencies, a qualified scientific professional or team of qualified scientific professionals, that is consistent with criteria established in WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925, as amended.

2. Protection for functions and value and anadromous fish. Critical area studies and decisions to alter critical areas shall rely on the best available science to protect the functions and value of critical areas and must give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish and their habitat, such as salmon and bull trout.

3. Absence of valid scientific information. Where there is an absence of valid scientific information or incomplete scientific information relating to a critical area leading to uncertainty about the risk to critical area function of permitting an alteration of or impact to the critical area, the Director shall take a “precautionary approach,” that strictly limits development and land use activities until the uncertainty is sufficiently resolved. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.070 Exemptions and exceptions.

1. Exemption request and review process. Exemptions shall be reviewed in conjunction with an associated approval such as a land use decision or the issuance of a construction permit. Absent associated permits or approvals, the proponent of the activity may submit a written request for exemption to the Director that describes the activity and states the exemption in this section that applies. The request shall be processed as an administrative decision. If the exemption is approved, it shall be placed on file with the department. If the exemption is denied, the proponent may continue in the review process and shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. The Director may add conditions for exemption to ensure the level of activity remains consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 

2. Avoid or limit impacts. All exempt activities shall use city-approved best management practices and other reasonable methods to reasonably minimize impact to critical areas and their required buffers. To be exempt from this chapter does not give permission to degrade a critical area or ignore risk from natural hazards. The Director may require submittal of a critical area study pursuant to BMC 19.40.110 through 19.40.130 if needed to assess public safety risks associated with the proposal. Restoration of non-exempted alterations or damage to a critical area or its buffer may be required.

3. Exempt activities. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; however, the activities listed below may not be exempted from other city, state or federal permit requirements or regulations:

A. Emergencies. Alterations in response to emergencies which pose an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare or which pose an imminent risk of damage to property. Any alteration undertaken as an emergency shall be reported within one (1) business day to the Department of Community Development. The Director shall confirm that an emergency exists and determine what, if any, mitigation and conditions shall be required to protect the health, safety, welfare and environment and to repair any damage to the critical area and its required buffers. Emergency work must be approved by the City. If the Director determines that the action taken, or any part of the action taken, was beyond the scope of an allowed emergency action, then enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.15 BMC shall apply.

B. Normal and routine operation, maintenance, remodeling, repair and revegetation of existing public facilities, parks and open spaces as long as any such activities do not involve the expansion of improvements into previously unimproved areas.

C. Normal and routine operation, maintenance, remodeling, replacement and repair of existing public streets and city-approved private roads. Such activities shall not involve the expansion of roadways or related improvements into previously unimproved portions of rights-of-way or vehicular access easements or tracts.

D. Except in streams and wetlands or their buffers, normal and routine operation, maintenance, remodeling, and repair of existing public and quasi-public utilities (including water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, natural gas, cable communications, telephone utility and related activities), including:

i. Relocation of electric facilities, lines, equipment or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less, only when required by a local governmental agency which approves the new location of the facilities;

ii. Replacement, modification, installation or construction in an improved city road right-of-way or city authorized private road of all electric facilities, lines, equipment or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less;

iii. Relocation of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment or appurtenances, only when required by a local governmental agency which approves the new location of the facilities; and

iv. Replacement, modification, installation or construction of public sewer local collection, public water local distribution, natural gas, cable communication or telephone facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment or appurtenances when such facilities are located within an improved public right-of-way or city authorized private roadway;

E. Normal and routine maintenance, repair, renovation or structural alteration of public and private structures not listed in this section, in existence on January 14, 2003.

F. New accessory structures and additions to structures that do not exceed a cumulative impervious surface addition after January 14, 2003 of 1,000 square feet or 7% of lot area, whichever is greater; provided that:

i. Construction is not within a stream, wetland or lake or in their required buffers; and

ii. The proposal does not increase non-conformance to critical area standards related to streams, wetlands or lakes.

G. Public and private pedestrian trails, except in streams, wetlands, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, or their buffers, subject to the following:

i. Critical area and/or buffer widths shall be increased, where possible, equal to the width of the trail corridor, including disturbed areas; and

ii. Trails proposed to be located in landslide or erosion hazard areas shall be constructed in a manner that does not increase the risk of landslide or erosion and in accordance with an approved geotechnical report.

H. Forest practices. Forest practices regulated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 76.09 RCW and forest practices regulations, WAC Title 222, and those that are exempt from city’s jurisdiction, provided that forest practice conversions are not exempt.

I. Minor site investigative work. Work necessary for permit submittals, such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests, and other related activities, where such activities do not require construction of new roads, significant amounts of excavation or removal of significant trees. In every case, impacts to the critical area shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored.

J. Non-regulated activities in the critical aquifer recharge areas.

4. Public agency and utility exception.

A. If the application of this chapter would prohibit a development proposal by a public agency or public utility, the agency or utility may apply for a Public Agency and Utility Exception. All requirements of this chapter apply, except as specifically waived as part of the decision on the exception.

B. Exception request and review process. An application for a public agency and utility exception shall be made to the city and shall include a critical area study, including mitigation plan, if necessary; other related project documents, and any applicable environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW). The application shall be processed using the Type 1 review process pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC.

C. Public agency and utility exception review criteria. The Director’s decision shall be based on the following criteria:

i. There is no other practical or feasible alternative to the proposed development with less impact on the critical area; and

ii. The proposal minimizes the impact on critical areas; and

iii. The application of this chapter would unreasonably restrict the ability to provide utility services to the public; and

iv. The proposal meets the decision criteria in BMC 19.40.100.

5. Reasonable use exception.

A. If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for a Reasonable Use Exception. All requirements of this chapter apply, except as specifically waived as part of the decision on the exception.

B. Limitations. Reasonable use exceptions are not authorized for changes in density limitations, permitted uses or activities in critical areas or their required buffers, expanding a use otherwise prohibited, and shall not be used to achieve the maximum density allowed without the existence of critical areas.

C. Exception request and review process. An application for a reasonable use exception shall be made to the city and shall include a critical area study, including mitigation plan, if necessary; and any other related project documents, such as special studies, and environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW). The application shall be processed using the Type 1 review process pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC.

D. Reasonable use exception review criteria. The Director’s decision shall be based on the following criteria:

i. The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

ii. There is no other reasonable use with less impact on the critical area;

iii. The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest; and

iv. Any alterations permitted to the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property.

v. The proposal meets the decision criteria in BMC 19.40.100. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.080 Nonconforming uses and structures.

Uses or structures lawfully established in a critical area or its buffer prior to the adoption of this chapter that no longer conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming to this chapter and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 19.55 BMC, Non-Conformance. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

CRITICAL AREA REVIEW


19.40.090 Critical area review.

1. Required review. Alteration, construction, development or activity within a critical area (except a seismic hazard) or its required buffer must be approved through a critical area review, unless exempted pursuant to BMC 19.40.070 or 19.40.320. Prior to submitting an application for critical area review, the applicant shall schedule and attend a City of Burien pre-application meeting to obtain information relating to overall project feasibility, scope of critical area studies, standards and possible mitigation required for alterations on or near critical areas.

2. As part of its review of a critical area review, the City shall:

A. Verify the information submitted by the applicant;

B. Determine whether any critical area exists on the property and confirm its nature and type;

C. Evaluate the critical area study;

D. Determine whether the development proposal conforms to the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the criteria in BMC 19.40.100;

E. Determine if the proposed project adequately addresses impacts on the functions or value of critical areas and whether such impacts are necessary and unavoidable;

F. Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the functions and value of the critical area, and public health, safety and welfare concerns, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this chapter.

3. Submittal requirements. Applications for critical area review shall be submitted with all of the following information:

A. A written critical area study (BMC 19.40.120) that adequately evaluates the proposal, all probable impacts and risks related to the critical area and recommends appropriate mitigation measures to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

B. In addition to indicating the location of the proposal, the site and development plans shall include:

i. The accurate location of those critical areas and their required buffers that could be affected by the proposal.

ii. The approximate location of all mapped or identifiable critical areas and their buffers that are within the distances identified in BMC 19.40.040(3).

iii. Accurate topography drawn to scale with a minimum 2-foot contour interval.

C. Applicable filing fees.

D. If necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, the Director may require additional information from the applicant, separate from the critical area study. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.100 Review criteria.

1. Any alteration to a critical area or its required buffer, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall be reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied based on the proposal’s ability to comply with all of the following criteria:

A. The proposal limits the impact on critical areas;

B. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the site;

C. The proposal is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest;

D. Any alterations permitted to the critical area or its required buffer are mitigated in accordance with the mitigation requirements of this chapter (BMC 19.40.170) and the critical area study (BMC 19.40.120); and

E. The proposal protects the critical area functions and value consistent with the best available science and achieves no net loss of critical area functions and values.

2. The city may condition the proposed activity as necessary to mitigate impacts to critical areas and to conform to the standards required by this chapter. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]

CRITICAL AREA STUDY


19.40.110 Critical area study – waiver.

The Director shall waive the requirement for a critical area study if:

1. There will be no alteration of the critical area or buffer; and

2. The development proposal will not impact the critical area in a manner contrary to the purpose, intent, and requirements of this chapter; and

3. The proposal is consistent with other City of Burien applicable regulations and standards. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.120 Critical area study requirements.

1. General. The critical area study shall be funded by the applicant and shall be prepared in accordance with procedures established by the Director. If appropriate professional expertise does not exist on City staff, the Director may retain experts at the applicant’s expense to review critical area studies submitted by the applicant. Expense to the applicant shall be determined at the pre-application meeting.

2. Prepared by qualified professional. A required critical area study shall be prepared by a person with experience and training in the scientific discipline appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology or related field, and two years of related work experience. The City maintains a roster of qualified professionals. 

A. A qualified professional for wetlands must be a Professional Wetland Scientist with at least two years of full-time work experience as a wetlands professional, including delineating wetlands using the state or federal manuals; preparing wetland reports; conducting function assessments; and developing and implementing mitigation plans.

B. A qualified professional for Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas must have a degree in biology and professional experience related to the subject species.

C. A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington.

D. A qualified professional for critical aquifer recharge areas means a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

3. Incorporating best available science. The critical area study shall use scientifically valid methods and studies in the analysis of critical area data and field reconnaissance and reference the source of science used. The critical area study shall evaluate the proposal and all probable impacts to critical areas in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

4. Minimum study contents. The critical area study shall contain, at a minimum, the following information, as applicable:

A. The name and contact information of the applicant, a description of the proposal, and identification of the permit requested.

B. A copy of the site plan for the development proposal showing:

i. Identified critical areas, buffers, and the development proposal with dimensions;

ii. Limits of any areas to be cleared; and

iii. A description of the proposed stormwater management plan for the development and consideration of impacts to drainage alterations;

C. The dates, names, and qualifications of the persons preparing the study and documentation of any fieldwork performed on the site;

D. Identification and characterization of all critical areas, water bodies, and buffers adjacent to the proposed project area or potentially impacted by the proposed project;

E. A statement specifying the accuracy of the study, and assumptions used in the study;

F. Determination of the degree of hazard and risk from the proposal both on the site and on surrounding properties;

G. An assessment of the probable cumulative impacts to critical areas, their buffers and other properties resulting from the proposal;

H. A description of reasonable efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing (BMC 19.40.170(2)) to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas;

I. When impacts are unavoidable, a mitigation plan (BMC 19.40.170(3));

J. Recommendations for maintenance, short-term and long-term monitoring, contingency plans and bonding measures; and

K. Any other technical information required by the Director to assist in determining compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.130 Critical area study – modifications to requirements.

1. Limitations to study area. The Director may limit the required geographic area of the critical area study as appropriate if:

A. The applicant, with assistance from the city, cannot obtain permission to access properties adjacent to the project area; or

B. The proposed activity will affect only a limited part of the site.

2. Modifications to required contents of study. The Director may allow modifications to the required contents of the study where, in the judgment of a qualified professional, more or less information is required to adequately address the potential critical area impacts and required mitigation. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]

CRITICAL AREA DETERMINATION


19.40.140 Determination.

1. General. The Director shall issue a written critical area determination as to whether the proposed activity and mitigation, if any, is consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The Director’s determination shall be based on the criteria of BMC 19.40.100. The Director may require increased buffer widths, increased setbacks or other protective measures not required in this chapter if required in the critical area study.

2. Review process and timing. The determination for proposed development on an undeveloped lot in a landslide hazard area shall be processed using the Type I review process and timing described in Chapter 19.65 BMC. Determinations for all other types of proposals shall be processed as an administrative decision. The City’s goal is to issue the administrative decision within 60 days of submittal of a complete application containing the materials required in BMC 19.40.090(3).

3. Favorable determination. If the Director determines that the proposed activity meets the criteria in BMC 19.40.100 and complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter, the Director shall prepare a written notice of determination and identify any required conditions of approval. If a Type I review is required, the critical area notice of determination shall be combined with the Type I review notice of decision. The notice of determination and conditions of approval shall be included in the project file and be considered in future phases of the city’s review of the proposed activity in accordance with any other applicable codes or regulations.

Any conditions of approval included in a notice of determination shall be attached to the underlying permit or approval. Any subsequent changes to the conditions of approval shall void the previous determination pending re-review of the proposal and conditions of approval by the Director.

A favorable determination should not be construed as endorsement or approval of any underlying permit or approval.

4. Unfavorable determination. If the Director determines that a proposed activity does not adequately mitigate its impacts on the critical areas and/or does not comply with the criteria in BMC 19.40.100 and the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall prepare written notice of the determination that includes findings of noncompliance. If a Type I review is required, the critical area notice of determination shall be combined with the Type I review notice of decision.

No proposed activity or permit shall be approved or issued if it is determined that the proposed activity does not adequately mitigate its impacts on the critical areas and/or does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.150 Appeal of determination.

A critical area determination issued using the Type 1 review process may be appealed using the appeal procedures for a Type 1 decision (Chapter 19.65 BMC). A critical area determination issued as an administrative decision may be appealed according to, and as part of the appeal procedure for the underlying permit or approval involved. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]

GENERAL CRITICAL AREA REQUIREMENTS


19.40.160 Notice on title.

1. The owner of any property containing critical areas or buffers on which a critical area review application is submitted, except a public right-of-way, shall record a notice approved by the Director with the King County Records and Elections Division. The notice shall inform the public of the presence of critical areas or buffers on the site, of the application of this chapter to the property, of the requirement for engineered structure design (if applicable), and that limitations on actions in or affecting such critical areas or buffers may exist. The notice shall run with the land.

2. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice has been filed for public record before the Director shall approve any permits or alteration for the site, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans, at or before recording. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.210]


19.40.170 Mitigation requirements.

1. The applicant shall avoid all impacts that degrade the functions and values of critical areas and buffers. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, if impacts to critical areas or buffers are unavoidable, all adverse impacts resulting from the proposed alteration, construction, development, or activity shall be mitigated, at the applicant’s expense, using the best available science in accordance with an approved critical area study.

2. Mitigation sequencing. Applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been examined with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, applicants shall follow the sequential order of preference below. Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of these measures.

A. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

B. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts;

C. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

D. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

E. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and/or

F. Monitoring the impact area or the required mitigation area and taking remedial action when necessary.

3. When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit for approval by the City a mitigation plan as part of the critical areas study (BMC 19.40.120). The mitigation plan:

A. shall be prepared by a qualified professional;

B. shall demonstrate that the proposed mitigation will adequately offset all adverse impacts to critical areas that may result from the proposed alteration, construction, development, or activity; and

C. shall include a monitoring, maintenance, and contingency plan, including measurable performance standards that evaluate whether or not the mitigation project has fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.

4. Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the City approval of a critical area study that includes a mitigation plan, and mitigation shall be in accordance with the provisions of the approved critical areas study.

5. Impacts to significant trees within critical areas shall be mitigated according to Chapter 19.25 BMC, Tree Retention and Landscaping. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.180 Vegetation management plan.

1. For all proposals where preservation of existing vegetation is required by this chapter, a vegetation management plan shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of the permit or other request for permission to proceed with an alteration.

2. Normal nondestructive pruning and trimming of vegetation for maintenance purposes shall not be considered alteration for the purposes of this section. Pruning allowed without a vegetation management plan shall be performed in a manner that ensures continual survival of the vegetation.

3. The vegetation management plan shall incorporate all City requirements relating to protection, maintenance and planting of vegetation and shall identify the proposed clearing limits for the project and any areas where vegetation in a critical area or its buffer is proposed to be disturbed.

4. Clearing limits as shown on the plan shall be marked in the field in a prominent and durable manner. Proposed methods of field marking shall be reviewed and approved by the Director prior to any site alteration. Field marking shall remain in place until the certificate of occupancy or final project approval is granted.

5. The vegetation management plan may be incorporated into a temporary erosion and sediment control plan or landscaping plan where either of these plans is required by other laws or regulations.

6. Vegetation within critical areas and their buffers may be altered only upon prior written approval by the Director. A report by a qualified professional or certified arborist may be required to address alternatives, to ensure that the proposed alteration will not be detrimental to surrounding properties and to the functions and values of the associated critical area.

7. Where alteration of the critical area or buffer has occurred during construction, revegetation with native vegetation will be required unless the Director approves a substitute vegetation with the same or better functions than the original buffer area. If the alteration was unauthorized by the City, the Director may also impose penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.190]


19.40.190 General development standards.

1. Clustering. Clustering of structures in areas of a site that are not located within critical areas or their buffers is encouraged. For purposes of this section, “clustering” means a form of development that allows a reduction in lot area, provided that the number of proposed dwelling units does not exceed the total number of dwelling units that could be allowed if clustering was not used. For the purposes of this section, the limitation on lot averaging in BMC 19.15.005(2) and 19.15.010(4) does not apply.

2. Building setback. Except in critical aquifer recharge areas and seismic hazard areas, buildings shall be set back 15 feet from the edges of all critical area buffers or from the edges of all other critical areas, if no buffers are required, as required in the critical area study. The following may be allowed in the building setback area:

A. Landscaping;

B. Uncovered decks;

C. Building overhangs which do not extend more than eighteen (18) inches into the area;

D. Pervious unroofed stairways and steps; and

E. Impervious ground surfaces, such as driveways and patios, provided that such improvements may be subject to water quality regulations as adopted in the City’s stormwater management regulations (Chapter 13.10 BMC). [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.230]


19.40.200 Construction requirements.

1. The Director may require that the applicant retain the expert(s) that prepared the critical area study, or another expert approved by the City, to monitor construction for compliance with the professional’s recommendations and related requirements imposed by the City. The Director may require that the expert submit field reports to the City on a regular basis during construction, a final report and following construction if needed to ensure compliance with this code and the recommendations of the critical area study.

2. If required by the critical area study, City of Burien Construction Code, or King County Surface Water Design Manual, the applicant shall submit a temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan and/or a permanent and complete stormwater control plan for the proposal. The plan shall include but not be limited to the following items as appropriate: curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, tightlines, retention and detention facilities, stabilized outfalls, and subterranean water. Maximum flows of runoff from the property shall not be increased by the construction activity or resultant improvements. The Director shall provide specific requirements for such plans.

3. If required by the critical area study, City of Burien Construction Code, or King County Surface Water Design Manual, the Director may restrict construction to a construction season. If a construction season is established, it may be subsequently modified as necessary by the Director.

4. If required by the critical area study or City of Burien Construction Code, the Director may require the use of alternate foundation systems that limit the amount of excavation, for example, pilings, caissons, footings with grade beams, or other appropriate systems. The Director may limit or prohibit the use of conventional spread footings at building perimeters. The Director may require excavations to be dug by hand or using hand-held machinery.

5. All subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans shall comply with the following additional requirements:

A. Except as provided in this section, existing vegetation shall be retained on all lots until building permits are approved for development on individual lots; and

B. If any vegetation on the lots is damaged or removed during construction of the subdivision infrastructure, the applicant shall be required to submit a restoration plan to the Director for review and approval. Following approval, the applicant shall be required to implement the plan;

6. Indemnification. An indemnification or hold harmless agreement shall be required for all clearing, grading or construction on lots containing critical areas, except for non-regulated uses in critical aquifer recharge areas. The form of the agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and executed prior to issuance of any permits for development of the site. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.160]


19.40.210 Critical area markers and signs.

The section below does not pertain to critical aquifer recharge areas or seismic hazard areas.

1. Boundary delineation and construction fencing. The outer edge of any required critical area buffer, tract or protective easement shall be clearly staked using permanent survey markers installed by a licensed surveyor. The survey markers and a temporary construction fence shall be installed at applicant expense and accepted by the Director prior to issuance of any permits for site clearing or construction, or, if permits are not required, prior to any alteration of the site. The temporary construction fence shall be a sturdy wire, chain link or wood fence between 3 feet and 6 feet high as required by the Director. The Director may require signs to be installed on the fence indicating that no disturbance of the critical area and its buffer is allowed.

2. Permanent barrier or fencing. Permanent fencing shall be required at the outer edge of the critical area buffer under the following circumstances. Fencing installed in accordance with this section shall be designed to not interfere with fish and wildlife migration and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes critical areas impacts.

A. As part of any development proposal for:

i. Plats;

ii. Short plats;

iii. Parks;

iv. Other development proposals, including but not limited to multifamily, mixed use, and commercial development where the director determines that such fencing is necessary to protect the functions of the critical area;

B. When buffer reductions are employed as part of a development proposal;

C. When buffer averaging is employed as part of a development proposal; and

D. At the director’s discretion to protect the values and functions of a critical area.

3. Signs. Development proposals approved by the City shall require that the boundary between a critical area buffer and contiguous land shall be identified with permanent signs. Permanent signs shall be a City-approved type designed for high durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of one per lot or every 50 feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner or homeowners’ association in perpetuity. The wording, number and placement of the signs may be modified by the director based on specific site conditions. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.200]


19.40.220 Permanent protection of critical areas and buffers.

As a condition of approval of a proposed activity within a critical area or its buffer, the City may require that critical areas and their buffers, except for critical aquifer recharge areas and seismic hazard areas, shall be permanently protected from alteration by tracts or easements. A property owner may also voluntarily propose permanent protection of critical areas and their buffers on the owner’s property by use of tracts, easements, or gifting of the property to the City. Any required forms or documents related to protective tracts or easements shall be approved by the City Attorney. Any area permanently protected under this section shall impose upon all present and future owners and occupiers of the protected area the obligation to leave the protective area permanently undisturbed, unless otherwise allowed by this chapter. Such obligation shall be enforceable by the City on behalf of the public. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]


19.40.230 Bonds.

The Director may require a bond or other security in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the Director to ensure compliance with any aspect of this chapter or any decision or determination made under this chapter. The Director shall administratively prepare and maintain applicable bonding forms and procedures. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003. Formerly 19.40.180]

FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS


19.40.240 Frequently flooded areas – Designation.

1. The purpose of designation and protection of frequently flooded areas shall be to:

A. Reduce the risk to life and safety, public facilities, and public and private property that result from floods;

B. Avoid and minimize impacts to fish and wildlife habitats that occur within frequently flooded areas;

C. Assure that flood loss reduction measures protect and are consistent with retaining natural floodplain functions related to protecting riparian habitat and the natural processes that create and maintain habitat for fish;

D. Assure maintenance of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological functions of floodplains;

E. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development activities which may increase flood damage and alter beneficial natural stream processes; and

F. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that may unnaturally divert floodwaters in such a way as to block natural channel migration, or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 

2. Frequently flooded areas shall include the following:

A. 100-year floodplain;

B. Flood fringe;

C. Zero-rise floodway; and

D. Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) floodway.

3. The City of Burien shall determine frequently flooded area boundaries after obtaining, reviewing and utilizing base flood elevations and available floodway data for a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” The base flood is determined for existing conditions, unless a basin plan including projected flows under future developed conditions has been completed and adopted by the city of Burien, in which case these future flow projections shall be used. In areas where the Flood Insurance Study for King County includes detailed base flood calculations, those calculations may be used until projections of future flows are completed and approved by the city of Burien. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 28 § 1(469), 1993]


19.40.250 Frequently flooded areas – General Standards.

1. For the purposes of this section and BMC 19.40.260 and 19.40.270, development in frequently flooded areas includes any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, subdivision of land, removal of substantial amounts of vegetation, or alteration of natural site characteristics. 

2. Development within frequently flooded areas shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.55 BMC, Flood Damage Prevention, as amended. 

3. Application requirements. In addition to the requirements of BMC 19.40.120(4), a critical area study for a frequently flooded area shall contain an assessment of the following site- and proposal-related information that describes the effects of proposed development on floodplain functions including, but not limited to:

A. Storing and conveying floodwater;

B. Reducing peak flows and flow velocities;

C. Reducing redd scour and displacing rearing juvenile fish at the project site and downstream;

D. Maintaining sediment quality in streams;

E. Improving water quality;

F. Maintaining and improving fish access; and

G. Mitigation for any adverse effects on floodplain functions, pursuant to BMC 19.40.170.

4. The Director shall have the authority to require consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or other appropriate agencies.

5. Development proposals shall not reduce the effective base flood storage volume of the floodplain. Grading or other activity which would reduce the effective storage volume shall be mitigated by creating compensatory storage on the site or off the site if legal arrangements can be made to assure that the effective compensatory storage volume will be preserved over time. Grading for construction of livestock manure storage facilities to control non-point source water pollution designed to the standards of and approved by the King County Conservation District is exempt from this compensatory storage requirement.

6. No structure shall be allowed which would be at risk due to stream bank destabilization including, but not limited to, that associated with channel relocation or meandering.

7. Prior to approving any permit for alterations in frequently flooded area, the city of Burien shall determine that all permits required by state or federal law have been obtained. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 28 § 1(470), 1993]


19.40.260 Floodway – Development standards and permitted alterations.

1. The following are presumed to produce no increase in base flood elevation and shall not require a special study to establish this fact:

A. New residential structures outside the FEMA floodway on lots in existence before November 27, 1990, which contain less than 5,000 square feet of buildable land outside the zero-rise floodway and which have a total building footprint of all proposed structures on the lot of less than 2,000 square feet;

B. Substantial improvements of existing residential structures in the zero-rise floodway, but outside the FEMA floodway, where the footprint is not increased;

C. Substantial improvements of existing residential structures meeting the requirements for new residential structures in BMC 19.40.250; and

D. Substantial improvements of existing residential structures in the FEMA floodway, meeting the requirements of WAC 173-158-070, as amended.

2. Post or piling construction techniques which permit water flow beneath a structure shall be used.

3. All temporary structures or substances hazardous to public health, safety and welfare, except for hazardous household substances or consumer products containing hazardous substances, shall be removed from the zero-rise floodway during the flood season from September 30th to May 1st.

4. New residential or nonresidential structures shall meet the following requirements:

A. The structures shall be outside the FEMA floodway; and

B. The structures shall be on lots in existence before November 27, 1990, which contain less than 5,000 square feet of buildable land outside the zero-rise floodway.

5. Utilities may be allowed within the floodway if the city of Burien determines that no feasible alternative site is available, subject to the following requirements:

A. Installation of new on-site sewage disposal systems shall be prohibited unless a waiver is granted by the Seattle/King County department of public health; and

B. Construction of sewage treatment facilities shall be prohibited.

6. Critical facilities shall not be allowed within the zero-rise floodway except as provided in subsection 8 of this section.

7. Livestock manure storage facilities and associated nonpoint source water pollution facilities designed, constructed and maintained to the standards of and approved in a conservation plan by the King County Conservation District may be allowed if the city of Burien reviews and approves the location and design of the facilities.

8. Structures and installations which are dependent upon the floodway may be located in the floodway if the development proposal is approved by all agencies with jurisdiction. Such structures include, but are not limited to:

A. Dams or diversions for water supply, flood control, hydroelectric production, irrigation or fisheries enhancement;

B. Flood damage reduction facilities, such as levees and pumping stations;

C. Stream bank stabilization structures where no feasible alternative exists for protecting public or private property;

D. Storm water conveyance facilities subject to the development standards for streams and wetlands and the Surface Water Design Manual;

E. Boat launches and related recreation structures;

F. Bridge piers and abutments; and

G. Other fisheries enhancement or stream restoration projects. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 28 § 1(471), 1993]

GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS


19.40.280 Geologically hazardous areas – Designation.

1. Intent. Geologically hazardous areas are a potential threat to public health, safety and welfare when construction of geotechnically incompatible uses is allowed. Some potential risk due to construction in geologically hazardous areas can be reduced through engineering design. Alteration of and construction in geologically hazardous areas should be avoided when the potential risk to public health and safety cannot be reduced to a level comparable to the undeveloped site. 

2. Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to erosion, landslide, rock fall, subsidence, earthquake, or other geological events. Areas susceptible to one or more of the following types of hazards shall be designated as a geologically hazardous area:

A. Erosion hazard;

B. Landslide hazard; or

C. Seismic hazard. 

3. The approximate location and extent of known landslide hazard areas and seismic hazard areas are shown on the Critical Areas Map adopted by the City, as described in BMC 19.40.040 and as most recently updated. For landslide hazard areas and seismic hazard areas depicted on the Critical Areas Map, the King County Census Areas Mapfolio from December 1990 was used as a base map. The City amends this map as new site-specific information becomes available from professional critical area studies completed as part of critical area review. 

4. The following areas are exempt from designation as geologically hazardous areas:

A. Slope exemptions: The following slopes are exempt, unless the slope is part of another critical area or required buffer:

i. Slopes resulting from street, alley, sidewalk and other typical rights-of-way improvements, including rockeries or retaining walls. This exemption shall not extend beyond the cut or fill created by the street, alley, sidewalk or other rights-of-way improvement.

ii. Slopes with a vertical elevation change of up to ten feet (10) and not part of a larger steep-slope system.

iii. Slopes which have been created through previous verifiable, legal grading activities, may be exempted by the Director based on a geotechnical report demonstrating that no adverse impact will result from the exemption.

B. Stabilization of landslide hazard area. Certain landslide hazard areas may be exempt if the Director determines based on geotechnical expertise, that application of the regulations would prevent necessary stabilization of a landslide-prone area. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015]


19.40.290 Geologically hazardous areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

1. Standards – Seismic hazard areas. Development in seismic hazard areas shall be in accordance with the standards for earthquake design and seismic motion of the City of Burien Construction Code.

2. Standards – Erosion hazard areas and landslide hazard areas. Development on or within 50 feet of areas designated erosion hazard areas or landslide hazard areas shall comply with the following requirements:

A. Buffer. A minimum 50 foot wide buffer shall be established from all edges of a landslide hazard area. The buffer shall be extended as required to mitigate hazards identified in the critical area study or as otherwise necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The buffer shall be maintained in native vegetation to provide additional soil stability and erosion control. If the buffer area has been previously cleared, it shall be replanted with native vegetation pursuant to a landscape plan submitted by the applicant and approved by the Director.

B. Buffer reduction. As part of critical area review, the Director may reduce or waive the landslide hazard area buffer if the applicant shows that the following criteria are met:

i. The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest; and

ii. There is no feasible alternative with less impact on the critical area.

iii. For a buffer of between 0 feet and 25 feet, in addition to the items required in BMC 19.40.120, the critical area study must specifically discuss and support the requested buffer reduction, including:

a. The ability to maintain long-term stability of the landslide hazard area; and

b. Any appropriate mitigating measures needed to mitigate impacts of the buffer reduction; and

c. An assessment of any increased risk that could result from the buffer reduction.

C. Erosion control. An erosion control plan shall be submitted to the Director for approval prior to any clearing, grading, construction or other alteration. The Director may limit clearing, grading or filling to the period between April 1st and October 1st.

D. Disturbance and alterations. Any alterations permitted in or within 50 feet of an erosion hazard area or landslide hazard area, or in a required landslide hazard area buffer, shall comply with the following criteria:

i. All proposed alterations shall be limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the applicant’s objectives and engineering design.

ii. The face of cuts and fills shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion and instability. Bluffs shall be protected from surface erosion.

iii. The proposal shall not increase the rate of surface water runoff, erosion or sedimentation, shall not increase geologic hazards for any property and shall reduce ponding and infiltration of storm drainage.

iv. Development must be located and designed to minimize slope disturbance, minimize removal of vegetation, and retain open space.

v. Shared access drives and utility corridors are required where feasible. Vehicular access shall be in the least sensitive area of the site.

vi. Foundations should be tiered where possible to conform to the existing topography of the site. Roads, walkways, driveways and parking areas should be designed to parallel the natural contours.

vii. All development shall be designed to minimize impervious surface coverage and where feasible should incorporate under-structure parking and multi-level structures.

viii. Construction techniques must minimize disruption of existing topography and existing vegetation. Any disturbed vegetation shall be restored as soon as feasible.

ix. The applicant shall submit a detailed site plan prepared by a licensed engineer showing all proposed clearing, grading, drainage and utilities. The Director may require that all proposed clearing, grading, drainage and utility locations be marked in the field by a licensed land surveyor, based on the engineer-prepared site plan.

E. Landscaping. The disturbed area of a site shall be landscaped to provide erosion control and to enhance wildlife habitat. Landscape plantings should include trees and shrubs with a mix of shade, flowering, and coniferous and broad-leaf evergreens that are either native to the Puget Sound area or are valuable to western Washington birds and wildlife as listed by the Department of Fish and Wildlife. [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

F. Vegetation maintenance. Limited trimming and pruning of vegetation for the creation and maintenance of views is allowed in accordance with the pruning standards of the International Society of Arboriculture; provided, that the soils are not disturbed and the activity will not increase the risk of landslide or erosion.

3. Application requirements. In addition to the requirements of Section 19.40.090.3, an application for critical area review involving a landslide hazard area shall include at least the following additional items, submitted by the applicant and prepared at the applicant’s expense. The Director may waive any of the following submittal requirements if not applicable to the proposal:

A. Plans and specifications prepared by a licensed architect or licensed professional engineer, in accordance with the City of Burien Construction Code;

B. A footing and foundation plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer incorporating the recommendations contained in the critical area study;

C. A Level 1 drainage analysis prepared by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with the Surface Water Design Manual as adopted by the City of Burien;

D. A storm water management plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer incorporating the recommendations contained in the Level 1 drainage analysis;

E. A vegetation management plan pursuant to BMC 19.40.180 showing all existing vegetation and which vegetation is proposed for removal. The location, size and species of all significant trees on the site shall be indicated by survey. Significant trees shall be retained, protected, or replaced in accordance with BMC 19.40.180. The plan shall propose mitigation measures to prevent erosion and protect the geologically hazardous area, its buffer and other properties from hazards and adverse impacts;

F. A landslide hazard area affidavit in a form approved by the City attorney, submitted by the applicant, which waives any claims against the City, releases the City from all liability, holds the City harmless, and agrees to indemnify the City for all costs, claims, and demands of any kind, including but not limited to attorney and expert witness fees associated with litigation, arbitration, or any other adversary proceeding arising in any manner from the owner’s or the owner’s agents’ acts or omissions relating in any manner to the development. The affidavit shall be recorded with the King County assessor’s office prior to, and as an express condition of, the issuance of any grading or building permit;

G. All other applicable codes of the City are met including but not limited to the setback, height, impervious surface coverage, and other requirements of this code and the requirements of the shoreline master program and the City of Burien Construction Code;

H. The applicant’s geotechnical engineer or geologist shall review the project plans and specifications prior to issuance of any permits and provide written confirmation to the City that the recommendations and design criteria have been fully incorporated into the project documents;

I. The applicant’s geotechnical engineer or geologist shall monitor project construction and provide written confirmation that the project has been constructed in accordance with their recommendations and design criteria. Changes to the recommended designs for excavation and construction which are based on new information shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to proceeding with the development activity. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003; Ord. 376 § 1, 2003]

WETLANDS


19.40.300 Wetlands – Designation and Classification.

1. Intent. Wetlands provide fish and wildlife habitat, flood storage, water quality, recreation, educational opportunities, and aesthetics. The goal of wetland regulations in the City of Burien is to achieve no net loss of wetland functions and values.

2. Designation and Applicability.

A. Wetlands are those areas in the City of Burien, designated in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the City of Burien meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. [RCW 36.70A.175, 90.58.380 (1995); WAC 173-22-035 (2011)] 

B. Where the vegetation has been removed or substantially altered, a wetland shall be determined by the presence or evidence of hydric or organic soil, as well as by other documentation, such as aerial photographs, of the previous existence of wetland vegetation.

C. Puget Sound and Lake Burien are shorelines of the state and shall be regulated under the Burien Shoreline Master Program.

3. Wetland Rating and Classification.

A. Wetlands shall be classified into category I, category II, category III and category IV according to the Washington Department of Ecology wetland rating system, as set forth in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Washington State Department of Ecology publication number 14-06-029, or as amended, which contains the definitions and methods for determining whether the criteria below are met. 

i. Category I. Category I wetlands are those that 1) represent a unique or rare wetland type; or 2) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; or 3) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or 4) provide a high level of functions. In Western Washington these include large undisturbed estuarine wetlands; wetlands of high conservation value; bogs; wetlands with mature and old-growth forests; wetlands in coastal lagoons; interdunal wetlands larger than one (1) acre with a high habitat score; and wetlands that provide a high level of functions.

ii. Category II. Category II wetlands are difficult, though not impossible, to replace, and provide high levels of some functions. In Western Washington, these include smaller estuarine wetlands; interdunal wetlands larger than one (1) acre or interdunal wetlands that are part of a wetland mosaic; and wetlands with a moderately high level of functions.

iii. Category III. Category III wetlands include wetlands with a moderate level of functions, and interdunal wetlands between 0.1 and one (1) acre in size. Category III wetlands generally have been disturbed in some way; are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands; and can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project.

iv. Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that we should be able to replace, and in some cases be able to improve.

B. Wetland rating categories shall not recognize illegal modifications.

C. The following types of wetlands are not regulated by the City of Burien: All hydrologically isolated Category III and IV wetlands less than 1,000 square feet that:

i. Are not associated with riparian areas or buffers,

ii. Are not part of a wetland mosaic, and

iii. Do not contain habitat identified as essential by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.310 Wetlands – Development standards.

1. General Requirements.

A. Any alterations to a wetland and/or wetland buffer shall require mitigation as described in BMC 19.40.330.

B. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the wetland and its buffer are prohibited by the City of Burien unless approved by the Director;

C. Plantings in a wetland or buffer shall be native to Western Washington or be a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion;

D. No vegetation removal, including mowing, shall be allowed in a wetland or wetland buffer unless authorized by the Director. Removal of noxious weeds is permitted if done manually;

E. Unless otherwise provided, the following restrictions shall apply to all development proposals in Category I, II, or III wetlands that include the introduction of livestock:

i. Implementation of a plan approved by the Director to protect and enhance the wetland’s water quality; and

ii. Fencing located at the buffer edge.

2. Buffers.

A. A buffer area shall be established adjacent to designated wetland areas. The purpose of the buffer area shall be to protect the integrity, functions and values of the wetland area. Buffer widths shall be appropriate for the sensitivity of the wetland and for the risks associated with land use development.

B. The following standard buffers, based on the category of wetland and the habitat score as determined by a qualified wetland professional, shall be established from the wetland edge. Additional buffer widths are added to the standard buffer widths. For example, a Category I wetland scoring eight (8) points for habitat function would require a buffer of 225 feet (75 + 150).

 

Wetland Buffers  

	Wetland Category	Buffer width if wetland scores 3 – 4 habitat points	Additional buffer width if wetland scores 5 habitat points	Additional buffer width if wetland scores 6 – 7 habitat points	Additional buffer width if wetland scores 8 – 9 habitat points

	Category I	75 ft	add 30 ft	add 90 ft	add 150 ft

	Category II 	75 ft	add 30 ft	add 90 ft	add 150 ft

	Category III	60 ft	add 45 ft	add 105 ft	add 165 ft

	Category IV	50 ft 

C. The use of the standard buffer widths requires the implementation of the measures in the following table, where applicable, to minimize the impacts of the adjacent land uses. If an applicant chooses not to apply these measures, then a thirty-three (33) percent increase in the width of all buffers is required. For example, a 75-foot buffer accompanied by the mitigation measures would be a 100-foot buffer without them. 

Wetland Impact Minimizations  

	Disturbance	Required Measures to Minimize Impacts

	Lights	•	Direct lights away from wetland

	Noise	•	Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland

		•	If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source

	 	•	For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially disruptive noise, such as certain heavy industry or mining, establish an additional 10’ heavily vegetated buffer strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer

	Toxic runoff	•	Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered

	 	•	Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within 150 feet of wetland

	 	•	Apply integrated pest management

	Stormwater runoff	•	Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads and existing adjacent development

	 	•	Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters the buffer

	 	•	Use Low Intensity Development techniques (per PSAT publication on LID techniques)

	Change in water regime	•	Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns

	Pets and human disturbance	•	Use privacy fencing OR plant dense vegetation to delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion

	 	•	Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect with a conservation easement

	Dust	•	Use best management practices to control dust

	Disruption of corridors or connections	•	Maintain connections to offsite areas that are undisturbed

	•	Restore corridors or connections to offsite habitats by replanting

D. Buffer widths as defined in subsection B above assume that the buffer is vegetated with a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion. If the existing buffer is unvegetated, sparsely vegetated, or vegetated with invasive species that do not perform needed functions, the buffer shall either be planted to create the appropriate plant community or the buffer shall be widened to ensure that adequate functions of the buffer are provided. 

E. Wetland buffers shall be measured from the wetland edge as delineated and marked in the field.

F. Any wetland restored, relocated, replaced or enhanced because of a wetland alteration shall have the minimum buffer required for the highest wetland class involved pursuant to an approved compensatory mitigation plan set forth in BMC 19.40.330.

G. Increased buffer widths may be required by the City of Burien when:

i. The buffer is within twenty-five (25) feet of the toe of a slope that is greater than thirty percent (30%); or

ii. The slope is susceptible to erosion and standard best management practices (BMPs) and erosion-control measures will not prevent adverse impacts to the wetland.

H. Standard buffer width averaging may be allowed by the Director (in accordance with an approved critical area review) if:

i. Additional protection to wetlands will be provided through the implementation of a buffer enhancement plan;

ii. Minimum buffer width is the greater of seventy-five percent (75%) of the standard buffer width or twenty-five (25) feet;

iii. Wetland functions or values will not be reduced; and

iv. As long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease.

I. Buffer reduction with enhancement may be allowed by the Director (in accordance with an approved critical area review) if:

i. Additional protection to wetlands will be provided through the implementation of a buffer enhancement plan;

ii. The existing condition of the buffer is degraded;

iii. Buffer enhancement includes, but is not limited to the following:

a. Planting native vegetation that would increase value for fish and wildlife habitat, improve water quality, or provide aesthetic/recreational value.

b. Enhancement of wildlife habitat by incorporating structures that are likely to be used by wildlife, including wood duck boxes, bat boxes, nesting platforms, snags, rootwads/stumps, birdhouses, and heron nesting areas.

c. Removing non-native plant species and noxious weeds from the buffer area and replanting the area subject to subsection (2)(I)(iii)(a) of this section.

iv. Buffer reductions under this Section shall be limited to twenty-five (25)% of the standard buffer width or a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is greater. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.320 Wetlands – Permitted Alterations.

1. Activities and uses shall be prohibited from wetlands and wetland buffers, except as allowed in this section.

2. The following activities are allowed outright without completion of a critical area review as described in BMC 19.40.090:

A. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife that does not entail changing the structure or functions of the existing wetland.

B. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources.

C. Site-specific biological studies with the purpose of collecting data for critical area studies.

D. Removal of noxious weeds if done manually.

3. Alterations to Wetlands.

A. Activities and uses shall be prohibited from Category I wetlands.

B. Alterations to Category II, III, and IV wetlands may be permitted if the Director determines, based upon review of special studies completed by qualified professionals, that:

i. It will not adversely affect water quality;

ii. It will not adversely affect fish, wildlife, or their habitat;

iii. It will not have an adverse effect on drainage and/or storm water detention capabilities;

iv. It will not lead to unstable earth conditions or create an erosion hazard or contribute to scouring actions;

v. It will not be materially detrimental to any other property or the City as a whole; and

vi. It will not have adverse effects on any other critical areas.

4. Alterations to Wetland Buffers. No land surface alteration or improvement may occur in a wetland buffer except as provided for below:

A. Buffer enhancements may be allowed pursuant to an approved mitigation plan.

B. Utilities such as water, telephone, cable, electric, and natural gas may be allowed in wetland buffers if:

i. The Director determines that no practical alternative location is available; and

ii. The utility corridor meets any additional requirements set forth by the Director and BMC 19.40.070(3) including, but not limited to, requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance pursuant to an approved mitigation plan as set forth in BMC 19.40.330.

C. Sewer utility corridors may be allowed in wetland buffers only if all of the following criteria are met:

i. The applicant demonstrates that sewer lines are necessary for gravity flow;

ii. The corridor is not located in a wetland or buffer used by species listed as endangered or threatened by the state or federal government or containing critical or outstanding actual habitat for those species or heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees;

iii. The corridor alignment including, but not limited to, any allowed maintenance roads, follows a path beyond a distance equal to 75 percent of the buffer width from the wetland edge;

iv. Corridor construction and maintenance protects the wetland and buffer and is aligned to avoid cutting trees greater than 12 inches in diameter at breast height, when possible, and pesticides, herbicides and other hazardous substances are not used;

v. An additional, contiguous and undisturbed buffer, equal in width to the proposed corridor including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the wetland;

vi. The corridor is revegetated with appropriate vegetation native to the City at preconstruction densities or greater immediately upon completion of construction or as soon thereafter as possible, and the sewer utility ensures that such vegetation survives;

vii. Any additional corridor access for maintenance is provided, to the extent possible, at specific points rather than by a parallel road;

viii. The width of any necessary parallel road providing access for maintenance is as small as possible, but not greater than 15 feet, the road is maintained without the use of herbicides, pesticides or other hazardous substances and the location of the road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side away from the wetland;

ix. Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

D. The following surface water management activities and facilities may be allowed in wetland buffers only as follows:

i. Surface water discharge to a wetland buffer from a detention facility, pre-settlement pond or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed if the discharge does not increase the rate of flow, change the plant composition in a forested wetland or decrease the water quality of the wetland;

ii. Stormwater management facilities are limited to stormwater dispersion outfalls and bioswales. They are not allowed in buffers of Category I or II wetlands, but may be allowed within the outer twenty-five percent (25%) of the buffer of Category III or IV wetlands, provided that:

a. No other location is feasible; and

b. The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions and values of the wetland; and

c. All requirements of the King County Surface Water Design Manual, as adopted in Chapter 13.10 BMC, are met.

E. Public and private trails may be allowed in the outer 25% of wetland buffers only if:

i. The trail surface is no more than 5 feet wide and shall not be made of impervious materials, except that public multipurpose trails may be made of impervious materials if:

a. they meet all other requirements including water quality; and

b. an impervious trail has less of an impact on the wetland and its buffer.

ii. The use of elevated boardwalks for trails is encouraged. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.330 Wetlands – Additional Mitigation Requirements.

1. General Requirements.

A. All approved activities that affect regulated wetlands or their buffers require compensatory mitigation so that the goal of no net loss of wetland function or value may be achieved.

B. Mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall achieve equivalent or greater biological functions. Mitigation plans shall be consistent with this chapter (BMC 19.40.170) and Wetland Mitigation in Washington State, Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance (Version 1, Ecology Publication #06-06-011a) or as amended, and best available science.

C. Wetland mitigation shall provide for in-kind lost functions and values. Mitigation actions shall address functions affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement, and shall provide similar wetland functions as those lost except when:

i. The altered wetland provides minimal functions as determined by a site-specific function assessment; and

ii. The proposed mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions that are limited in the watershed; or

iii. Out of kind replacement will best meet formally identified regional goals, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.

2. Types of Mitigation. Impacts to wetlands shall be mitigated according to the mitigation sequence defined in BMC 19.40.170, Mitigation Requirements. Mitigation actions that require compensation by replacing, enhancing, or substitution shall occur in the following order of preference:

A. Restoring wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.

B. Creating wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of exotic introduced species or noxious weeds.

C. Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands.

3. Mitigation Location. Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same sub-drainage basin and on the site as the alteration except when all of the following apply:

A. There are no reasonable on-site or in sub-drainage basin opportunities or on-site and in sub-drainage basin opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures, adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity are inadequate;

B. Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and

C. Off-site locations shall be in the same sub-drainage basin and the same Water Resource Inventory Area (WRIA) unless:

i. Regional or watershed goals for water quality, flood or conveyance, habitat or other wetland functions have been established and strongly justify location of mitigation at another site; or

ii. Credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank are used as compensation, and the use of credits is consistent with the terms of the certified bank instrument; or

iii. Fees are paid to an approved in-lieu fee program to compensate for the impacts.

D. If compensatory wetland or wetland buffer mitigation is proposed off-site, a signed statement of consent is required from owners of all affected properties. This statement shall be submitted to the Director and a Notice on Title recorded with King County Department of Assessments prior to approval of a compensatory mitigation plan.

4. Mitigation Timing. Mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development causing the wetland alteration. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

5. Mitigation Schedule.

A. A mitigation monitoring schedule shall be established for a period of a minimum of five years.

B. An “as-built” mitigation report shall be submitted to the City within one month of mitigation installation. Acceptance of the as-built report by the City will be made after a site investigation is performed by the City, and all changes requested by the City are completed.

C. Mitigation monitoring reports shall be submitted annually to the City.

6. Financial Surety. A performance bond, or other approved financial surety, is required before building and clearing and grading permits are issued. The purpose of the financial surety is to hold an applicant accountable for implementing the mitigation, monitoring, and contingency plans. The release of financial surety is contingent on satisfactory completion by the applicant of the proposed construction, mitigation, monitoring, and contingency plans as determined by the Director.

7. Mitigation Ratios.

A. The following ratios shall apply to creation or restoration that meets all other requirements in subsections 1 through 6 of this section and is the same category of wetland, and has a high probability of success. The first number in the following table specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

Wetland Mitigation Ratios  

	Category of Impact Wetland	Creation or Re-establishment	Rehabilitation	Enhancement

	Category I: based on total score	4:1	8:1	16:1

	Category I: Mature Forested	6:1	12:1	24:1

	Category II	3:1	6:1	12:1

	Category III	2:1	4:1	8:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	6:1

B. Increased creation or restoration ratios. The City of Burien may increase the ratios under the following circumstances:

i. Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed restoration or creation;

ii. A significant period of time will elapse between impact and replication of wetland functions;

iii. Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted; or

iv. The impact or alteration requiring mitigation was not authorized by the City.

8. Wetlands Enhancement as Mitigation.

A. Impacts to wetlands may be mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must produce a critical area study that identifies how enhancement will increase the functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately mitigate for the loss of wetland area and function at the impact site. An enhancement proposal must also show whether existing wetland functions will be reduced by the enhancement actions.

B. At a minimum, enhancement acreage shall be according to the ratios in subsection 7 of this section.

9. Wetland and Wetland Buffer Violations. Restoration shall be required when a wetland or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the Director. The following minimum requirements shall be met for the restoration of a wetland:

A. The original wetland configuration shall be replicated including its depth, width, length and gradient at the original location;

B. The original soil type and configuration shall be replicated;

C. The wetland edge and buffer configuration shall be restored to its original condition;

D. The wetland, edge and buffer shall be replanted with vegetation native to Burien which replicates the original vegetation in species, sizes and densities; and

E. The original wetland functions shall be restored including, but not limited to, hydrologic and biologic functions.

F. Violators may be imposed penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.15 BMC.

G. At the discretion of the Director, the violator may be required to enhance the wetland or wetland buffer to provide higher functions and values than the original wetland or wetland buffer. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

STREAMS


19.40.340 Streams – Designation and Classification.

1. General Requirements. The goal of stream regulations in the City of Burien is to preserve and enhance stream channels, banks, and buffers and to maintain and enhance fish and wildlife habitat and species diversity.

2. Applicability. All water bodies meeting the definition of streams that lie within the City of Burien are regulated by this section. Ditches are excluded from regulation as streams under this section; ditches and artificial drainage features with documented current fish usage are regulated as streams.

3. Stream Classifications. Streams shall be classified as Type S, Type F, Type Np, or Type Ns according to the permanent water typing system (WAC 222-16-030). Water types are described generally below: 

A. Type S waters are all waters inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under Chapter 90.58 RCW. Type S waters are not regulated under this chapter and are subject to the Shoreline Master Program (BMC Title 20).

B. Type F waters are segments of natural watercourses, or natural watercourses which have been altered by humans, other than Type S waters, which contain fish habitat.

C. Type Np waters include segments of natural watercourses, or natural watercourses which have been altered by humans, which are perennial during a period of normal rainfall and do not have the potential to be used by fish and are typically formed by geomorphic processes.

D. Type Ns waters include segments of natural watercourses, or natural watercourses which have been altered by humans, which are seasonal or ephemeral during a year of normal rainfall and do not have the potential to be used by fish and were generally formed by geomorphic processes. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.350 Streams – Development Standards.

1. General Requirements.

A. Any alterations to a stream may require state and federal approvals that may require mitigation and conditions of approval beyond those required by the City.

B. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in the stream corridor and its buffer are prohibited by the City of Burien unless approved by the City.

C. Plantings in a stream or buffer should be native to Western Washington or increase the functions of the stream or buffer;

D. No vegetation removal, including mowing, shall be allowed in a stream buffer unless authorized by the Director. Removal of noxious weeds is permitted if done manually.

E. Unless otherwise provided, the following restrictions shall apply to all development proposals within the vicinity of all City of Burien streams and stream buffers that include the introduction of livestock:

i. Implementation of a plan approved by the Director to protect and enhance the stream’s water quality; and

ii. Fencing located at the stream buffer edge. 

2. Buffers.

A. A stream buffer area shall be established as required in this section. The purpose of the buffer shall be to protect the integrity, functions, and values of the stream.

B. Required buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the particular stream. The following minimum buffers for streams shall be established from the ordinary high water mark of the adjacent stream(s) or from the top of the defined stream bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified:

Stream Buffers  

	Stream Type	Standard Stream Buffer (feet)

	S	See BMC Title 20, Shoreline Master Program

	F	100

	Np	50

	Ns	50

C. Any stream restored or enhanced because of a stream alteration shall have the minimum buffer required for the highest stream class involved pursuant to an approved mitigation plan and stream study set forth in BMC 19.40.370.

D. Increased stream buffer widths may be required by the City of Burien when the slope is susceptible to erosion and standard erosion-control measures will not prevent adverse impacts to the stream.

E. Any stream with an ordinary high water mark within twenty-five (25) feet of the toe of a slope thirty percent (30%) or steeper, shall have the minimum buffer required for the stream class involved or a twenty-five (25) foot buffer beyond the top of the slope, whichever is greater.

F. Standard buffer width averaging may be allowed by the Director (in accordance with an approved critical area review) if:

i. Additional protection to the stream and riparian habitat area will be provided through the implementation of a buffer enhancement plan as described in subsection (2)(G) of this section;

ii. Minimum buffer width is the greater of fifty percent (50%) of the standard buffer width or twenty-five (25) feet;

iii. Stream and riparian functions or values will not be reduced; and

iv. As long as the total area contained in the buffer on the development proposal site does not decrease.

G. Buffer reduction with enhancement may be allowed by the Director (in accordance with an approved critical area study) if:

i. Additional protection to streams will be provided through the implementation of a buffer enhancement plan.

ii. The existing condition of the buffer is degraded.

iii. Buffer enhancement includes, but is not limited to, the following:

a. Planting vegetation that would increase value for fish and wildlife habitat, improve water quality, or provide aesthetic/recreational value.

b. Enhancement of wildlife habitat by incorporating structures that are likely to be used by wildlife, including wood duck boxes, bat boxes, nesting platforms, snags, rootwads/stumps, birdhouses, and heron nesting areas.

c. Removing non-native plant species from the buffer area.

iv. For Type F and Type Np streams, buffer reductions under this Section shall be limited to twenty-five percent (25)% of the standard buffer width. For Type Ns streams, buffer reductions shall result in a buffer of no less than twenty-five (25) feet. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.360 Streams – Permitted Alterations.

1. Alteration to Streams.

A. Relocation or piping of any Type F stream in the City of Burien shall not be permitted unless undertaken for stream enhancement as described in subsection (1)(B) of this section. Relocation or piping of Type Np or Ns streams may take place only when it is part of an approved mitigation or restoration plan, and will result in equal or better habitat and water quality, and will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream.

B. Stream enhancement not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if:

i. An approved design, implementation, maintenance, and monitoring plan prepared by a civil engineer and a qualified professional is approved by the Director;

ii. The plan is carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified professional pursuant to provisions contained in administrative rules;

iii. The enhancement is accomplished by a public agency with a mandate to do such work;

iv. The enhancement is limited to placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel, other specific salmonid improvements, and involves only light equipment or hand labor; and

v. Water quality in the stream is protected during construction.

C. A stream channel may be stabilized if:

i. Movement of the stream channel threatens existing residential or commercial structures, public facilities or improvements, unique natural resources or the only existing access to property; and

ii. The stabilization is done in compliance with the requirements of BMC 19.40.240 through 19.40.280.

2. Alterations to Stream Buffers. No alteration may occur in a stream buffer except as permitted below:

A. Buffer enhancements may be allowed pursuant to an approved mitigation plan as described in BMC 19.40.370.

B. Buffers and vegetation within the buffer shall be protected during construction by placement of a temporary fencing, on-site notice for construction crews of the presence of the stream, and implementation of appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

C. Utilities such as water, telephone, cable, electric, and natural gas may be allowed in Type Np or Type Ns stream buffers if:

i. The Director determines that no practical alternative location is available; and

ii. The utility corridor meets any additional requirements set forth by the Director and BMC 19.40.070(3) including, but not limited to, requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance.

D. Sewer utility corridors may be allowed in stream buffers only if all of the following criteria are met:

i. The applicant demonstrates that sewer lines are necessary for gravity flow;

ii. The corridor is not located in a stream or stream buffer used by species listed as endangered or threatened by the state or federal government or containing critical or outstanding actual habitat for those species or heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees;

iii. The corridor alignment including, but not limited to, any allowed maintenance roads, follows a path beyond a distance equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the stream buffer width from the ordinary high water mark;

iv. Corridor construction and maintenance protects the stream and stream buffer and is aligned to avoid cutting trees greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter at breast height, when possible, and pesticides, herbicides, and other hazardous substances are not used;

v. An additional, contiguous and undisturbed buffer, equal in width to the proposed corridor including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the stream;

vi. The corridor is revegetated with appropriate vegetation native to the City at preconstruction densities or greater immediately upon completion of construction or as soon thereafter as possible, and the sewer utility ensures that such vegetation survives;

vii. Any additional corridor access for maintenance is provided, to the extent possible, at specific points rather than by a parallel road; and

viii. The width of any necessary parallel road providing access for maintenance is as small as possible, but not greater than fifteen (15) feet, the road is maintained without the use of herbicides, pesticides or other hazardous substances and the location of the road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side away from the stream.

ix. Joint use of an approved sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed.

E. The following surface water management activities and facilities may be allowed in Type Np and Type Ns stream buffers only as follows:

i. Surface water discharge to a Type Np or Type Ns stream from a detention facility, pre-settlement pond or other surface water management activity or facility may be allowed if discharge does not increase the rate of flow, change the fish habitat or decrease the water quality of the stream;

ii. A Type Np or Type Ns stream or stream buffer may be used for a regional retention/detention facility if:

a. A public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to BMC 19.40.070(4);

b. All requirements of the King County Surface Water Design Manual, as adopted in Chapter 13.10 BMC, are met;

c. The use will not alter the rating or the factors used in rating the stream; and

d. There are no significant adverse impacts to the stream.

F. Public and private trails may be allowed in stream buffers only if:

i. The trail surface shall not be made of impervious materials, except that public multipurpose trails may be made of impervious materials if:

a. they meet all other requirements including water quality, and

b. an impervious trail has less of an impact on the stream and its buffer.

ii. The use of elevated boardwalks for trails is encouraged.

G. Stream crossings may be allowed and may encroach on the required stream buffer if the following conditions are met. Stream crossings include those for streets, trails, or private vehicular access easements.

i. There is no other feasible access to the property;

ii. All crossings use bridges or other construction techniques which do not disturb the stream bed or bank, except that bottomless culverts, fish friendly culverts or other appropriate methods demonstrated to provide fisheries protection may be used for Type F, Np, or Ns streams if the culvert design is in accordance with the 2013 WDFW manual Water Crossing Design Guidelines, as amended;

iii. All crossings are constructed during low stream flow periods and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to salmonids, construction timing must coincide with the WDFW in-water work windows;

iv. Crossings do not occur over salmonid spawning areas;

v. Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water mark;

vi. Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

vii. Underground utility crossings are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four (4) feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington; and

viii. Crossings are minimized and serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.370 Streams – Additional mitigation requirements.

1. General Requirements.

A. Restoration or mitigation shall be required when a stream or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without any specific permission or approval by the Director. In addition to the requirements of BMC 19.40.170, a mitigation plan for stream impacts shall demonstrate that:

i. The stream has been degraded and will not be further degraded by the mitigation activity;

ii. The mitigation will improve the water quality and fish and wildlife habitat of the stream;

iii. The mitigation will have no lasting significant adverse impact on any stream functions; and

iv. The mitigation will assist in stabilizing the stream channel.

B. In addition to the requirements of BMC 19.40.170, mitigation minimum requirements shall include:

i. All work shall be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified professional;

ii. Engineering analysis as described in Chapter 13.10 BMC shall be performed to determine hydrologic conditions;

iii. The natural channel dimensions shall be replicated including its depth, width, length and gradient at the original location, and the original horizontal alignment (meander lengths) shall be replaced;

iv. The bottom shall be restored with identical or similar materials;

v. The bank and buffer configuration shall be restored to its original condition;

vi. The channel, bank and buffer areas shall be replanted with vegetation native to Western Washington which replicates the original vegetation in species, sizes and densities; and

vii. The original biologic functions of the stream shall be recreated.

2. Mitigation Location. Mitigation of adverse impacts to riparian habitat areas or streams shall result in equivalent functions and values on a per function basis, be located as near the alteration as feasible, and be located in the same sub-drainage basin as the habitat impacted.

3. Mitigation Schedule.

A. A mitigation monitoring schedule shall be established for a period of five (5) years.

B. An “as-built” mitigation report shall be submitted to the City within one (1) month of mitigation installation. Acceptance of the as-built report by the City will be made after a site investigation is performed by the City, and all changes requested by the City are completed.

C. Mitigation monitoring reports shall be submitted annually to the City and shall show that the mitigated area is meeting performance standards and goals set forth in the mitigation plan.

4. Financial Surety. A performance bond, or other approved financial surety, is required before building and clearing and grading permits are issued. The purpose of the financial surety is to hold an applicant accountable for implementing the mitigation, monitoring, and contingency plans. The release of financial surety is contingent on satisfactory completion by the applicant of the proposed construction, mitigation, monitoring, and contingency plans as determined by the Director. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS


19.40.380 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Designation.

1. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are those habitat areas that meet any of the following criteria:

A. Areas with which endangered, threatened, and sensitive species listed by the federal government or the State of Washington have a primary association;

B. All public and private tidelands or bedlands suitable for commercial or recreational shellfish harvest;

C. Kelp and eel-grass beds identified by the Washington Department of Natural Resources;

D. Herring and smelt spawning areas as outlined in Chapter 220-110 WAC and the Puget Sound Environmental Atlas as presently constituted or as may be subsequently amended;

E. Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat;

F. Bald eagle habitat protected pursuant to the Federal Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act;

G. Heron rookeries or active nesting trees; or

H. Waters of the state, regulated under BMC 19.40.340, Streams.

2. The approximate location and extent of known fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are shown on the Critical Area Maps adopted by the City, as described in BMC 19.40.040(2)(A) and as most recently updated. The following maps are to be used as a guide for the City, but do not provide a final critical area designation:

A. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitat and Species Maps;

B. Anadromous and resident salmonid distribution maps contained in the Habitat Limiting Factors Reports published by the Washington Conservation Commission; and

C. Washington State Digital Coastal Atlas and Coastal Zone Management Program. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.390 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Development Standards.

1. The Director shall require the establishment of buffer areas for activities in, or adjacent to, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, when needed to protect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall:

A. Consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation, or areas identified for restoration, established to protect the integrity, functions and values of the affected habitat;

B. Reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted on the site and on adjacent sites; and

C. Be consistent with the management recommendations issued by the state Department of Fish and Wildlife.

2. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions may apply. Larger buffers may be required and activities may be further restricted during the specified season.

3. A Habitat Management Plan may be required by the Director when the critical area review of a development proposal determines that the proposed activity will have an effect on habitat conservation areas.

A. All Habitat Management Plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional in consultation with the state Department of Fish and Wildlife. Habitat Management Plans for critical species listed as endangered or threatened shall be approved by the City following review and approval by the Department of Fish and Wildlife.

B. Habitat Management Plan Content Requirements. Based on the characteristics of the site and information submitted by the applicant, the Director may require that all or a portion of the following be included in a Habitat Management Plan:

i. A map drawn to scale or survey showing the following information:

a. All lakes, ponds, streams, and wetlands on, or adjacent to the subject property, including the name (if named), ordinary high water mark of each, and the stream type or wetland class;

b. The location and description of the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas on the subject property, as well as any potential fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas within 200 feet of the subject property as shown on the City’s adopted Critical Area Maps; and

c. The location of any observed evidence of use by a listed species;

ii. An analysis of how the proposed development activities will affect the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and listed species;

iii. The Habitat Management Plan should also address the following mitigation measures:

a. Reduction or limitation of development activities within the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

b. Use of low impact development techniques or clustering of development on the subject property to locate structures in a manner that preserves and minimizes adverse effects to habitat areas;

c. Seasonal restrictions on construction activities on the subject property;

d. Preservation or retention of habitat and vegetation on the subject property in contiguous blocks or with connection to other habitats that have a primary association with listed species;

e. Establishment of a buffer around the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

f. Limitation of access to the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and buffer; and

g. The creation or restoration of habitat area for the listed species.

4. Non-indigenous species shall not be introduced. No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the Puget Sound region shall be introduced into a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area unless authorized by a state or federal permit or approval. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.400 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Permitted Alterations.

1. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas or their buffers may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not degrade the functions and values of the habitat. All new structures and land alterations shall be prohibited from habitat conservation areas except in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Approvals of activities may be conditioned. The Director may condition approvals of activities allowed adjacent to fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas as necessary, to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse effects. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. Establishment of buffer zones;

B. Preservation of vegetation with which listed species have a primary association;

C. Limitation of access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;

D. Seasonal restriction of construction activities;

E. Requirement of mitigation for activities having an effect on fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas; and

F. Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and successful implementation of proposed mitigation (BMC 19.40.170).

3. Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Any impacts from these uses and activities shall be mitigated. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted by the Director include:

A. Pervious trails;

B. Viewing platforms;

C. Storm water management features such as grass-lined swales, and

D. Utilities and utility easements.

4. Mitigation shall result in contiguous habitat. Mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved habitat Management Plan to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas. Mitigation of aquatic habitat must be located within the same aquatic ecosystem or watershed as the area disturbed.

5. Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions, and in the case of streams shall include mitigation for adverse impacts upstream and/or downstream of the development proposal site. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per function basis. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.410 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas – Specific Habitats.

1. Endangered, threatened, and sensitive species habitat.

A. No alteration shall be allowed within a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association without Federal and State approval.

B. Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with a Habitat Management Plan prepared by a qualified professional (BMC 19.40.390) and approved by the City.

C. Bald eagle habitat shall be protected pursuant to the Federal Bald Eagle Protection Act. Whenever activities are proposed within 660 feet of a verified nest territory or communal roost, the applicant shall consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to determine if a permit is required.

2. Aquatic Habitats.

A. All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by salmonid fish species or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of salmonid habitat.

B. Filling of aquatic habitats shall not adversely impact salmonids or their habitat or shall mitigate any unavoidable impacts, and shall only be allowed for a water-dependent activity. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]

CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS


19.40.420 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Designation and Classification.

1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect critical aquifer recharge areas from degradation or depletion resulting from new and redeveloping land use activities. Due to the potential vulnerability of groundwater underlying certain aquifer recharge areas to contamination and the importance of such groundwater as sources of public water supply, it is the intent of this section to safeguard groundwater resources by mitigating or precluding future discharges of contaminants from new development activities and redevelopment activities.

2. Applicability.

A. General. The provisions of this section shall apply to regulated facilities as defined in this ordinance within or adjacent to those portions of the City of Burien designated as critical aquifer recharge areas on the City of Burien Critical Areas Map. Regulated facilities are those commercial, industrial and home occupation uses that:

i. Process or handle hazardous materials in regulated quantities; and

ii. Treat and store regulated quantities of hazardous materials.

B. The City of Burien shall administer the provisions of this Chapter and shall determine appropriate mitigation measures.

3. Classification.

A. Criteria. Any site located within the City of Burien and within or adjacent to the boundaries of any critical aquifer recharge area is subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Sources. The following sources were used to identify the aquifer recharge areas that are depicted on the Critical Areas Map.

i. Guidance Document for the Establishment of Critical aquifer recharge area Ordinances, December 1998, Washington State Department of Ecology, Publication No. 97-30, Version 3.0, 47p.

ii. Geologic Map of the Des Moines 7.5 Minute Quadrangle, D.B. Booth and H.H. Waldron, (2000), United States Geological Survey, Open File Report in press.

iii. Occurrence and Quality of Ground Water in Southwestern King County, Washington, (1995), United States Geological Survey, Water Resources Investigations Report 92-4098, 69p. [Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


19.40.430 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development Standards.

1. Prohibited activities and land uses – critical aquifer recharge areas. The following land uses and activities for new development or redevelopment shall be prohibited within or adjacent to critical aquifer recharge areas:

A. Solid waste landfills;

B. Disposal of hazardous or dangerous wastes;

C. All underground injection wells as defined in Chapter 173-218 WAC;

D. Mining;

i. Metals and hard rock mining.

ii. Sand and gravel mining is prohibited from critical aquifer recharge areas determined to be highly susceptible or vulnerable;

E. Wood Treatment Facilities. Wood treatment facilities that allow any portion of the treatment process to occur over permeable surfaces (both natural and manmade);

F. Storage, processing, or disposal of radioactive substances. Facilities that store, process, or dispose of radioactive substances;

G. Dry cleaning establishments using the solvent perchloroethylene; and

H. Other.

i. Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers currently or potentially used as a potable water source;

ii. Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers that are a source of significant baseflow to a regulated stream;

iii. Activities that are not connected to an available sanitary sewer system are prohibited from critical aquifer recharge areas associated with sole source aquifers.

2. Hazardous materials questionnaire required. Applications for development or redevelopment of regulated facilities within the boundaries of critical aquifer recharge areas shall be accompanied by a completed hazardous materials questionnaire to determine the regulatory status of the applicant facility. The Director shall review the hazardous materials questionnaire to determine whether the facility is regulated under this chapter. If it is determined that the applicant is a regulated facility that processes, handles, treats, and/or stores hazardous substances as defined by this chapter, the applicant facility must submit a Critical Areas Report pursuant to this Section to the City.

3. Critical area review for critical aquifer recharge areas required.

A. After reviewing the hazardous materials questionnaire, the Director may require a critical area review pursuant to BMC 19.40.090 through 19.40.150.

B. Notification to adjacent water supply systems. The City of Burien shall provide written notice to the operators of neighboring water supply systems in whose wellhead protection area the proposed regulated activity is located. The City of Burien shall consider comments received from the water system when reviewing the hydrogeologic assessment.

4. Appeal of determination.

A. The Director’s determination that the facility is a regulated facility or within a critical aquifer recharge area may be appealed according to, and as part of the appeal procedure for the underlying permit or approval involved. The appeal must be accompanied with a hydrogeologic assessment to assess the facility’s potential impact on the aquifer.

B. Prepared by a qualified professional. The hydrogeologic assessment should be prepared by a licensed engineer, engineering geologist, geologist, or hydrogeologist registered in the State of Washington and approved by the City of Burien.

C. Hydrogeologic assessment report. A hydrogeologic assessment shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

i. Information sources;

ii. Geologic setting – include well logs or borings used to characterize the area;

iii. Background water quality;

iv. Groundwater elevations;

v. Location/depth to perched water tables;

vi. Recharge potential of the proposed development site (permeability/transmissivity);

vii. Groundwater flow direction and gradient;

viii. Currently available data on wells located within 1,000 feet of site;

ix. Currently available data on any spring within 1,000 feet of site;

x. Surface water location and recharge potential;

xi. Water source supply to site;

xii. Any sampling schedules necessary;

xiii. Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the groundwater resource;

xiv. Description of potential mitigation measures, should it be determined that the proposed project may have an adverse impact on groundwater resources; and

xv. Other information as required by the City of Burien.

D. If the hydrogeologic assessment determines that the facility will have no effect on groundwater, the facility is exempt from the development standards requirements in subsection 6 of this section.

E. If the hydrogeologic assessment determines that the facility could have an effect on the groundwater resource, the City shall require implementation of applicable development standards in subsections 5 and 6 of this section.

5. Development standards – General requirements.

A. Activities may only be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if the applicant can show that the proposed activity will not cause contaminants to enter the aquifer and that the proposed activity will not adversely affect the recharging of the aquifer.

B. The proposed activity must comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, and state Department of Health, and the King County Health District.

C. Storage tank permits. The City of Burien specifically regulates and authorizes permits for underground storage tanks, pursuant to the International Fire Code and this chapter. The Washington Department of Ecology also regulates and authorizes permits for underground storage tanks (Chapter 173-360 WAC). The local Fire District regulates and authorizes permits for the removal of underground storage tanks.

D. Owners and operators of facilities with existing underground storage tanks that are located within a critical aquifer recharge area shall comply with all release detection requirements as specified in Chapter 173-360 WAC.

E. Spreading or injection of reclaimed water. Water reuse projects for reclaimed water must be in accordance with the adopted water or sewer comprehensive plans that have been approved by the departments of Ecology and Health.

i. Surface spreading must meet the groundwater recharge criteria given in RCW 90.46.080 and 90.46.010(10).

ii. Direct injection must be in accordance with the standards developed by authority of RCW 90.46.042.

F. Storm water treatment and control as per the King County Surface Water Design Manual.

6. Development standards for regulated facilities within critical aquifer recharge areas. The following mitigation measures, as applicable, are required for development of regulated facilities within a critical aquifer recharge area:

A. Floor drains shall not be allowed to drain to the storm water system and must be designed and installed to meet the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) Section 303.

B. If any roof venting carries contaminants, then the portion of the roof draining this area must go through pretreatment pursuant to UPC Section 304(b).

C. All nonresidential vehicle washing must be self contained or be discharged to a sanitary sewer system, if approved by the sewer utility, and is subject to UPC Sections 708 and 711.

D. Utilize Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices for pest control and Best Management Practices (BMPs) for the use of fertilizers as described by the King County Local Hazardous Waste Management Program.

E. Facilities installing new underground tanks. All new underground storage facilities used or to be used for the underground storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes shall meet the requirements of WAC 173-360 and be designed and constructed so as to:

i. Prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank;

ii. Be protected against corrosion, constructed of non-corrosive material, steel clad with a non-corrosive material, or designed to include a secondary containment system to prevent the release or threatened release of any stored substance; and

iii. Use material in the construction or lining of the tank which is compatible with the substance to be stored.

F. Aboveground tanks.

i. No new aboveground storage facility or part thereof shall be fabricated, constructed, installed, used, or maintained in any manner which may allow the release of a hazardous substance to the ground, or groundwater of the City of Burien within a critical aquifer recharge area.

ii. For a tank that will contain a hazardous substance, no new aboveground tank or part thereof shall be fabricated, constructed, installed, used, or maintained without having constructed around and under it an impervious containment area enclosing or underlying the tank or part thereof.

iii. A new aboveground tank that will contain a hazardous substance will require a secondary containment system either built into the tank structure or a dike system built outside the tank for all tanks located within a critical aquifer recharge area. The secondary containment system or dike system must be designed and constructed to contain the material stored in the tank(s), have a capacity of at least 110 percent of the primary tank and conform to the requirements of UFC Chapter 7902.2.

G. Vehicle repair and servicing.

i. Commercial vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

ii. No dry wells shall be allowed in critical aquifer recharge areas on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility establishment must be abandoned using techniques approved by the state Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity.

H. Additional protective measures may be required if deemed necessary by the City of Burien.

I. State and federal regulations – The uses listed below shall be conditioned as necessary to protect critical aquifer recharge areas in accordance with the applicable state and federal regulations.

Statutes, Regulations, and Guidance Pertaining to  Groundwater Impacting Activities  

	Activity	Statute – Regulation – Guidance

	Above Ground Storage Tanks	Chapter 173-303-640 WAC

	Animal Feedlots	Chapter 173-216 WAC, Chapter 173-220 WAC

	Automobile Washers	Chapter 173-216 WAC, Best Management Practices for Vehicle and Equipment Discharges (WDOE WQ-R-95-56)

	Below Ground Storage Tanks	Chapter 173-360 WAC

	Chemical Treatment Storage and Disposal Facilities	WAC 173-303-182

	Hazardous Waste Generator (Boat Repair Shops, Biological Research Facility, Dry Cleaners, Furniture Stripping, Motor Vehicle Service Garages, Photographic Processing, Printing and Publishing Shops, etc.)	Chapter 173-303 WAC

	Injection wells	Federal 40 CFR Parts 144 and 146, Chapter 173-218 WAC

	Junk Yards and Salvage Yards	Chapter 173-304 WAC, Best Management Practices to Prevent Stormwater Pollution at Vehicles Recycler Facilities (WDOE 94-146)

	Oil and Gas Drilling	WAC 332-12-450, Chapter 173-218 WAC

	On-Site Sewage Systems (Large Scale)	Chapter 173-240 WAC

	On-Site Sewage Systems (< 14,500 gal/day)	Chapter 246-272 WAC, Local Health Ordinances

	Pesticide Storage and Use	Chapter 15.54 RCW, Chapter 17.21 RCW

	Sawmills	Chapter 173-303 WAC, Chapter 173-304 WAC, Best Management Practices to Prevent Stormwater Pollution at Log Yards (WDOE 95-53)

	Solid Waste Handling and Recycling Facilities	Chapter 173-304 WAC

	Surface Mining	WAC 332-18-015 

	Waste Water Application to Land Surface	Chapter 173-216 WAC, Chapter 173-200 WAC, WDOE Land Application Guidelines, Best Management Practices for Irrigated Agriculture

[Ord. 623 § 1, 2015; Ord. 394 § 1, 2003]


Chapter 19.45 Urban Center Development

19.45.001    User guide

19.45.005    Purpose

19.45.010    Definitions.

19.45.020    Residential target area designation and standards.

19.45.030    Tax exemptions for multi-family housing in residential target areas.

19.45.040    Chapter review


19.45.001 User guide.

This chapter establishes regulations pertaining to the ten-year multi-family tax abatement program authorized by RCW 84.14. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


19.45.005 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage increased residential opportunities within an urban center, including affordable housing opportunities. It is further the purpose of this chapter to stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in urban centers having insufficient housing opportunities that will increase and improve residential opportunities within these urban centers, including affordable housing opportunities. To achieve these purposes, this chapter provides for special valuations in residentially deficient urban centers for eligible improvements associated with multiunit housing, which includes affordable housing. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


19.45.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

1. “Ad valorem property taxation” is a term used by RCW 84.14 and is a tax based on value.

2. “Affordable housing” means residential housing that is rented by a person or household whose monthly housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed thirty percent of the household’s monthly income. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, “affordable housing” means residential housing that is within the means of low or moderate-income households.

3. “Household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]

4. “Low-income household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below eighty percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States department of housing and urban development. For cities located in high-cost areas, “low-income household” means a household that has an income at or below one hundred percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]

5. “High cost area” means a county where the third quarter median house price for the previous year as reported by the Washington center for real estate research at Washington State University is equal to or greater than one hundred thirty percent of the statewide median house price published during the same time period. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]

6. “Moderate-income household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is more than eighty percent but is at or below one hundred fifteen percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States department of housing and urban development. For cities located in high-cost areas, “moderate-income household” means a household that has an income that is more than one hundred percent, but at or below one hundred fifty percent, of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007]

7. “Multi-family housing” means building(s) having four or more dwelling units not designed or used as transient accommodations and not including hotels and motels. Multi-family units may result from new construction or rehabilitation or conversion of vacant, underutilized, or substandard buildings to multi-family housing.

8. “Owner” means the property owner of record.

9. “Permanent residential occupancy” means multi-family housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy for a period of at least one month. This excludes hotels and motels that predominately offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.

10. “Rehabilitation improvements” means modifications to existing structures that are vacant for 12 months or longer, or modification to existing occupied structures which convert nonresidential space to residential space and/or increase the number of multi-family housing units.

11. “Residential target area” means an area within an urban center that has been designated by the City Council as lacking sufficient, available, desirable, and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public.

12. “Urban center” means a center designated as such on Figure 2-LU1.11 in the land use element of the City’s comprehensive plan. An urban center is a compact identifiable district containing several business establishments, adequate public facilities, and a mixture of uses and activities, where residents may obtain a variety of products and services. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


19.45.020 Residential target area designation and standards.

1. Criteria. Following a public hearing, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, designate one or more residential target areas. Each designated target area must meet the following criteria, as determined by the City Council:

A. The target area is located within a designated urban center;

B. The target area lacks sufficient available, desirable, and convenient residential housing, and affordable housing, to meet the needs of the public who would likely live in the urban center if the affordable, desirable, attractive, and livable places were available; and

C. The provision of additional housing opportunity, including affordable housing, in the target area will assist in achieving the following purposes:

i. Encourage increased residential opportunities within the target area; or

ii. Stimulate the construction of new multi-family housing and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multi-family housing. In designating a residential target area, the City Council may also consider other factors, including, but not limited to: whether additional housing in the target area will attract and maintain a significant increase in the number of permanent residents; whether an increased residential population will help alleviate detrimental conditions and social liability in the target area; and whether an increased residential population in the target area will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under RCW 36.70A.020. The City Council may, by ordinance, amend or rescind the designation of a residential target area at any time pursuant to the same procedure as set forth in this chapter for original designation.

2. Target Area Standards and Guidelines. For each designated residential target area, the City Council must adopt and implement basic requirements for both new construction and rehabilitation, including the application process and procedures. The City Council may also adopt guidelines including the following:

A. Requirements that address demolition of existing structures and site utilization; and

B. Building requirements that may include elements addressing parking, height, density, environmental impact, public benefit features, compatibility with the surrounding property, and such other amenities as will attract and keep permanent residents and will properly enhance the livability of the residential target area. The required amenities shall be relative to the size of the proposed project and the tax benefit to be obtained.

3. Designated Target Area. The proposed boundaries of the “residential target area” are the boundary of the Downtown Commercial (DC) zone as indicated on the official city zoning map. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


19.45.030 Tax exemptions for multi-family housing in residential target areas.

1. Intent. Limited exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for multi-family housing in residential target areas are intended to:

A. Encourage increased residential opportunities, including affordable housing, within urban centers designated by the City Council as residential target areas;

B. Stimulate new construction or rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multi-family housing in residential target areas to increase and improve housing opportunities;

C. Assist in directing future population growth to designated urban centers, thereby reducing development pressure on single-family residential neighborhoods; and

D. Achieve development densities which are more conducive to transit use in designated urban centers.

2. Duration of Exemption. The value of improvements qualifying under this chapter will be exempt from ad valorem property taxation as follows:

A. For properties for which applications for certificates of tax exemption eligibility are submitted under this chapter before July 22, 2007, the value is exempt for ten successive years beginning January 1 of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption;

B. For properties for which applications for certificates of tax exemption eligibility are submitted under this chapter on or after July 22, 2007, the value is exempt:

i. For eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption; or

ii. For twelve successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption, if the property otherwise qualifies for the exemption under this chapter and meets the conditions in this subsection. For the property to qualify for the twelve-year exemption under this subsection, the applicant must commit to renting or selling at least twenty percent of the multi-family housing units as affordable housing units to low and moderate-income households, and the property must satisfy that commitment and any additional affordability and income eligibility conditions adopted under this chapter. In the case of projects intended exclusively for owner occupancy, the minimum requirement of this subsection may be satisfied solely through housing affordable to moderate-income households.

3. Limits on Exemptions. The exemptions do not apply to the value of land or to the value of non-housing related improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor do the exemptions apply to increases in assessed valuation of land and non-qualifying improvements. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemptions do not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter.

4. Project Eligibility. A proposed project must meet the following requirements for consideration for a property tax exemption:

A. Location. The project must be located within a residential target area, as designated in Section 19.45.020.

B. Tenant Displacement Prohibited. The project must not displace existing residential tenants of structures that are proposed for redevelopment. Existing dwelling units proposed for rehabilitation must have been unoccupied for a minimum of 12 months prior to submission of application and must have one or more violations of the City’s minimum housing code. Applications for new construction cannot be submitted for vacant property upon which an occupied residential rental structure previously stood, unless a minimum of 12 months has elapsed from the time of most recent occupancy.

C. Size. The project must include at least four units of multi-family housing within a residential structure or as part of a mixed-use development. A minimum of four new units must be constructed or at least four additional multi-family units must be added to existing occupied multi-family housing. Existing multi-family housing that has been vacant for 12 months or more does not have to provide additional units so long as the project provides at least four units of new, converted, or rehabilitated multi-family housing.

D. Permanent Residential Housing. At least 50 percent of the space designated for multi-family housing must be provided for permanent residential occupancy, as defined in Section 19.45.010.

E. Proposed Completion Date. New construction multi-family housing and rehabilitation improvements must be scheduled to be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application.

F. Compliance With Guidelines and Standards. The project must be designed to comply with the City’s comprehensive plan, building, housing, and zoning codes and any other applicable regulations in effect at the time the application is approved. New construction, rehabilitation and conversion improvements must comply with BMC Title 15. The project must also comply with any other standards and guidelines adopted by the City Council for the residential target area in which the project will be developed.

G. Minimum Residential Density. The project shall achieve a minimum residential density of 50 dwelling units per net acre. For the purposes of this chapter residential density shall be calculated using the following method.

	Residential Density =	number of units

	 	(net lot area X % of floor area devoted to residential units)

H. Mixed Use Development. The project shall be a mixed use project as defined by BMC 19.10.350. The Director may waive this requirement for the purposes of this chapter, provided the project meets at least one of the following criteria:

i. The project provides at least one complete public benefit feature from BMC Table 19.15.025.1.

ii. The proposed dwelling units are designed, marketed and managed as housing for persons 55 years of age and older.

iii. The project meets the minimum requirements for the twelve-year property tax exemption.

I. Twelve-Year Tax Exemption. To be eligible for the twelve-year property tax exemption, the proposed multiunit housing project must meet the affordable housing requirements as described in this chapter.

5. Application Procedure. A property owner who wishes to propose a project for a tax exemption shall complete the following procedures:

A. File with the Burien Community Development Department the required application along with the required fees established by resolution. If the application shall result in a denial by the City, the City will retain that portion of the fee attributable to its own administrative costs and refund the balance to the applicant.

B. A complete application shall include:

i. A completed City of Burien application form setting forth the grounds for the exemption;

ii. Preliminary floor and site plans of the proposed project;

iii. A statement acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible under this chapter; and

iv. Verification by oath or affirmation of the information submitted.

v. For rehabilitation projects, the applicant shall also submit an affidavit that existing dwelling units have been unoccupied for a period of 12 months prior to filing the application and shall secure from the City verification of property noncompliance with the City’s minimum housing code.

6. Application Review and Issuance of Conditional Certificate. The Director may certify as eligible an application which is determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within 90 days of receipt of a complete application.

A. Approval. If an application is approved, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the City, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council regarding the terms and conditions of the project. Upon Council approval of the contract, the Director shall issue a Conditional Certificate of Acceptance of Tax Exemption. The Conditional Certificate expires three years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.

B. Denial. The Director shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address.

C. Appeal. An applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council within 14 days of the issuance of the notice of denial. On appeal, the Director’s decision will be upheld unless the applicant can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the Director’s decision. The City Council’s decision on appeal will be final.

7. Extension of Conditional Certificate. The Conditional Certificate may be extended by the Director for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive months. The applicant must submit a written request stating the grounds for the extension, accompanied by a processing fee established by resolution. An extension may be granted if the Director determines that:

A. The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;

B. The owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and

C. All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project.

8. Application for Final Certificate. Upon completion of the improvements agreed upon in the contract between the applicant and the City and upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant may request a Final Certificate of Tax Exemption. The applicant must file with the Burien Community Development Department the following:

A. A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multi-family housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;

B. A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption; and

C. A statement that the work was completed within the required three-year period or any authorized extension. Within 30 days of receipt of all materials required for a Final Certificate, the Director shall determine which specific improvements satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

9. Issuance of Final Certificate. If the Director determines that the project has been completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City and has been completed within the authorized time period, the City shall, within 14 days, file a Final Certificate of Tax Exemption with the King County Assessor.

A. Denial and Appeal. The Director shall notify the applicant in writing that a Final Certificate will not be filed if the Director determines that:

i. The improvements were not completed within the authenticated time period;

ii. The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City; or

iii. The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter.

B. Within 14 days of the issuance of the Director’s denial of a Final Certificate, the applicant may file an appeal with the City’s Hearing Examiner, as provided in Chapter 2.20 of the Burien Municipal Code. The applicant may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision in King County Superior Court, if the appeal is filed within 30 days of receiving notice of that decision.

10. Annual Compliance Review. Within 30 days after the first anniversary of the date of filing the Final Certificate of Tax Exemption, and each year thereafter, for the applicable exemption period, the property owner shall file a notarized declaration with the Director indicating the following:

A. A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multi-family units during the previous year;

B. A certification that the property continues to be in compliance with the contract with the City; and

C. A description of any subsequent improvements or changes to the property.

City staff shall also conduct on-site verification of the declaration. Failure to submit the annual declaration may result in the tax exemption being canceled.

11. Cancellation of Tax Exemption. If the Director determines the owner is not complying with the terms of the contract, the tax exemption will be canceled. This cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any other time when noncompliance has been determined. If the owner converts the multi-family housing to another use, the owner must notify the Director and the King County Assessor within 60 days of the change in use.

A. Effect of Cancellation. If a tax exemption is canceled due to a change in use or other noncompliance, the King County Assessor may impose an additional tax on the property, together with interest and penalty, and a priority lien may be placed on the land, pursuant to State legislative provisions.

B. Notice and Appeal. Upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the Director shall notify the property owner by certified mail. The property owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner will conduct a hearing at which all affected parties may be heard and all competent evidence received. The Hearing Examiner will affirm, modify, or repeal the decision to cancel the exemption based on the evidence received. An aggrieved party may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the King County Superior Court. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


19.45.040 Chapter review.

The City Council shall review the effectiveness of this Chapter in meeting the stated purposes in BMC 19.45.005 concurrently with the Comprehensive Plan update required by RCW 36.70A.130(4). [Ord. 413 § 1, 2004]


Chapter 19.47 Downtown Design Standards

19.47.010    User Guide

19.47.020    General

19.47.030    Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation

19.47.040    Relationship to Adjacent Properties

19.47.050    Relationship to Streetfront

19.47.060    Pedestrian Facilities and Amenities

19.47.070    Parking Area Location and Design

19.47.080    Site Lighting

19.47.090    Service, Loading, Outdoor Storage and Mechanical Areas

19.47.100    Building Design Character

19.47.110    Building Scale and Mass

19.47.120    Building Exteriors


19.47.010 User Guide

This chapter establishes design standards for Downtown Burien. If you are interested in developing or making changes to property within Downtown Burien, you should read this chapter, along with BMC 19.15.025 which contains additional regulations relating to uses and other standards for Downtown Burien, and the vision for Downtown Burien, which can be found in the Burien Comprehensive Plan. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.020 General

1. Purpose and Intent. These guidelines are intended to direct the design of buildings and sites within the Downtown Commercial (DC) zone, in compliance with the City’s Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan. The guidelines will promote quality development and reinforce the City’s identity in the downtown area-a vision of an attractive, pedestrian-oriented urban downtown with a small town atmosphere. Buildings and sites should convey a sense of permanence, attention to detail, quality and investment. The guidelines are not intended to slow or restrict development, but rather to add consistency and predictability to the permit review process. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Compliance With Design Standards.

A. For each element below, a design objective or end result of what is intended to be achieved is stated. The design objective must be complied with. Following each objective are a series of design standards. There are two types of design standards. Some design standards are viewed as fundamental in achieving the stated design objective(s). These standards are mandatory. In these statements, the word “shall” is used. The second type of design standard are examples or alternatives to achieving the design objectives. In these standards, the word “should” is used, or neither “shall” nor “should” are used. In standards where “shall” is not used, there is an obligation to comply with the standard, unless the project demonstrates a better means for achieving the design objective.

B. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the applicable objectives and design standards and met. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

3. Review Process. BMC 19.65.105 contains procedures for compliance with this Chapter. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.030 Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation

1. Objectives.

A. Provide priority treatment for pedestrians in the design of transportation facilities.

B. Improve the pedestrian environment by making it easier, safer, more convenient and more comfortable to walk between businesses, on street sidewalks, to transit stops, across streets and through parking lots. Pedestrian facilities such as sidewalks, crosswalks, and bus shelters should connect all modes of transportation.

C. Provide wide sidewalks along both sides of streets for a variety of activities that accommodate and complement city life.

D. Provide safe routes for disabled persons.

E. Accommodate bicycles and other non-motorized transportation modes.

F. Create a safe, convenient network for vehicle circulation and parking.

G. Provide vehicular access routes through large lots to complete the downtown street grid, as directed by the Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan and subsequent plans and BMC 19.15.025.5 (Public Benefit Incentive System). [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation shall comply with the Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan (“Streetscape Plan”) and the City’s adopted street standards.

B. Sidewalks on Class A and B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets shall comply with the Streetscape Plan.

C. Provide obvious pedestrian access onto the site from adjacent streets.

D. Integrate on-site pedestrian circulation design with the design of pedestrian facilities on the adjacent street and adjacent development.

E. In multiple-building developments, provide pedestrian paths or walkways connecting all businesses and the entries of multiple buildings.

F. In parking areas, pedestrian walkways connecting the parking area with primary building entrances, pedestrian-oriented spaces, adjacent streets and adjacent properties should be provided at least every 150 feet. Pedestrian walkways should be delineated by separate paved routes using a variation in paved texture and/or color, and protected from adjacent vehicle circulation areas with landscaping. Approved methods of delineation include: stone, brick or granite pavers; exposed aggregate; or stamped and colored concrete. Paint striping on asphalt as a method of delineation is discouraged.

G. Creatively designed, clean and functional alleys should provide for vehicular access and pedestrian linkages through mid-blocks and between properties. Lighting shall be provided for pedestrian safety. Amenities such as seating and planters should be provided to encourage pedestrian circulation.

H. Pedestrian access should conform to applicable Federal, State and local codes relating to access for the disabled.

I. Where feasible, provide steps and ramps across retaining walls and slopes to facilitate pedestrian access.

J. If appropriate, based on site design and the land uses involved, fences should allow for pedestrian access by gates or openings to adjacent properties and streets.

K. Landscaping shall not block visibility to and from pedestrian circulation routes, especially where it approaches a street or driveway.

L. Where feasible, paved horizontal surfaces for walks or parking at or near the finish grade of a building should be separated horizontally from any wall of a structure by a minimum four feet for landscaping. Paved surfaces may abut the structure at entrances and service areas. Sidewalks along Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets may abut the adjacent structure.

M. Drive-through facilities such as but not limited to banks, cleaners, fast food, drug stores, espresso stands, etc. allowed by BMC 19.15.025.1.C shall comply with the following:

i. Drive-through windows and stacking lanes shall not be located along facades of buildings that face a street.

ii. Drive-through speakers shall not be audible off-site.

iii. The entrance and exit from the drive-through lane shall be internal to the site, not a separate entrance and/or exit to or from the street. [Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.040 Relationship to Adjacent Properties

1. Objectives.

A. Promote functional and visual compatibility between adjacent properties.

B. Avoid negative impacts to adjacent properties. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Proposed development shall coordinate with surrounding site planning and development efforts on adjacent properties.

B. Development shall consider the following design features to create visual continuity between the proposed development and adjacent neighborhoods and the community:

i. Site design features: building setbacks; placement of structures; location of pedestrian and vehicular facilities; and spacing from adjoining buildings.

ii. Planting design features: composition of plant materials; type and quantity of plant materials; and street trees.

iii. Building design features: scale; massing; proportion; spacing and location of windows, doorways and other features; roof silhouette; facade proportions and orientation; location of entries; surface material, finish, color and texture of surrounding development; and style of architecture.

C. In some areas, the existing context is not well defined, or may be undesirable. In such cases, the new development will be recognized as a model with the opportunity to establish a pattern of identity from which future development can take its cues. Relevant Zoning Code requirements, design standards and comprehensive plan policies shall be considered as indicators of the desired direction for the area and the project.

D. Properly link proposed development to existing and planned pedestrian, vehicular, drainage and utility systems, and assure efficient continuation of such systems.

E. Consider the impact of building mass, color, lighting, and design upon existing and planned adjacent public and private open spaces, parks and recreation areas. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.050 Relationship to Streetfront

1. Objectives.

A. Create an active, safe pedestrian environment.

B. Upgrade Downtown Burien to establish visual identity for each street type.

C. Unify streetscapes within each street type.

D. Improve circulation including options for pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles.

E. Create visual interest and increased activity and public focal points at street corners. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. The street edge shall be defined with building, landscaping or other pedestrian-oriented features.

B. Buildings shall be located at the front property line without a setback. The City may allow for up to a 10’ setback on lots that are not corner lots if:

i. The setback area is designed and used as pedestrian-oriented space, is an extension of the adjacent ground floor use (such as tables for a restaurant, or an outdoor display area for goods for sale inside the building), or is used by a use that is permitted in the DC zone (such as an espresso stand).

ii. The setback area is visually open to pedestrians on the adjacent sidewalk.

iii. Vehicle parking is not allowed.

iv. Fencing of 4 feet or less in height and landscaping is acceptable.

C. On corner lots:

i. Building corners shall be setback up to fifteen feet from the front property line to enhance an entry to the building or to accent the corner of the building.

ii. Except on a Class A pedestrian-oriented street, install landscaping (at least 200 SF of ground surface area with trees and shrubs or living ground cover) at or near the corner of the lot. Landscaping may include plant material to form a low hedge. However, care should be taken to not create a visibility or security problem.

D. If the public sidewalk is less than the width shown in the Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan, set the building back sufficiently to provide for the walking surface and optional finish portion of the walks shown in the Burien Downtown Streetscape Design Plan.

E. Provide site development features which are visible and pedestrian-accessible from the street. These features could include plazas, open space areas, employee lunch and recreational areas, architectural focal points, and accent lighting.

F. Along Class A and B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets:

i. Principal pedestrian building entries must have direct access to the public sidewalk (entries may be on the side of buildings but they must be visible from the street and connected by a pedestrian pathway).

ii. No large outside item display areas are permitted (e.g. kitchen appliances or other similarly large merchandise that is visible from the street). Sidewalks shall not be enclosed as building space for retailing. Small, temporary displays for items such as groceries, hardware, books, etc. may be allowed in the optional sidewalk finish area provided the display does not impede couples passing comfortably on the sidewalk. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.060 Pedestrian Facilities and Amenities

1. Objective.

A. Provide a variety of pedestrian areas to accommodate shoppers, residents, employees and visitors. Along Class A pedestrian-oriented streets, a portion of the required open space should be designed as pedestrian-oriented space. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Along both Class A and B pedestrian-oriented streets, pedestrian weather protection is required as follows:

i. Buildings located along designated Class A Pedestrian-Oriented Streets shall provide pedestrian weather protection at least 6’ deep (measured from the front wall to edge of protection nearest the street) along sidewalks and pedestrian routes of 75% of the building’s front face.

ii. Buildings located along designated Class B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets shall provide pedestrian weather protection at least 6’ deep (measured from the front wall to edge of protection nearest the street) along sidewalks and pedestrian routes of at least 33% of the building’s front face.

B. Pedestrian weather protection is encouraged in public spaces such as transit stops, display windows, and outdoor dining.

C. Pedestrian weather protection shall comply with the following standards:

i. Protection may be in the form of awnings, marquees, canopies, or building overhangs.

ii. Canopies or awnings should not be higher than 15’ above finish grade at the highest point or lower than 8’ at the lowest point.

iii. The color, material, and configuration of the pedestrian coverings shall be approved by the City. Coverings with visible corrugated metal or corrugated fiberglass are not permitted unless approved by the City. Fabric and rigid metal awnings are acceptable if they meet the applicable standards. All lettering, color and graphics on pedestrian coverings must conform to BMC 19.30 (sign code).

D. Developments with 100 feet of frontage along Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets shall provide at least 4 of the following pedestrian amenities near the sidewalk along Class A Pedestrian-Oriented Streets or at least 2 of the following pedestrian amenities near the sidewalk along Class B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets: Developments with less than 100 feet of frontage along Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets shall provide at least 1 of the following pedestrian amenities near the sidewalk for each 25 feet of frontage (with a minimum of 2 amenities) along Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets.

i. Window displays over the majority of the front facade.

ii. Pedestrian furniture – provide at least two of the following: (1) seating space, (2) supplemental area lighting, (3) drinking fountain, (4) waste receptacle, (5) other item appropriate to the space acceptable to the City.

iii. At least 5 SF of pedestrian-oriented space located along the sidewalk for every linear foot of facade as measured along the property line adjacent to the street. The pedestrian-oriented space shall also include at least 200 SF of landscaping for every 100 linear feet of building facade as measured along the property line adjacent to the street. The landscaping must conform to the planting standards contained in BMC 19.25.

iv. Space for transit stop with seating (if applicable).

v. Artwork integrated with public street improvements. The location should provide for public view but not hinder pedestrian traffic.

vi. Decorative screen wall, trellis, or other building or site feature.

vii. Water feature or decorative drinking fountain: Shall be accessible and/or visible by pedestrians from an adjacent sidewalk or pedestrian-oriented space. Shall be designed to use water efficiently with low water loss from evaporation and wind.

viii. Decorative clock or decorative landmark.

ix. Kiosk suitable for temporary community-oriented notices.

F. Enhance transit stops by providing rider convenience and amenities such as weather protected seating, newspaper dispensers, postal boxes, automated teller machines (ATM), and small vendor spaces (i.e. cleaners, florist, etc.). [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.070 Parking Area Location and Design

1. Objectives.

A. Provide safe, convenient access to and within sites without diminishing quality pedestrian walking or visual experiences.

B. Minimize driveway impacts across pedestrian walks.

C. Meet the need for adequate parking and minimize the negative effects of the automobile while encouraging transit and other forms of transportation.

D. Minimize visual impacts of parking structures on streets and pedestrian-oriented facilities. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Driveways along Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets are limited to one entry lane and one exit lane per 300’ of street frontage. Properties with less than 300’ of street frontage are allowed one entry lane and one exit lane, if the applicant demonstrates that genuine effort has been made to negotiate shared access with adjoining property owners and such access is not feasible.

B. No more than 65’ of the Class A or B Pedestrian-Oriented Street frontage (measured parallel to the curb) shall be occupied by parking and driveways. The City may waive or modify this requirement for public safety purposes or if there is no feasible alternative. If a waiver or modification is granted, the design shall incorporate measures such as decorative screens along the street frontage. Such decorative screens shall include pedestrian amenities and visual continuity with structures that define the street edge along the street frontage.

C. Vehicular access to corner lots with less than 300’ of street frontage shall be located on the lowest classified street and as close as practical to the property line most distant from the intersection.

D. Restricting vehicular and pedestrian access between adjoining parking lots at the same grade is prohibited.

E. The bulk (or mass) of a parking structure as seen from the street should be minimized by placing its short dimension along the street edge. The parking structure should include active uses such as retail or other appropriate uses at the ground level and/or along the street frontage.

F. Parking structures shall be architecturally consistent with exterior architectural elements of the primary structure, including roof lines, facade design, articulation, modulation and finish materials.

G. Buildings built over parking should not appear to “float” over the parking area, but should be linked with ground level uses or screening. Parking at grade under a building is discouraged unless the parking area is completely enclosed within the building or wholly screened with walls and/or landscaped berms.

H. Parking structures and vehicle entrances should be designed to minimize views into the garage interior from surrounding streets. Methods to help minimize such views may include, but are not limited to landscaping, planters and decorative grilles and screens.

I. Security grilles for parking structures shall be architecturally consistent with and integrated with the overall design. Chain link fencing is not permitted for parking structure fencing. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.080 Site Lighting

1. Objectives.

A. Encourage the use of lighting as an integral design component to enhance buildings, landscaping, or other site features.

B. Encourage night skies’ visibility and to reduce the general illumination of the sky in Burien.

C. Screen light fixtures so that the light source is not visible off-site.

D. Reduce horizontal light glare and vertical light trespass from a development site onto adjacent parcels.

E. Encourage the judicious use of lighting in conjunction with other security methods to increase site safety.

F. Discourage the use of lighting for advertising purposes.

G. Provide adequate lighting levels in all areas used by pedestrians or automobiles, including building entries, walkways, parking areas, circulation areas, and other open space areas. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. All public areas should be lighted with minimum and maximum levels as follows:

i. Minimum (for low or non-pedestrian and vehicular traffic areas): 0.5-foot candles

ii. Moderate (for moderate or high volume pedestrian areas): 1-2 foot candles

iii. Maximum (for high volume pedestrian areas and building entries): 4-foot candles

B. Lighting should be provided at consistent levels, with gradual transitions between maximum and minimum levels of lighting and between lit areas and unlit areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark areas shall be avoided.

C. Parking lot lighting fixtures should be non-glare and mounted no more than 25 feet above the ground. All fixtures over 15 feet in height shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield.

D. Pedestrian-scaled lighting is encouraged in areas of pedestrian activity.

E. Lighting shall enable pedestrians with normal vision to identify a face 15 yards away in order to promote safety.

F. All building lights should be directed onto the building itself and/or the ground immediately adjacent to it. The light emissions should not be visible above the roofline of the building.

G. Light fixtures other than traditional cobra heads are encouraged. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.090 Service, Loading, Outdoor Storage and Mechanical Areas

1. Objectives.

A. Minimize adverse visual, olfactory, or auditory impacts of service, loading, outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas at ground and roof levels.

B. Encourage more thoughtful siting and reduce impacts of service, outdoor storage and mechanical areas. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Landscaping or other forms of screening shall be provided around outdoor service, storage, loading and mechanical areas to provide sensory (visual, olfactory, auditory) screening from adjacent properties, streets, affected pedestrian circulation routes, and affected pedestrian-oriented spaces.

B. Integrate outdoor storage areas and loading facilities into the site design to minimize their size, reduce visual impact, and where appropriate allow for pedestrian and vehicular movement between sites.

C. The total area allowed for outdoor storage and/or merchandise display shall be less than five percent (5%) of the total gross floor area of the use. This standard shall not apply to temporary uses such as material storage during construction, street vendors, City-approved community fairs and events, and periodic outdoor uses, such as farmers markets.

D. Dumpsters, refuse and recycling containers shall not be visible from the sidewalk and adjacent properties. They shall be screened by minimum 6’ high masonry enclosures designed to screen refuse containers, including lids, and refuse stacked in containers. Chain link fencing with slats may be used for gates but not for the enclosure.

E. Locate and screen mechanical equipment at ground level and attached to structures to reduce visual impacts from streets and adjoining properties.

F. Locate and screen service areas to reduce adverse sensory impacts.

G. Locate and screen roof mounted mechanical equipment so that the equipment is not visible when viewed from ground level of adjacent properties. Screen or match the color of roof mounted equipment with the exposed color of the roof to minimize visual impacts when roof mounted equipment is visible from nearby buildings and higher elevations.

H. Locate and screen utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service and utilities apparatus so as not to be visible from adjoining and nearby streets. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.100 Building Design Character

1. Objectives.

A. Design buildings that reflect a traditional main street character. Traditional main street character refers to a collection of structures designed and built in the early twentieth century when structures were composed of simple forms expressed through commonly available materials such as brick, masonry, cast stone and timber. Design of structures along traditional main streets incorporated integral expressions responding to local climate, topography, ecosystems, and evolved social organization.

B. Encourage building design that has visual character and creates comfortable human environments. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. The general form of structures is to be simple, three-dimensional forms characteristic of twentieth century main streets that orient to and participate in the activities of the street.

B. Structures with multiple component forms are to be integrated for visual unity.

C. Visually expose components that support and/or stabilize structures when compatible with design.

D. Adapt building access to site conditions for level, convenient, obvious entry. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.110 Building Scale and Mass

1. Objectives.

A. Encourage the use of building components that are human scale.

B. Reduce bulk and mass of buildings.

C. Encourage architectural scale of development that is compatible with desired existing adjacent development or commercial areas within 100 feet. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. If a proposed building is more than 60’ wide as measured along any facade facing a street and visible from that street, then the building shall incorporate at least three of the measures indicated below:

i. Balconies or decks in upper stories, at least one balcony or deck per upper floor on facades facing streets is required. Balconies should be at least eight feet deep and ten feet wide.

ii. Bay windows or other window treatment that extends out from the building facade.

iii. At least 150 SF of pedestrian-oriented space.

iv. First floor individual windows, generally less than 32 square feet per pane and separated from other windows by at least a 6-inch molding.

v. Gable or hipped roof, provided that the hipped or gable roof covers at least one half of the building’s footprint and has a slope greater or equal to 3 feet vertical in 12 feet horizontal. Use gabled forms at corners, entry, wall modulation points, etc. to adapt large structures to the character described in BMC 19.47.100 above.

vi. A porch or covered entry.

vii. Spatially defining building elements such as a trellis, overhang, canopy, or other element that identifies and defines space that can be occupied by people.

viii. Providing smaller building elements near the entry of large buildings along Class A Pedestrian-Oriented Streets.

ix. The City may consider other methods to provide human scale elements not specifically listed here. The proposed methods must satisfy the design intent stated above.

B. All new buildings over three stories, or over 2,500 SF in gross building footprint, shall provide along their facades that are visible from the street or public park or open space the following:

i. Upper Story Stepback: Four story or higher buildings must stepback upper stories by at least 10 feet measured from the facade of the third floor facing the street or public park or open space. The Director may waive or modify this requirement if there are stepbacks on one or more of the first three floors.

ii. Horizontal Building Modulation: Building facades shall conform to the following standards:

a. The maximum width (as measured horizontally along the building exterior) without building modulation shall be 60 feet.

b. The minimum depth of modulation shall be the greater of 6 feet or not less than 0.2 multiplied by the height of the structure (finish grade to top of wall). The minimum width of modulation shall be 15 feet.

c. Roof decks or balconies may be used as all or part of the building modulation so long as each individual balcony has an area of 80 square feet and meets the minimum modulation depth in BMC 19.47.110.2.B.ii.b above.

iii. Modulated roofline: Roofs are a design element and should relate to the building facade articulations. A variety of roof types and configurations should be used to add interest and reduce the perceived building bulk. The roofline of all facades visible from a street or public park or open space shall be modulated according to the following standards:

a. For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet – change roofline so that no un-modulated segment of roof exceeds 60’. Minimum vertical dimension of roofline modulation is the greater of two feet or 0.1 multiplied by the wall height (finish grade to top of wall).

b. For gable, hipped, or shed roofs – a minimum slope of 3 feet vertical to 12 feet horizontal.

c. Other roof forms such as arched, vaulted, dormer, or saw-toothed may satisfy this design principle if the individual segments of the roof with no change in slope or discontinuity are less than 60’ in width (measured horizontally).

iv. Building “articulation” shall be accomplished with design elements such as the following, so long as the articulation interval does not exceed 60’.

a. Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals less than the articulation interval.

b. Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry for each articulation interval.

c. Providing a balcony or bay window for each articulation interval.

d. Changing the roofline by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval.

e. Changing materials with a change in building plane.

f. Providing lighting fixtures, trellis, tree, or other landscape feature within each interval.

v. Vertical “articulation”: To moderate the vertical scale of buildings, the design shall include techniques to clearly define the building’s top, middle and bottom. The following techniques are suggested methods of achieving vertical articulation:

a. Top: Sloped roofs, strong eave lines, cornice treatments, horizontal trellises or sunshades, etc.

b. Middle: Windows, balconies, material changes, railings and similar treatments that unify the building design.

c. Bottom: Pedestrian-oriented storefronts, pedestrian scale building details, awnings, and arcades.

Where appropriate, the applicant should coordinate the horizontal elements (i.e., cornices, window lines, arcades, etc.) in a pattern and height to reflect similar elements on neighboring buildings that exhibit the City’s desired scale and character for the area.

vi. Cluster smaller uses and activities around entrances on street-facing facades.

vii. Include pedestrian-oriented spaces along street-facing facades.

viii. The City may allow other methods that provide architecturally scaled elements not specifically listed in this section. The proposed methods must satisfy the intent of the design standards. Note that the City may increase the 60’ interval for modulation and articulation to better match surrounding structures or to implement an approved design concept. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.47.120 Building Exteriors

1. Objectives.

A. Ensure that buildings have design integrity at all observable distances.

B. Ensure that exterior finishes are compatible with traditional main street character.

C. Enhance buildings with appropriate design details.

D. Encourage pedestrian-friendly street facades along Class A and B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets and public parks or open spaces.

E. Architecturally accentuate building corners at street intersections.

F. Encourage the use of high-quality, permanent, compatible materials that will upgrade the visual image of downtown Burien.

G. Use the architectural elements of a building and landscaping to highlight and define the entrance.

H. Reduce the visual impact of large, undifferentiated walls.

I. Reduce the apparent size of large walls through the use of various architectural and landscaping treatments. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Design Standards.

A. Material finishes shall reflect the early twentieth century main street vernacular for building materials.

B. Exterior finish colors are to (1) express the integral color of building materials (i.e. brick, cast stone), (2) be neutral shades of natural colors found in nature in the northwest, and (3) may include limited use of approved compatible accent colors. The color of neighboring buildings that comply with this section should be considered when selecting colors for repainting or remodeling of existing structures and for new structures.

C. New buildings shall incorporate at least two of the following measures:

i. Decorative rooflines: For example, an ornamental molding, entablature, frieze or other roofline device visible from the ground level. If the roofline decoration is in the form of a linear molding or board, then the molding or board must be at least 8" wide.

ii. Decorative treatment of windows and doors: For example, decorative molding / framing details around all ground floor windows and doors, decorative glazing, or door designs located on facades facing streets or public parks or open spaces.

iii. Decorative light fixtures with a diffuse visible light source such as a globe or “acorn” that is non-glaring or a decorative shade or mounting.

iv. Decorative building materials, including the following:

a. Decorative masonry, shingle, brick or stone.

b. Other materials with decorative or textural qualities as approved by the City.

D. Note the year of construction of a building by the installation of a permanent cast metal plaque attached to the building. Stone or masonry set integral with other masonry on the front building elevation facing the principal street may be used in lieu of a cast metal plaque. The year of construction is to be noted by numbers not less than six inches high. Other information associated with the building that may have historic interest in the future may be included.

E. Building facades located within 20 feet of a sidewalk along Class A and B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets, shall include one or more of the following elements:

i. Transparent window area or window displays along the majority of the ground floor facade between 2’ and 8’ above ground level.

ii. Sculptural, mosaic, or bas-relief artwork over the majority of the ground floor facade.

F. All new buildings located within 15’ of a property line, at the intersection of streets, are required to employ two or more of the following design elements or treatments to the building corner facing the intersection.

i. Provide at least 100 square feet of pedestrian-oriented space.

ii. Provide a corner entrance to a store, courtyard, building lobby, atrium, pedestrian pathway, or pedestrian-oriented space.

v. Include a corner architectural element such as:

a. Bay window or turret.

b. Roof deck or balconies on upper stories.

c. Building core stepback “notch” or curved facade surfaces.

d. Sculpture or artwork either bas-relief, figurative, or distinctive use of materials.

iv. Special treatment of pedestrian weather protection canopy at the corner of the building.

v. Other similar treatment or element approved by the City.

G. The arrangement, proportion and design of windows and doors (fenestration) shall conform to the following:

i. The height to width ratio of single openings and group openings are to be proportionately scaled to the wall.

ii. Door and window details and trim suitably scaled to the wall.

iii. Reduce large expanses of glass used in windows and doors to smaller component windows reminiscent of traditional main street vernacular when adjacent to sidewalks or other pedestrian use areas.

iv. Incorporate window flower boxes, where feasible.

v. The total square footage of windows along a facade facing a street shall be a minimum of 15% of the square footage of the facade.

H. Retain facades that reflect the heritage of the City. Facades of vintage buildings may be adapted to contemporary use with compatible materials. Use of metal siding, metal screening, plastic, plywood, sheet wood products, or fiberglass to cover over existing facades is prohibited. Wood should not be used to cover over existing brick or cast stone masonry.

I. Building exteriors shall be constructed from high quality, durable materials. Preferred exterior building materials that reflect the City’s desired traditional main street character are as follows:

i. Masonry;

ii. Cast Stone;

iii. Tile;

iv. Other materials subject to approval by the City

J. If concrete or concrete blocks (concrete masonry units or “cinder blocks”) are used for walls that are visible from a street, public park or open space, or pedestrian route then the concrete or concrete block construction must be architecturally treated in one or more of following ways:

i. Use of textured surfaces such as split face or grooved.

ii. Use of other masonry types such as brick, glass block, or tile in conjunction with the concrete or concrete blocks.

iii. Use of decorative coursing to break up blank wall areas.

iv. Use matching colored mortar where color is an element of architectural treatment for any of the options above.

K. The following materials are prohibited in visible locations unless an exception is granted by the City based on the integration of the material into the overall design of the structure.

i. Corrugated or beveled metal siding.

ii. Vinyl or plywood siding.

iii. Highly tinted or mirrored glass (except stained glass) as a major building element.

iv. Corrugated fiberglass.

v. Chain link fencing (except for temporary purposes such as a construction site or as a gate for a refuse enclosure).

vi. Crushed colored rock/crushed tumbled glass.

N. Enhance the primary building entry or entries, by use of the following measures:

i. Provide pedestrian weather protection such as an awning, canopy, marquee, or other building element (i.e. recessed opening) to create a covered pedestrian space of at least 100 square feet.

ii. Provide at least 200 square feet of landscaping at or near each entry of buildings on Class B Pedestrian-Oriented Streets.

iii. Provide benches and other pedestrian facilities, such as, kiosks, special paving, etc.

iv. Provide special pedestrian scaled lighting.

v. Provide at least 2 of the following items:

a. Provide a trellis, canopy, porch, or other building element that incorporates landscaping;

b. Provide adjacent window displays;

c. Provide building ornamentation such as mosaic tile, relief sculpture, ornamental wood, or metal trim, etc.;

d. Provide artwork or special pedestrian-scaled signs;

e. Other enhancements as approved by the City.

O. All blank walls within 50’ of and visible from a street, public park or open space, or adjacent lot, shall be treated in one or more of the following methods:

i. Install a vertical trellis in front of at least 50% of the wall length with climbing vines or plant materials.

ii. Provide a landscaped planting bed at least 8’ wide or raised planter bed at least 2’ high and 3’ wide in front of the wall. Plant materials that will obscure or screen at least 50% of the wall’s surface within 3 years are to be planted in the planting bed.

iii. Provide artwork (mosaic, mural, sculpture, relief, etc.) over at least 50% of the blank wall surface.

iv. Other methods as approved by the City.

Treatment of blank walls is to be proportional to the wall. All of the proposed methods are subject to City approval. The applicant must submit architectural plans and elevations showing proposed treatments for approval.

P. Prototype design for franchises should use customized components that are consistent with the desired traditional main street character and that reinforce visual consistency with other adjacent buildings. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


Chapter 19.48 Airport Industrial Design Standards

19.48.010    User Guide

19.48.020    General

19.48.030    Site Planning and Design.

19.48.040    Pedestrian and Non-Motorized Circulation.

19.48.050    Vehicular Access and Parking.

19.48.060    Building Design.

19.48.070    Surface Water.


19.48.010 User Guide

This chapter establishes design standards for properties zoned Airport Industrial (AI). If you are interested in developing or making changes to property with an AI zone designation, you should read this chapter. Also, refer to BMC 19.15.070 which contains additional regulations relating to uses and other standards for AI zoned properties. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.020 General

1. Purpose and Intent. These standards are intended to direct the design of buildings and sites within the Airport Industrial (AI) zone, in compliance with the City’s Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan. The standards will promote quality development and reinforce the opportunity for economic development in areas affected by aircraft noise from SeaTac International Airport. Allowed uses within the AI zone are intended to develop as a coordinated, well-landscaped business park, with substantial buffers along the perimeter where residential uses will continue to be allowed. The standards are not intended to slow or restrict development, but rather to add consistency and predictability to the permit review process.

2. Compliance with Design Standards. There are two types of design standards below. Mandatory standards contain the word “shall.” All other standards must be complied with, unless the project design demonstrates a better means for achieving the standard. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 479 § 1, 2007, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.030 Site Planning and Design.

1. Coordinate proposed site development with planned development on adjacent properties.

2. Screen activities that produce glare from adjacent rights-of-way and residential uses.

3. Landscaping.

A. Landscaping should comply with BMC 19.25.

B. Landscaping along the Miller Creek Corridor shall include native plants that contribute to the overall health of the creek. There shall be an emphasis on trees and shade cover for landscaping along Miller Creek.

C. Encourage use of drought-tolerant or indigenous plants to minimize the amount of water required for irrigation.

D. Encourage use of “gray water” for irrigation.

4. Mechanical equipment. Screen mechanical equipment with landscaping or attractive architectural features integrated into the structure itself.

5. Fencing. Screen chain link fences by a Type I landscape “full screen” as described in BMC 19.25, or a dark colored coating approved by the Director.

6. Outdoor service, storage and loading areas.

A. Loading areas shall not be oriented towards or be visible from rights-of-way.

B. Locate service areas, incidental outside storage, construction storage and other areas which tend to be unsightly away from residential uses, rights-of-way and vehicular tracts and easements.

C. Screen such areas from view by either:

i. Use of building design and layout to provide the required screening, or

ii. Installation of a minimum six foot high solid fence or enclosure using materials (such as wood or concrete) in the same architectural style of the building on the property, or

iii. Installation of a minimum ten foot wide Type I landscape buffer.

7. Biofiltration swales. Integrate bio-filtration swales into the site landscape concept. The Director may waive or modify required landscaping widths, types or materials to accommodate an integrated bio-filtration swale.

8. Site lighting.

A. Provide adequate lighting levels in all areas used by pedestrians and vehicles, especially at building entrances and walkways.

B. Use light sources, lighting levels and fixture designs that minimize spillage of light off-site.

C. Direct lighting toward the interior of the project and away from rights-of-way and existing or planned residential uses. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.040 Pedestrian and Non-Motorized Circulation.

1. Pedestrian and non-motorized access should comply with BMC 19.20.090.

2. Provide facilities for pedestrian and non-motorized access in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and when adopted, the non-motorized pedestrian and bicycle facilities plan. Special consideration shall be given to developing a complete non-motorized network, including development of a trail system along Miller Creek and connections to such system.

3. Provide a trail along Miller Creek. The exact location, width and design of the trail should comply with the Burien Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities Plan.

4. Develop an internal circulation plan to facilitate pedestrian and non-motorized access between major project phases and adjacent developments. The City may require recording of cross-easements and/or right-of-way dedication to achieve the objective of a coordinated, internal access system within the AI zone. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.050 Vehicular Access and Parking.

1. Vehicular access and parking should comply with BMC 19.20 and the City of Burien’s adopted road standards (BMC 12.05).

2. Street system. Developments shall be designed to accommodate the planned internal street system shown conceptually on Figure 19.48-1.

3. Vehicle entrances and driveways.

A. Encourage shared vehicular access to reduce impervious surfaces and minimize the number of access points.

B. Limit vehicular access from the right-of-way to each property to no more than two locations. The City may allow additional access points upon review of site and traffic conditions, and on-site traffic patterns.

C. Design access points to direct traffic to a limited number of access points onto Des Moines Memorial Drive, So. 140th St. or So. 144th/So. 146th St., as shown conceptually on Figure 19.48-1.

D. Prohibit truck access onto 8th Avenue So. except for deliveries to properties accessed solely from 8th Avenue So. The City may allow truck access where necessary due to natural constraints (such as topography), or for required emergency access. [Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.060 Building Design.

1. General.

A. Design buildings to provide a sense of quality and permanence.

B. Multiple structures within a development should share common design elements.

C. Design or screen rear building elevations to avoid or substantially minimize negative visual impacts facing Des Moines Memorial Drive or 8th Ave. South.

D. Photo-simulations of the completed development as viewed from adjacent hillsides, roadways and residential areas may be required.

2. Building facade. A building facade that exceeds 100 feet in length that is visible from a right-of-way or the shared internal street system shown conceptually on Figure 19.48-1 should be treated by one or more of the following methods:

A. Facade offset or modulation. The minimum offset or modulation depth should be 3 feet; minimum length should be 8 feet, minimum height should be 8 feet. The maximum wall length without offset or modulation should be 30 feet.

B. Material, color and texture variation. Use variation in building materials, colors and/or textures to minimize the visual effect of building scale.

3. Building colors. Use natural and earth tones on the major portions of the building facade. Accent colors are permitted on the minor portions of the facade.

4. Building materials.

A. Limit the percentage of wall area covered by reflective glass. The applicant may be required to provide documentation verifying reflective characteristics of glass proposed for structures. Provide awnings or other solar shading devices as needed to minimize sunlight reflection off of the glass.

B. The following materials shall not be used in visible locations unless an exception is granted by the City based on the integration of the material into the overall design of the structure.

i. Corrugated or beveled metal siding.

ii. Vinyl or plywood siding.

iii. Corrugated fiberglass.

iv. Crushed colored rock or crushed tumbled glass.

5. Building roof treatment.

A. Design and/or screen rooftop vents, air conditioning units, mechanical, electrical and other rooftop equipment to avoid unsightly appearance as viewed from surrounding properties. The building roof design and covering/screening materials shall be described in detail, and it shall be demonstrated how these items will mitigate the visual impact of the equipment.

B. Use non-reflective roofing materials in black, natural or earth tones.

C. Encourage the use of green roof technology to minimize the need for engineered storm water controls.

6. Water conservation. Encourage use of water conserving plumbing fixtures and other building conservation measures to minimize water consumption. [Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


19.48.070 Surface Water.

1. Review proposed developments to ensure installation of proper drainage controls to prevent significant impacts to the storm drainage system, including Miller Creek.

2. Retain or slow release site-generated runoff using detention ponds, vegetated drainage swales, etc.

3. Encourage “zero” off-site release of on-site storm drainage runoff. [Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]


[IMAGE]


Map 19.48-1 Planned Internal Streets

  


Chapter 19.49 Old Burien Design Standards

19.49.010    User Guide

19.49.020    General

19.49.030    Building Location and Orientation

19.49.040    Service, Loading, Outdoor Storage and Mechanical Areas

19.49.050    Pedestrian Amenities

19.49.060    Parking Area and Driveway Location and Design

19.49.070    Site Lighting

19.49.080    Architectural Style / Character

19.49.090    Building Scale and Mass

19.49.100    Building Details and Materials


19.49.010 User Guide

This chapter establishes design standards for the SPA-1 zone (Old Burien). Figure 1 illustrates the boundaries of the SPA-1 zone. If you are interested in developing or making changes to property within the SPA-1 zone, you should read this chapter, along with BMC 19.15.055 which contains additional regulations relating to uses and other standards for the SPA-1 zone. The comprehensive plan should also be used as a reference to gain further insight for the vision of Old Burien.

Words within the standards and guidelines that are italicized are defined in the Definitions portion of the zoning code found in BMC section 19.10.


19.49.020 General

1. Purpose and Intent.

These guidelines are intended to direct the design of buildings and sites within Old Burien, in compliance with the City’s Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan. The guidelines will promote quality development and reinforce Old Burien’s early 20th century “main street” character -a vision of an attractive, pedestrian-oriented environment with a small town atmosphere. Buildings and sites should convey a sense of permanence, attention to detail, quality and investment. The guidelines are not intended to slow or restrict development, but rather to add consistency and predictability to the permit review process.

2. Compliance with Design Standards.

For each element below, a design objective or end result of what is intended to be achieved is stated. The design objective shall be complied with. Following each objective are a series of design standards. There are two types of design standards. Some design standards are viewed as fundamental in achieving the stated design objective(s). These standards are mandatory. In these statements, the word “shall” is used. The second type of design standard are examples or alternatives to achieving the design objectives. In these standards, the words “should” or “may” are used, or “shall”, “must” or “should” are not used. In standards where neither “shall” or “must” nor “should” or “may” are used, there is an obligation to comply with the standard, unless the project demonstrates a better means for achieving the design objective.

The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the applicable objectives and design standards are met.

3. Review Process.

BMC 19.65.105 contains procedures for compliance with this Chapter.


[IMAGE]


Figure 1. Properties in the white area (SPA-1 zone) are subject to the design standards herein.


19.49.030 Building Location and Orientation

1. Objectives.

A. Reinforce and preserve the historic character of Old Burien.

B. Reinforce the pattern of small storefronts along SW 152nd Street.

C. Create an active and safe pedestrian environment by encouraging street oriented development.

D. Create visual interest and increased pedestrian activity at street corners.

E. Reduce the impact of parking lots and blank walls on adjacent streets.

2. Design Standards.

A. All buildings, unless otherwise noted, may be placed at the sidewalk’s edge provided they include a pedestrian-oriented facade. This includes:

i. Primary building entry on this facade.

ii. Transparent windows and doors covering at least 75% of the facade between 2 and 8 feet above the ground.
[IMAGE]


Figure 2. Many of Old Burien’s storefronts exhibit “pedestrian-oriented facades.”

Exceptions to (ii):

a. The transparency requirement may be reduced by 50% for all public uses (meaning that transparent windows and doors must cover at least 37.5% of the facade between 2 and 8 feet above the ground), including municipal facilities and museums provided the building treatments meet the intent of the standards.

b. In lieu of transparent windows, display cabinets showing products or features relating to the use of the building may be used for up to 50% of the transparency requirement (up to 37.5% of the facade between 2 and 8 feet above the ground) provided the treatments meet the intent of the standards.

B. SW 151st and 152nd Streets east of 10th Avenue SW. All buildings must feature a pedestrian-oriented facade facing the street. Such buildings must be placed at the sidewalk edge, except:

i. To allow for wider sidewalks.

ii. If the area between the sidewalk and the building meets the definition of pedestrian – Oriented space (see Figure 4).

iii. If the area between the sidewalk and the street is maintained as a landscaped area (excluding required pedestrian access areas) with plantings that adds seasonal color and interest and do not act as a visual barrier (see Figure 5).
[IMAGE]


Figure 3. The 151st and 152nd Street frontages highlighted in black require pedestrian-oriented facades adjacent to the sidewalk (with noted exceptions).


[IMAGE]


Figure 4. Building setbacks on 151st and 152nd Streets, east of 10th Avenue SW, may be allowed if the space between the sidewalk and the building is maintained as pedestrian-oriented space.


[IMAGE]


Figure 5. Building setbacks on 151st and 152nd Streets, east of 10th Avenue SW, may be allowed if the space between the sidewalk and the building is maintained as a landscaped area (except for required pedestrian access).

C. Buildings not featuring a pedestrian-oriented facade, where allowed, must be set back at least 5 feet from the back of the sidewalk. The area between the sidewalk and any such building must be landscaped or designed as a pedestrian-oriented space. The applicant must demonstrate how the landscaping and/or other design treatments meet the Building Location and Orientation Objectives.


[IMAGE]


Figure 6. Buildings that do not contain pedestrian-oriented facades must be setback from the sidewalk at least 5 feet and contain pedestrian-oriented space or landscaping (such as this) between the sidewalk and the building. Note how landscaping in this example mitigates the blank wall to the left, but allows for visibility between windows and the street.

D. Buildings on SW 152nd Street west of 10th Avenue SW shall include a 10’ minimum landscaped setback from the street to reinforce the pattern of landscaped front yards to the west. Shrubs and trees that block visibility between ground floor entrance and windows and the street shall be avoided.
[IMAGE]


Figure 7. If redevelopment occurs on properties on SW 152nd Street west of 10th, a 10' minimum landscaped setback shall be provided to reinforce the character of landscaped front yards here.

E. Street corner sites. All buildings located at the intersection of streets shall be located within 15 feet of the street corner (larger setbacks will be permitted where the space between the street and building meet the definition of pedestrian-oriented space) and are encouraged to orient the primary entrance to the corner. Cropped or notched building corners that provide for small pedestrian-oriented spaces adjacent to the street corner are encouraged.


[IMAGE]


Figure 8. Street corner buildings are encouraged to orient the primary entrance to the corner.

F. If the public sidewalk is less than the width shown in the Downtown Burien Streetscape Design Plan, the building should be set back sufficiently to provide for the walking surface and/or space to provide optional finishes shown in the Burien Downtown Streetscape Design Plan to enhance pedestrian safety and enjoyment. For those streets not specified in the Burien Downtown Streetscape Design Plan, developments must set their buildings back to provide for the following sidewalk widths. Additional sidewalk width may be achieved by sidewalk easements or dedication of property for public right-of-way:

i. SW 151st Street and 9th and 10th Avenues SW: 10’ sidewalks.

ii. Ambaum Blvd SW: 10’ sidewalks.

G. Principal pedestrian building entries must have direct access to the adjacent public sidewalk.


19.49.040 Service, Loading, Outdoor Storage and Mechanical Areas

1. Objectives.

A. Minimize adverse visual, olfactory, or auditory impacts of service, loading, outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas at ground and roof levels.

B. Encourage more thoughtful siting and reduce impacts of service, outdoor storage and mechanical areas.

2. Design Standards.

A. Landscaping or other forms of screening shall be provided around outdoor service, storage, loading and mechanical areas, utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service and utilities apparatus to provide sensory (visual, olfactory, auditory) screening from adjacent properties, streets, affected pedestrian circulation routes, and affected pedestrian-oriented spaces.


[IMAGE]


Figure 9. Where service elements are visible to the public, they should be screened. This example includes landscaping and masonry to mitigate impacts on the visual environment.

B. Outdoor storage areas and loading facilities shall be integrated into the site design to minimize their size, reduce visual impact, and where appropriate allow for pedestrian and vehicular movement between sites.

C. No large outside item display areas are permitted (e.g. kitchen appliances or other similarly large merchandise that is visible from the street). Sidewalks shall not be enclosed as building space for retailing. Outdoor dining and small, temporary displays for items such as groceries, hardware, books, etc. may be allowed provided they do not impede pedestrians passing comfortably on the sidewalk.


[IMAGE]


Figure 10. Locate service areas to minimize impacts on the pedestrian environment.

D. Dumpsters, refuse and recycling containers shall not be visible from the sidewalk and adjacent properties. They shall be screened by minimum 6’ high masonry enclosures designed to screen refuse containers, including lids, and refuse stacked in containers. Chain link fencing with slats may be used for gates but not for the enclosure. See Figure 9

E. Mechanical equipment shall be located and screened at ground level and attached to structures to reduce visual impacts from streets and adjoining properties.

F. Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be located and screened so that the equipment is not visible when viewed from ground level of adjacent properties. The color of roof mounted equipment shall be screened or matched with the exposed color of the roof to minimize visual impacts when roof mounted equipment is visible from nearby buildings and higher elevations.

G. Service areas shall be located and screened to reduce adverse sensory impacts.

H. Utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service and utilities apparatus shall be located and screened so as not to be visible from adjoining and nearby streets.


19.49.050 Pedestrian Amenities

1. Objectives.

A. Enrich the pedestrian environment and encourage pedestrian activity.

2. Design Standards.

A. Developments are encouraged to incorporate pedestrian-oriented space into the design of the site. Desirable locations for pedestrian-oriented space are:

i. Between the sidewalk and the building entrance.

ii. Adjacent to the street corner.

iii. Adjacent to a building’s secondary entrance.

Note: Specific design requirements and recommendations for “pedestrian-oriented spaces” are provided in BMC 19.10, Definitions. For example, there are a number of design elements that are required in order for open spaces to qualify as a pedestrian-oriented space. Likewise, there are other features that are encouraged and a list of features that are prohibited in pedestrian-oriented space.


[IMAGE]


Figure 11. An example of a pedestrian-oriented space.


19.49.060 Parking Area and Driveway Location and Design

1. Objectives.

A. Provide safe, convenient access to and within sites without diminishing quality pedestrian walking or visual experiences.

B. Minimize driveway impacts across pedestrian walks.

C. Meet the need for adequate parking and minimize the negative effects of the automobile while encouraging transit and other forms of transportation.

D. Minimize visual impacts of parking structures on streets and pedestrian-oriented facilities.

2. Design Standards.

A. New driveways onto any street are prohibited. Access to all off-street parking areas shall be from existing alleys. Parking or other vehicular access areas between the sidewalk and the building are prohibited. Exceptions:

i. Ambaum Boulevard, where there is no public alley access between SW 151st and 152nd Street. Where possible, existing driveways along this block should be consolidated to the extent possible and may be required by the Director. Preferably, the alley should be extended to Ambaum Boulevard in conjunction with redevelopment activity.

ii. Existing driveways may be reconfigured provided the associated improvements bring the driveway and the development as a whole closer into conformance with the design standards herein. In reconfiguring existing driveways, the applicant shall consider use of the existing alleyways in lieu of maintaining an access from a public street.

B. Parking lots adjacent to any street must comply with BMC 19.25.070 Perimeter Landscaping standards.

Exception: The Director may eliminate or reduce the landscaping buffer requirement provided the applicant incorporates a decorative screen wall or low wall that incorporates landscaping sufficient to mitigate the visual impact of the parking area on the street. All such treatments must maintain maximum visibility at eye level between parking area and sidewalk. For instance walls or hedges should be limited to 3 feet in height and the underside of tree canopies should be trimmed up to 8 feet. (see Figure 12)


[IMAGE]


Figure 12. A screen wall example that incorporates landscaping. Note how visibility is maintained at eye level between the parking area and the sidewalk.

C. On SW 151st street, no more than 65’ of the street frontage (measured parallel to the curb) shall be occupied by surface parking and driveways. The Director may waive or modify this requirement for public safety purposes or if there is no feasible alternative. If a waiver or modification is granted, the design shall incorporate measures such as decorative screens along the street frontage. Such decorative screens shall include pedestrian amenities and visual continuity with structures that define the street edge along the street frontage.

D. Restricting vehicular and pedestrian access between adjoining parking lots at the same grade is prohibited.

E. The bulk (or mass) of a parking structure as seen from the street should be minimized by placing its short dimension along the street edge. Where adjacent to the street, the parking structure should include active uses such as retail or other appropriate uses along the street frontage.

F. Parking structures visible from a public street shall be architecturally compatible with exterior architectural elements of the primary structure. Parking structures, particularly those built to serve pre-existing buildings, don’t need to mimic the primary structure, but should utilize design features to make the structure compatible and complementary to the primary structure. Techniques could include facade treatments, use of finishing materials, fenestration, or massing techniques. Where technical requirements of the structure make it difficult and cost prohibitive to create a garage compatible with, for example, an early 20th century building, then alternative materials consistent with 20th century buildings may be used (including but not limited to brick and stone).

G. Buildings built over parking should not appear to “float” over the parking area, but should be linked with ground level uses or screening. Parking at grade under a building is discouraged unless the parking area is completely enclosed within the building or wholly screened with walls and/or landscaped berms.

H. Parking structures and vehicle entrances should be designed to minimize views into the garage interior from surrounding streets. Methods to help minimize such views may include, but are not limited to landscaping, planters and decorative grilles and screens.

I. Security grilles for parking structures shall be architecturally consistent with and integrated with the overall design. Chain link fencing is not permitted for parking structure fencing.

J. New parking lots shall not be located adjacent to intersections. Exceptions may be granted where alterative site configurations can more successfully meet the objectives of Site Planning and Pedestrian Access, Amenities, and Open Space Standards and Guidelines. Such parking areas must incorporate at least one of the following design treatments to add seasonal interest and reduce the visual impact of the parking lot on the street:

i. Install substantial decorative landscaping (at least 200 square feet of area adjacent to the street corner) utilizing a combination of decorative ground cover, shrubs, and/or trees.

ii. Install a trellis or other similar architectural element that incorporates landscaping.
[IMAGE]


Figure 13. An example of minimizing the impact of a parking garage on the street: a) The entry is placed on the side street; b) space for ground floor retail is included along most of the street front (left side of photo); c) a decorative trellis and other architectural features effectively screen blank walls of the garage.


19.49.070 Site Lighting

1. Objectives.

A. Encourage the use of lighting as an integral design component to enhance buildings, landscaping, or other site features.

B. Encourage night skies’ visibility and reduce the general illumination of the sky in Burien.

C. Screen light fixtures so that the light source is not visible off-site.

D. Reduce horizontal light glare and vertical light trespass from a development site onto adjacent parcels.

E. Encourage the judicious use of lighting in conjunction with other security methods to increase site safety.

F. Discourage the use of lighting for advertising purposes.

G. Provide adequate lighting levels in all areas used by pedestrians or automobiles, including building entries, walkways, parking areas, circulation areas, and other open space areas.

2. Design Standards.
[IMAGE]


A. All public areas should be lighted with minimum and maximum levels as follows:

i. Minimum (for low or non-pedestrian and vehicular traffic areas): 0.5-foot candles

ii. Moderate (for moderate or high volume pedestrian areas): 1-2 foot candles

iii. Maximum (for high volume pedestrian areas and building entries): 4-foot candles

B. Lighting should be provided at consistent levels, with gradual transitions between maximum and minimum levels of lighting and between lit areas and unlit areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark areas shall be avoided.

C. Parking lot lighting fixtures should be non-glare and mounted no more than 25 feet above the ground. All fixtures over 15 feet in height shall be fitted with a full cut-off shield.

 

D. Pedestrian-scaled lighting is encouraged in areas of pedestrian activity. New pedestrian scaled lighting in the right of way should be consistent with the existing street lights in Old Burien (see Figure 14) as set forth in the Burien Street Standards.

E. Lighting shall enable pedestrians with normal vision to identify a face 15 yards away in order to promote safety.

F. All building mounted lights should be directed onto the building itself and/or the ground immediately adjacent to it. The light emissions should not be visible above the roofline of the building

G. Building mounted light fixtures should be consistent with the early 20th century theme of Old Burien.


19.49.080 Architectural Style / Character

1. Objectives.

A. Design buildings that reflect a traditional early 20th century main street character. Traditional main street character refers to a collection of structures designed and built in the early twentieth century when structures were composed of simple forms expressed through commonly available materials such as brick and timber.

B. Design buildings to reinforce Old Burien’s pattern of small-scale storefronts.

C. Encourage building design that has visual character and creates human environments.

D. Encourage developments to employ desirable architectural features found in historical Old Burien buildings without promoting a false sense of historicism.

2. Design Standards.

A. Applicants should base a building’s architectural character on building elements and form common to early 20th century Old Burien structures. These structures feature simple three-dimensional building forms expressed through commonly available materials such as brick and timber. Desirable building elements for commercial structures are shown in Figure 15. Applicants may consider modern interpretations of these building elements and components in a way that meets the guidelines herein and complements the surrounding context.


[IMAGE]


Figure 15. New buildings should base their architectural style on building elements and form common to early 20th century Old Burien structures.

B. Large or multiple building developments should employ a variety of colors, building materials, and architectural treatments at no more than 40 foot intervals to reduce monotony and reinforce Old Burien’s sense of scale and character.


[IMAGE]


Figure 16. An example of developments that employ a variety of colors, building materials, and architectural treatments to reduce monotony and add visual interest.

C. Architecture that is defined predominately by corporate identity features (and difficult to adapt to other uses) is prohibited. For example, some fast food franchises have very specific architectural features that reinforce their identity; these buildings are undesirable because they can dilute a town or neighborhood’s identity with corporate (and therefore generic) identities, and are not adaptable to other uses when the corporate franchises leave. Prototype design for franchises should use customized components that are consistent with the desired traditional main street character and that reinforce visual consistency with other adjacent buildings.


19.49.090 Building Scale and Mass

1. Objectives.

A. Encourage the use of building components that are human scale.

B. Encourage architectural scale of development that is compatible with Old Burien structures.

C. Enhance the character and identity of Old Burien and add visual interest.

2. Design Standards.

A. The facades of all buildings facing SW 151st and 152nd Streets must include modulation and/or articulation features every 40 feet or less to reinforce Old Burien’s pattern of small storefronts. For facades facing other streets, the maximum interval shall be 60 feet. At least three of the following methods must be employed:

i. Use of window and/or entries that reinforce the pattern of small storefront spaces.

ii. Use of weather protection features that reinforce small storefronts. For example, for a business that occupies three lots, use three separate awnings to break down the scale of the storefronts. Alternating colors of the awnings may be useful as well.

iii. Change of rooflines that reinforce the pattern of small storefront spaces.

iv. Change in building material, siding style, or color.

v. Other methods that meet the Objectives of the Standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17. This building utilizes fenestration patterns of windows and awnings and roofline modulation at intervals of no more than 40 feet to reduce its architectural scale and add visual interest.

B. The residential portion of mixed-use buildings shall include at least three of the following modulation and/or articulation features at intervals of no more than 40 feet or to distinguish individual units within the building (whichever interval is less) along all facades facing a street or pedestrian-oriented space.

i. Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals less than the articulation interval.

ii. Horizontal building modulation. Minimum depth of modulation is 2 feet and minimum width for each modulation is 4 feet if tied to a change in color or building material and roofline modulation as defined below. Otherwise, minimum depth of modulation is 10 feet (except balconies) and minimum width for each modulation is 15 feet.

iii. Change of roofline. To qualify for this measure, the maximum length of any continuous roofline shall be 40 feet and comply with the treatments below:

a. For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet, the minimum vertical dimension of roofline modulation is the greater of two feet or 0.1 multiplied by the wall height (finish grade to top of wall).

b. For gable, hipped, or shed roofs – a minimum slope of 3 feet vertical to 12 feet horizontal.

c. Other roof forms consistent with the design standards herein may satisfy this standard if the individual segments of the roof with no change in slope or discontinuity are less than 40’ in width (measured horizontally).

iv. Change in building material or siding style (perhaps coordinated with horizontal building modulation and a change in color).

v. Alternative methods as approved by the Director that meet the objectives of the standards.


[IMAGE]


Figure 18. This mixed-use building uses repeating distinctive window patterns, modulated roofline, upper level setbacks, and a change in siding color to reduce the perceived scale of the building.

C. The maximum facade width (the facade includes the apparent width of the structure facing the street and includes required modulation) of the upper story of multi-story buildings visible from a street, public open space, or pedestrian-oriented space is 120 feet. Buildings exceeding 120 feet in width along the street front shall be divided by a 30-foot wide modulation of the exterior wall, so that the maximum length of a particular facade is 120 feet. Such modulation must be at least 20 feet or deeper and extend through all floors except the ground floor where a pedestrian-oriented facade has been provided. Decks and roof overhangs may encroach up to 3 feet (per side) into the modulation. The Director will consider other design methods that are effective at reducing the perceived width of the building.
[IMAGE]


Figure 19. Maximum building facade width standards.

D. Rooflines visible from a public street, open space, or public parking area must be varied by emphasizing dormers, chimneys, stepped roofs, gables, prominent cornice or fascia, or a broke or articulated roofline. The width of any continuous flat roofline should extend no more than 100 feet without modulation. Modulation should consist of either:

i. For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet, the minimum vertical dimension of roofline modulation is the greater of 2 feet or 0.1 multiplied by the wall height (finish grade to top of wall) if the segment is 50 feet or less or at least 4 feet if the segment is more than 50 feet in length.

ii. A sloped or gabled roofline segment of at least 20 feet in width and no less than 3 feet vertical in 12 feet horizontal.

iii. A combination of the above.

E. To moderate the vertical scale of multi-story buildings, the design shall include techniques to clearly define the building’s top, middle and bottom. The following techniques are suggested methods of achieving vertical articulation:

i. Top: Sloped roofs, strong eave lines, cornice treatments, horizontal trellises or sunshades, etc.

ii. Middle: Windows, balconies, material changes, railings and similar treatments that unify the building design.

iii. Bottom: Pedestrian-oriented storefronts, pedestrian scale building details, awnings, and arcades.
[IMAGE]


Figure 20. Utilize design techniques to clearly define a multi-story building’s top, middle, and bottom.

F. Untreated blank walls within 50’ of and visible from a public street, pedestrian pathway, public park or open space are prohibited. Treatment of blank walls is to be proportional to the wall. All of the proposed methods are subject to City approval. The applicant must submit architectural plans and elevations showing proposed treatments for approval. Methods to treat blank walls must include one or more of the following:

i. Transparent windows or doors.

ii. Display windows.

iii. Landscape planting bed at least 8’ feet wide or a raised planter bed at least 2 feet high and 3 feet wide in front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or screen at least 50 percent of the wall’s surface within three years.

iv. A vertical trellis in front of at least 50% of the wall with climbing vines or plant materials.

v. Artwork (mosaic, mural, sculpture, relief, etc.) over at least 50% of the blank wall surface.

vi. Other methods that meet the Objectives.


[IMAGE]


Figure 21. Blank wall treatments.


19.49.100 Building Details and Materials

1. Objectives.

A. To encourage the incorporation of design details and small scale elements into building facades that are attractive at a pedestrian scale.

B. To encourage creativity in the design of building facades to add visual interest.

C. Ensure that buildings have design integrity at all observable distances.

D. Ensure that exterior finishes are compatible with traditional main street character.

E. Enhance buildings with appropriate design details.

F. Architecturally accentuate building corners at street intersections.

G. Encourage the use of high-quality, permanent, durable, and compatible materials that will upgrade the visual image of Burien and are easy to maintain.

H. Use the architectural elements of a building and landscaping to highlight and define the entrance.

I. Reduce the apparent size of large, undifferentiated walls through the use of various architectural and landscaping treatments.

2. Design Standards.

A. All buildings shall be enhanced with appropriate details. Specifically, buildings shall include at least three of the following elements on their primary facades.

i. Decorative rooflines: For example, an ornamental molding, entablature, frieze or other roofline device visible from the ground level. If the roofline decoration is in the form of a linear molding or board, then the molding or board shall be at least 8" wide.

ii. Decorative treatment of windows and doors: For example:

a. Decorative molding / framing details around all ground floor windows and doors; molding should comply with the following:

- Wood framed windows are preferred.

- Metal framed windows shall be powder-coated; darker colors are preferred.

- Natural mill finished or clear anodized aluminum window frames are discouraged.

b. Decorative glazing, or door designs located on facades facing streets or public parks or open spaces.

c. Display windows divided into a grid of multiple panes.

d. Smaller component windows reminiscent of traditional main street vernacular when adjacent to sidewalks or other pedestrian use areas.

iii. Recessed entry.

iv. Decorative paving and artwork near entry.

v. Landscaped trellises or other decorative element that incorporates landscaping near the building entry.

vi. Decorative light fixtures with a diffuse visible light source such as a globe or “acorn” that is non-glaring.

iv. Decorative building materials, including decorative masonry, shingle, brick, tile, stone, or other materials with decorative or textural qualities as approved by the Director.

ix. Decorative pedestrian-oriented signage, such as hanging or window sign.

x. Other details that meet the Objectives.


[IMAGE]


Figure 22. This building’s transom windows, display windows, recessed entry and decorative door add visual interest at a pedestrian scale

B. All commercial uses containing a secondary side or rear entrance shall incorporate at least two of the following design elements to visually enhance such entries.

i. Weather protection over the entry at least 4 1/2 feet wide in the form of awnings, marquees, canopies, or overhangs.

ii. Decorative pedestrian-oriented signage consistent with BMC 19.30 that highlights the entry and adds visual interest.

iii. Pedestrian-oriented space or designated outdoor eating areas.

iv. Fixed landscaping elements, including one of the following:

a. Landscaped planter or fixed planter box incorporating decorative ground cover, shrubs, and/or trees.

b. A trellis or other similar architectural element that incorporates landscaping.

v. Decorative pedestrian-scaled lighting fixture(s).

vi. Special building details that highlight the entry and add visual interest.

vii. Other features that meet the objectives.

All elements above shall be approved by the Director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 23. The secondary entrances of these businesses incorporate transparent windows and doors, decorative building elements, pedestrian-oriented signage, and a designated outdoor dining area.

C. Building exteriors shall be constructed from high quality, durable materials. Preferred exterior building materials that reflect the City’s desired traditional main street character are as follows:

i. Brick.

ii. Narrow horizontal wood siding (generally 5 inches or less); wider siding will be considered where there is a historic precedent.

iii. Other materials subject to approval by the Director.

D. The following materials are prohibited in visible locations unless an exception is granted by the Director based on the integration of the material into the overall design of the structure.

i. Vinyl or plywood siding (including T-111 or similar plywood).

ii. Highly tinted or mirrored glass (except stained glass) as a major building element.

iii. Corrugated fiberglass.

iv. Chain link fencing (except for temporary purposes such as a construction site or as a gate for a refuse enclosure).

v. Crushed colored rock/crushed tumbled glass.

vi. Non-corrugated and highly reflective sheet metal.

E. Special standards for concrete or concrete blocks (concrete masonry units or “cinder blocks”): When used for walls that are visible from a street, public park or open space, or pedestrian route, concrete or concrete block construction shall be limited to 30 percent of the facade area and architecturally treated in one or more of following ways:

i. Use of textured surfaces such as split face or grooved.

ii. Use of other masonry types such as brick, glass block, or tile in conjunction with the concrete or concrete blocks.

iii. Use of decorative coursing to break up blank wall areas.

iv. Use matching colored mortar where color is an element of architectural treatment for any of the options above.

F. Special standards for metal siding: When used for walls that are visible from a street, public park or open space, or pedestrian route, buildings shall have visible corner moldings and trim and incorporate masonry, stone, or other durable permanent material near the ground level (first 2 feet above sidewalk or ground level). Facades wider than 40 feet that employ metal siding shall incorporate multiple colors / other siding materials.

G. Special standards for Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) and other similar troweled finishes:

i. Limited to no more than 30 percent of the facade area.

ii. Shall be trimmed in wood or masonry.

iii. Should be sheltered from extreme weather by roof overhangs or other methods.

iv. Shall incorporate masonry, stone, or other durable permanent material near the ground level (first 2 feet above sidewalk or ground level).

H. The year of construction of a building shall be noted by the installation of a permanent cast metal plaque attached to the building. Stone or masonry set integral with other masonry on the front building elevation facing the principal street may be used in lieu of a cast metal plaque. The year of construction is to be noted by numbers not less than six inches high. Other information associated with the building that may have historic interest in the future may be included.

I. Street corner buildings located at Ambaum Boulevard SW and SW 151st and 152nd Street intersections shall employ two or more of the following design elements or treatments to the building corner facing the intersection.

i. Provide at least 100 square feet of pedestrian-oriented space between the building and the street corner.

ii. Provide a corner entrance.

iii. Include a corner architectural element such as:

a. Bay window or turret.

b. Roof deck or balconies on upper stories.

c. Building corner stepback “notch” or curved facade surfaces.

d. Sculpture or artwork either bas-relief, figurative, or distinctive use of materials.

e. Special weather protection feature at the corner of the building.

v. Other similar treatment or element approved by the Director.

J. A storefront’s palette should be no more than three colors; one base color, one trim color, and one accent color. Encourage trim and accent colors that contrast with the base color. Specifically, darker base colors with white trim work particularly well (see Figure 24). However, lighter base colors can effectively be combined with dark trim colors (see Figure 25).


[IMAGE]


Figure 24. The use of dark base colors with white trim is encouraged on storefronts.


[IMAGE]


Figure 25. Lighter base colors with dark trim can also be attractive.

K. Respect existing architecture and materials such as tile and brick. These materials may not be appropriate for paint application and should be treated as the background base color theme.


Chapter 19.50 Personal Wireless Service Facilities

19.50.005    User Guide

19.50.010    Purpose

19.50.015    Exemptions

19.50.020    PWSF Locations and Permit Process

19.50.025    Collocation

19.50.030    Design Criteria

19.50.035    Small Wireless Facility Design Criteria

19.50.040    Facility Removal

19.50.045    Application Requirements

19.50.050    Third Party Review

19.50.055    Bonds

19.50.060    Other Wireless Communication Facilities

19.50.065    Conflict

19.50.070    Eligible Facilities Requests

19.50.075    New Structures in the Rights-of-Way and Concealment Element Designs


19.50.005 User Guide.

This Chapter contains a variety of regulations and standards that apply to the use and development of personal wireless service facilities (PWSF). If you are operating or are interested in proposing a PWSF, you should read this Chapter. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 2, 1999]


19.50.010 Purpose.

These standards were developed to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to protect property values and minimize visual impacts while furthering the development of enhanced telecommunication services in Burien. These standards were designed to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services. This Chapter shall not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 3, 1999]


19.50.015 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter and shall be permitted in all zones:

1. Temporary PWSF during an emergency declared by the City;

2. Licensed amateur (ham) radio stations;

3. Satellite dish antennas less than two meters in diameter when located in non-residential zones, and satellite dish antennas less than one meter in diameter when located in residential zones, including direct to home satellite services, when used as an accessory use of the property;

4. PWSF which legally existed or had a vested application on or prior to the effective date of this Chapter; except that this exemption does not apply to modifications of such facilities;

5. Routine maintenance or repair of a PWSF and related equipment (excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, support structures, utility poles or buildings), provided that compliance with the standards of this Code are maintained. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 4, 1999]


19.50.020 PWSF Locations and Permit Process.

1. The following table indicates the hierarchy of locations to be used in reviewing an application for a PWSF. The applicant bears the burden to show that location in a higher priority is not technically feasible. Small wireless facilities not requiring new poles or structures and eligible facilities requests are exempt from this hierarchy requirement and shall follow the permit processes outlined in subsections 3 and 4 of this section and BMC 19.50.070, respectively. Pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(25), some PWSF may require a SEPA Review as part of the review processes outlined below.

	Priority (highest to lowest)	Special Review Process (See Chapter 19.65)	Type of PWSF and Location

	1	None	A. Collocation of antennas on an existing support structure in a non-residential zone.

B. Attachment of antennas to existing structures in the I, CR, CC-1, CC-2, and AI zones.

C. Antennas attached to existing or replacement ball field light standards, electrical transmission towers, water tanks or existing utility poles in any zone, or in any public street.

D. Any PWSF located in the public rights-of-way will require a right-of-way use permit.

E. Any PWSF located outside of the public rights-of-way will require a building permit.

	2	Type 1	A. Attachment of antennas to existing structures (except single detached dwelling units and their accessory structures) in the O, SPA-1, SPA-2, SPA-3, DC, CI, PR, RM and RS zones.

B. New support structures or poles in the public rights-of-way or outside of the public rights-of-way proposed to site new small wireless facilities, provided that the requirements of BMC 19.50.075 are met, except in those public rights-of-way in the DC zone.

	3	Type 2	Any PWSF not listed above, except for the following which are prohibited: lattice towers in all zones, new monopoles and new structures that support small wireless facilities in the DC zone and in public rights-of-way in the DC zone and new monopoles in residential zones.

2. An applicant for a Type 2 review for a PWSF to be located within a residential zone or within 100 feet of a residential zone shall demonstrate that the proposed facility cannot be located in a non-residential zone, or greater than 100 feet from a residential zone and that due to valid considerations including physical constraints, or technological feasibility, no other location is available. The applicant is required to demonstrate that it contacted the landowners or owners of structures in excess of thirty feet (30') in height within a one-quarter mile radius of the proposed site (except single detached dwelling units and their accessory structures), and asked for permission to build the support structure or install the antenna on an existing structure. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the facility, its relationship to other sites in the applicant’s network (within and outside of Burien city limits), and, an evaluation of existing available land, buildings and structures taller than thirty feet (30') within one-quarter mile of the proposed site.

3. Small wireless facilities not requiring new poles or structures and meeting the requirements of this Chapter are permitted in any zone with a right-of-way use permit (if located in the right-of-way) or a building permit (if located outside of the right-of-way).

4. If the applicant is proposing a PWSF located in the public rights-of-way, then the applicant must apply for a franchise. The Director may process the application for a PWSF permit concurrently with an application for a franchise, but any such permit will be conditioned on approval of the franchise by the City Council.

5. To the extent applicable, permits issued under this Chapter 19.50 BMC for PWSF in the public rights-of-way shall comply with the process requirements in Chapter 19.65 BMC except that such decisions are exempt from RCW 36.70B.60 through 36.70B.080 and RCW 36.70B.110 through 36.70B.130. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 529, 2009, Ord. 385 § 1, 2003, Ord. 265 § 5, 1999]


19.50.025 Collocation.

To minimize potential adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of PWSF support structures, collocation of PWSF antennas is encouraged, as follows:

1. Collocation shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. This subsection applies to both new and existing PWSF. The terms and conditions for collocating late-comer providers on PWSF facilities shall be reasonable and based on current market rates for comparable facilities. Imposition of unreasonable or higher than market rate terms and conditions by the host provider shall be considered failure to cooperate in good faith to accommodate collocation with competitors and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 6 of this section.

3. The City may deny an application to construct a new monopole if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has made an effort to mount the proposed antennas on an existing building or support structure that would provide adequate service. The applicant shall use the following collocation protocol:

A. Prior to or with an application for approval of a PWSF, the applicant shall demonstrate that the following notice was mailed via certified mail to all other PWSF providers licensed to provide service within the City:

“Pursuant to the requirements of City of Burien Municipal Code Section 19.50.025, (name of wireless provider) is hereby providing you with notice of our intent to submit an application with the City of Burien for construction of a new freestanding personal wireless service facility that would be located at ________ (location). In general, we plan to construct a monopole of _____ feet in height for the purpose of providing (cellular, PCS, ESMR, etc.) service in the _________ frequency range. Please inform us whether you have any existing or planned personal wireless service facilities within one mile of the proposed facility that may be available for possible collocation. If you do not have a facility available for collocation, please indicate whether you would be interested in collocating on our proposed facility. Please provide us with this information within 10 business days after the date of this letter. Your cooperation is appreciated.”

B. Copies of any responses to the collocation request letter shall be provided to the City prior to or with the PWSF application. If a response to a collocation request letter is received by an applicant indicating an opportunity for collocation, the applicant shall make a good faith effort to analyze the feasibility of collocation. This analysis shall be submitted with an application for any monopole and shall include, at a minimum:

i. A statement from a qualified engineer indicating whether the necessary service can or cannot be provided by collocation at the possible collocation site.

ii. Evidence that the lessor of the possible collocation site either agrees or disagrees to collocation on his/her property.

iii. Evidence that adequate space exists or does not exist at the possible collocation site to accommodate needed equipment and meet the applicable requirements of this Code.

iv. Evidence that adequate access does or does not exist at the possible collocation site.

4. To reduce the number of future support structures needed in the City, new support structures shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.

5. Unless collocation is not feasible, an applicant’s site plan shall reserve an area for at least one other provider’s equipment near the base of the applicant’s monopole. An option agreement to lease the area at the base of the monopole for a second provider shall not expire prior to the underlying lease.

6. Personal wireless service providers, their lessees and agents shall cooperate in good faith to accommodate collocation with competitors, including responding in a timely manner to a collocation letter required by subsection 3 of this section. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of collocating, the Director may require a third party technical study, pursuant to BMC 19.50.050, to resolve the dispute. Failure to accommodate collocation may be grounds for revocation of permit and removal of the PWSF under public nuisance abatement procedures (Chapter 1.15 BMC).

7. Small wireless facilities located within the public rights-of-way are exempt from the collocation requirements of this section. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 265 § 6, 1999]


19.50.030 Design Criteria.

Unless otherwise included, small wireless facilities are exempt from the design criteria of this section.

1. The location and design of PWSF sites shall consider the visual and physical impacts of the facility on the surrounding neighborhood.

2. PWSF shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses and screened or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site and its surroundings.

3. As provided in BMC 19.50.020, new monopoles shall be designed to accommodate collocation, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.

4. Setbacks. The setback requirements in this section apply to PWSFs located outside of the right-of-way and are not subject to a variance (BMC 19.65.085). The Director may waive or reduce the setback requirement for a camouflaged PWSF.

A. All monopoles and all above-ground equipment enclosures shall be set back at least 10 feet from property lines. This setback shall be measured from the closest point of the antenna, monopole and equipment enclosure to the property lines on the lot on which it is located.

B. When located within 100 feet of a residential zone, all monopoles and above-ground equipment enclosures shall be set back from the residential zone boundary 10 feet plus at least one foot for every one foot of height of the antenna and monopole. This setback shall be measured from the closest point of the antenna, monopole and equipment enclosure to the residential zone boundary.

C. Antennas installed on building rooftops shall be set back from the edge of the roof at least one foot for each foot of antenna height as measured from the top of the roof (or parapet, if one exists) to the highest point of the antenna.

D. Small wireless facilities attached to new support structures or poles must comply with these setback requirements.

5. View corridors. PWSF, including small wireless, shall be located and designed to not obstruct or significantly diminish views of Mt. Rainier, Puget Sound or the Cascade or Olympic Mountains from public streets and public property.

6. Height. The height limits in this subsection are not subject to a variance (BMC 19.65.085).

A. PWSF shall not exceed the minimum height required to function satisfactorily.

B. Monopoles shall not exceed: 100 feet in height in the CR and I zones; and 60 feet in height in all other zones where monopoles are allowed; provided, however the height of an existing monopole may exceed these height requirements if such increase does not constitute a substantial change as defined in BMC 19.50.070.

C. Whip antennas located on existing structures shall not be higher than 15 feet above the highest point of the structure. Panel antennas located on existing structures, other than a utility pole, shall not exceed 10 feet above the highest point of the structure.

7. Screening.

A. All PWSF shall be designed and located on a site to take maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation, structures and/or topography to screen as much of the facility as possible from view, and so that the facility blends into the background.

B. The visual impacts of monopoles and ground-mounted equipment enclosures shall be mitigated through installation of a 5’ wide Type I landscape strip around the perimeter of the monopole, equipment enclosure and the outside of the security fence (if any). The City may waive or modify this requirement for those sides of the facility that are not visible from streets or adjacent property.

C. Landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, thriving condition. Landscaped areas shall be irrigated either by an irrigation system, or by regular servicing and irrigation by a landscape maintenance company. In the event that landscaping is not maintained as required, the City after giving thirty (30) days’ advance written notice to the PWSF provider and property owner, may maintain or establish the landscaping. Both the PWSF provider and property owner shall be billed for such costs until the City is paid.

D. Equipment enclosures mounted on a roof shall be screened or have a finish and appearance similar to the exterior building walls.

8. Antennas. The requirements in this subsection are not subject to a variance (BMC 19.65.085).

A. Antennas mounted on buildings. Antennas shall be architecturally compatible with the building and wall on which it is mounted, and shall be designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. Panel antennas shall not be mounted on a pitched rooftop. A wall-mounted antenna shall be as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the wall on which it is mounted. Antennas and any visible mounting brackets and cables shall be constructed, painted, or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted, or otherwise blend into its background. The antennas may be attached to existing conforming or new roof structures allowed pursuant to BMC 19.17.130(1). Antennas shall not project any higher than the roof structure. New roof structures shall be the minimum necessary to achieve the desired outcome and purpose of the building height projection allowed by BMC 19.17.130(1).

B. Antennas mounted on other structures. Antennas shall be integrated into the design of the structure to which they are attached. Antenna platforms are prohibited. External projections from the structure shall be limited to the smallest projection technically feasible.

9. Locating on utility poles. The requirements in this section do not apply to small wireless facilities and are not subject to a variance (BMC 19.65.085). PWSF located on existing or replacement utility poles shall conform to the following design criteria:

A. The utility pole at the proposed location may be replaced with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a PWSF; provided, that the new pole shall not exceed a height that is a maximum of fifteen (15) feet taller than the existing pole;

B. Panel antennas shall not project out from the surface of the utility pole by more than twelve (12) inches or the minimum distance required by the pole owner, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, and shall be placed such that the top of the panel antenna does not extend above the height of the utility pole;

C. A cylindrical antenna may be mounted as an extension on top of an existing utility pole, but the existing pole shall not be replaced with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating the cylindrical antenna. A cylindrical antenna mounted on top of a utility pole shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter and eight (8) feet in height, or the minimum distance required by the pole owner;

D. A whip antenna may be mounted as an extension on top of an existing utility pole, but the existing pole shall not be replaced with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating the whip antenna. A whip antenna mounted on top of a utility pole shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and shall be enclosed within a cylinder that is painted to match the pole, or the minimum distance required by the pole owner;

E. All PWSF, including but not limited to antennas, equipment, cables and conduit which are mounted on utility poles shall be painted to match the pole;

F. The visual effect of the PWSF on all other aspects of the appearance of the utility pole shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible;

G. The use of the utility pole for the siting of a PWSF shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the utility pole. If the primary function of a utility pole serving as the host site for a PWSF becomes unnecessary and any regulation requires its removal, the utility pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the PWSF and the PWSF and all associated equipment shall be removed immediately;

H. Equipment enclosure(s) for PWSF located on utility poles in residential zones shall be located underground, unless an existing building other than a single-family residence, such as a garage, which has been in place for at least one year prior to the date of application, is available to accommodate the equipment enclosure(s). Equipment enclosure(s) which are located underground may be located within the front setback in all zones;

I. In all cases where a utility pole is replaced for the purpose of accommodating a PWSF installation, the cables and other wiring necessary for the PWSF shall be routed inside the new pole, provided such pole is a non-wooden pole. If routing inside the pole is not allowed by the utility and that determination is confirmed in writing by the utility, then all cable, wiring and conduit routed outside the pole shall be painted to match the pole;

J. There is no collocation requirement for PWSF located on utility poles and there shall be no more than one (1) PWSF located on any one utility pole;

K. PWSF located on utility poles shall be located no closer than a quarter mile from any other PWSF (except a small wireless facility) located on a utility pole operated by the same applicant in any zone or within the public rights-of-way within any zone;

L. Any replacement pole shall substantially conform to the design of the pole it is replacing or the neighboring pole design standards utilized in the continuous right-of-way.

10. Special Planning Area 3 (Gateway). All new support structures, including monopoles, and equipment enclosure(s) shall be camouflaged and the applicant shall provide clear and convincing evidence, in a manner as outlined in BMC 19.50.025, that there are no existing support structures which will support the proposed new antennas in the SPA-3 zone.

11. Downtown Commercial Zone. All new antennas in the DC zone shall be located on the following:

A. Any existing support structure which has been in place for at least one year prior to the date of application, or

B. Any building or structure which was not constructed for the sole purpose as a support structure for an antenna.

All new antennas, cables, conduit and equipment enclosure(s), shall be camouflaged to protect pedestrian views in the DC zone. Locating PWSF on utility poles is prohibited in the DC zone and in the public rights-of-way within the DC zone, expect for small wireless facilities located on existing or replacement utility poles.

12. Color. PWSF shall have colors generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility. In the event that the FCC or FAA requires special marking, the City may require the applicant to request dual mode lighting as an alternative to the marking requirement.

13. Lights, signals and signs. No signage, message, or identification other than the manufacturer’s identification or identification required by federal or state law is allowed to be portrayed on any PWSF, including small wireless facilities, and any such signage on equipment enclosures shall be of the minimum amount possible to achieve the intended purpose; provided that, signs are permitted as concealment techniques where appropriate or as otherwise permitted pursuant to BMC 19.50.035.

14. Noise. PWSF, including small wireless facilities, shall comply with applicable State and local noise regulations.

15. Federal requirements. PWSF, including small wireless facilities, providers and lessees shall assure that its facility complies at all times with current Federal standards. Failure to maintain PWSF in compliance with current Federal standards and regulations shall constitute a nuisance.

16. Cumulative effects. Subject to BMC 19.50.070, the City may consider the cumulative visual effects of PWSFs mounted on an existing structure in determining whether additional permits may be granted so as to not adversely affect the visual character of the City. [Ord. 700 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 385 § 1, 2003, Ord. 265 § 7, 1999]


19.50.035 Small Wireless Facility Design Criteria.

In addition to the requirements of this Chapter, except where otherwise specifically excluded, the following design criteria shall apply to small wireless facilities. Applicants desiring the placement of new poles or structures in the right-of-way to support small wireless facilities must comply with the requirements of BMC 19.50.075. In lieu of a variance process, subsection 5 of this section shall apply.

1. Small Wireless Facilities Attached to Wooden Poles.

Small wireless facilities located on wooden poles shall conform to the following design criteria:

A. The wooden pole at the proposed location may be replaced with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a small cell facility; provided, that the replacement pole shall not exceed a height that is a maximum of ten (10) feet taller than the existing pole, unless a further height increase is required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner and that such height extension is the minimum extension possible to provide sufficient separation and/or clearance from electrical and wireline facilities. Replacement wooden poles may either match the approximate color and materials of the replaced pole or shall be the standard new wooden pole used by the pole owner in the city.

B. Panel antennas shall not be mounted more than twelve (12) inches from the surface of the wooden pole or the minimum distance required by the pole owner, and shall be placed such that the top of the panel antenna does not extend above the height of the wooden pole, unless a pole extender is used. Each antenna shall not be more than three (3) cubic feet in volume.

C. A canister antenna may be mounted on top of an existing or replacement wooden pole, which may not exceed the height requirements described in subsection (1)(A) of this section. A canister antenna mounted on top of a wooden pole shall not exceed the diameter of the pole by more than twelve (12) inches measured at the top of the pole. The canister antenna shall be colored or painted to match the pole. The canister antenna must be placed to look as if it is an extension of the pole. In the alternative, the applicant may propose a side mounted canister antenna, so long as the inside edge of the antenna is no more than twelve (12) inches from the surface of the wooden pole. All cables shall be concealed either within the canister antenna or within a sleeve between the antenna and the utility pole.

D. An omni-directional antenna may be mounted on top of an existing or replacement utility pole, provided such antenna is no more than four (4) feet in height and is mounted directly on the top of a pole or attached to a sleeve made to look like the exterior of the pole as close to the top of the pole as technically feasible. All cables shall be concealed within the sleeve between the bottom of the antenna and the mounting bracket.

E. Multiple antennas are permitted on a wooden pole provided that each antenna shall not be more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. Antennas should be placed in an effort to minimize visual clutter and obtrusiveness.

F. All equipment for small wireless facilities, including but not limited to ancillary equipment, radios, cables, associated shrouding, microwaves, and conduit which are mounted on utility poles shall not be mounted more than six (6) inches from the surface of the pole if technically feasible, unless a further distance is required by the pole owner.

G. Equipment for small cell facilities must be attached to the utility pole, unless otherwise permitted to be ground mounted pursuant to subsection (4)(A) of this section. The equipment must be placed in the smallest enclosure possible for the intended purpose. The equipment enclosure and all other wireless equipment associated with the pole, including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the pole, may not exceed twenty-eight (28) cubic feet. Multiple equipment enclosures may be acceptable if designed to more closely integrate with the pole design and does not cumulatively exceed twenty-eight (28) cubic feet. The applicant is encouraged to place the equipment enclosure behind any banners or road signs that may be on the pole, if such banners or road signs are allowed by the pole owner.

H. An applicant who desires to enclose its antennas and equipment within a Unified Enclosure may do so, provided that such Unified Enclosure is the minimum size necessary for its intended purpose and the Unified Enclosure and all other wireless equipment associated with the pole, including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the pole, may not exceed twenty-eight (28) cubic feet. The applicant is encouraged to place the Unified Enclosure behind any banners or road signs that may be on the pole, if such banners or road signs are allowed by the pole owner. The Unified Enclosure may not be placed more than six (6) inches from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is technically required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner.

I. A pole extender may be used instead of replacing an existing pole but may not increase the height of the existing pole by more than ten (10) feet, unless a further height increase is required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner and that such height increase is the minimum extension possible to provide sufficient separation and/or clearance from electrical and wireline facilities. The pole extender shall be painted to approximately match the color of the pole and shall substantially match the diameter of the pole measured at the top of the pole. A “pole extender” as used herein is an object affixed between the utility pole and the antenna for the purpose of increasing the height of the antenna above the pole.

J. Antennas, equipment enclosures, and all ancillary equipment, boxes and conduit shall be colored or painted to match the approximate color of the surface of the utility pole on which they are attached, or consistent with the paint requirements of the pole owner.

K. Cable and wires may be routed through conduit exterior to the pole. The outside conduit shall be colored or painted to match the pole. The number of conduit shall be minimized to the number technically necessary to accommodate the small wireless facility.

L. The visual effect of the small wireless facility on all other aspects of the appearance of the utility pole shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible.

M. The use of the utility pole for the siting of a small cell facility shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the utility pole. If the primary function of a utility pole serving as the host site for a small cell facility becomes unnecessary or any regulation requires its removal, the utility pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the small wireless facility and the small cell facility and all associated equipment shall be removed.

2. Small Wireless Facilities Attached to Non-Wooden Light Poles and Other Non-Wooden Poles.

Small wireless facilities attached to existing or replacement non-wooden light poles and other non-wooden poles in the public rights-of-way or non-wooden poles outside of the public rights-of-way shall conform to the following design criteria:

A. Antennas and the associated equipment enclosures (including disconnect switches and other appurtenant devices) shall be fully concealed within the pole, unless such concealment is otherwise technically infeasible or is incompatible with the pole design, then the antennas and associated equipment enclosures must be camouflaged to appear as an integral part of the pole or flush mounted to the pole in a manner that integrates the antenna(s) and equipment enclosure(s) into the design of the pole and minimizes clutter and visual impact. If an equipment enclosure is permitted on the exterior of the pole, the applicant is encouraged to place the equipment enclosure behind any banners or road signs that may be on the pole. For purposes of this section, “incompatible with the pole design” may include a demonstration by the applicant that the visual impact to the pole or the streetscape would be reduced by placing the antennas and equipment exterior to the pole.

B. All conduit, cables, wires and fiber must be routed internally in the non-wooden pole. Full concealment of all conduit, cables, wires and fiber is required within mounting brackets, shrouds, canisters or sleeves if attaching to exterior antennas or equipment, except for the minimum amount necessary to directly connect to the antennas or equipment.

C. Any replacement pole shall substantially conform to the design of the pole it is replacing or the neighboring pole design standards utilized within the contiguous right-of-way or immediate vicinity.

D. The height of any replacement pole, inclusive of the antenna, may not extend more than ten (10) feet above the height of the existing pole, unless a different height is required by the pole owner due to technical or safety requirements.

E. The diameter of a replacement pole shall comply with the City’s setback and sidewalk clearance requirements, shall not be more than a 25% increase in the diameter of the existing pole measured at the base of the pole, and shall comply with the requirements in subsection 4.F of this section. If additional diameter is needed in order to conceal equipment within the base of the pole, then the applicant shall propose a Concealment Element Design consistent with BMC 19.50.075.3 below. Further, the diameter of the pole must comply with the pole owner’s design requirements.

F. An antenna on top of an existing pole may not extend more than six (6) feet above the height of the existing pole and the diameter may not exceed the diameter of the pole by more than twelve (12) inches, measured at the top of the pole, unless the applicant can demonstrate that more space is technically or aesthetically needed. Antennas on top of a replacement pole may not extend above the height of the replacement pole unless specifically approved by the Director. The antennas shall be integrated into the pole design so that it appears as a continuation of the original pole, including colored or painted to match the pole, and shall be shrouded or screened to blend with the pole except for canister antennas which shall not require screening. All cabling and mounting hardware/brackets from the bottom of the antenna to the top of the pole shall be fully concealed and integrated with the pole.

G. The use of a non-wooden pole for the siting of a small wireless facility shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the non-wooden pole. If the primary function of a non-wooden pole serving as the host site for a small wireless facility becomes unnecessary or any regulation requires its removal, the non-wooden pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the small wireless facility and the small wireless facility and all associated equipment shall be removed.

3. Small Wireless Facilities Attached to Buildings.

Small wireless facilities attached to existing buildings, shall conform to the following design criteria:

A. Small wireless facilities may be mounted to the sides of a building if the antennas do not interrupt the building’s architectural theme.

B. The interruption of architectural lines or horizontal or vertical reveals is discouraged.

C. New architectural features such as columns, pilasters, corbels, or other ornamentation that conceal antennas may be used if they complement the architecture of the existing building.

D. Small wireless facilities shall utilize the smallest mounting brackets necessary in order to provide the smallest offset from the building.

E. Skirts or shrouds shall be utilized on the sides and bottoms of antennas in order to conceal mounting hardware, create a cleaner appearance, and minimize the visual impact of the antennas. Exposed cabling/wiring is prohibited.

F. Small wireless facilities shall be painted or colored and textured to match the adjacent building surfaces.

4. General Requirements.

A. Ground mounted equipment in the rights-of-way is prohibited, unless such facilities are placed underground, or the applicant can demonstrate that pole mounted, or undergrounded equipment is technically infeasible. If ground mounted equipment is necessary, then the applicant shall submit a Concealment Element Design consistent with BMC 19.50.075.3. Generators located in the rights-of-way are prohibited.

B. The design approved in a permit for a small wireless facility shall be considered concealment elements and such facilities may only be expanded upon an Eligible Facilities Request described in BMC 19.50.070 when the modification does not defeat the concealment elements of the small wireless facility.

C. Small wireless facilities may not be placed on traffic signal poles.

D. Small wireless facilities may not be placed on decorative poles, as such poles are identified in the City’s Road Design and Construction Manual.

E. Side arm mounts for antennas or equipment are prohibited.

F. Replacement poles and new poles shall comply with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), City construction and sidewalk clearance standards, city ordinances, and state and federal statutes and regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the rights-of-way. Further, the location of any replacement pole or new pole must: be physically possible, cannot obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the clear zone, not interfere with utility or safety fixtures (e.g., fire hydrants, traffic control devices), and not adversely affect the public welfare, health or safety.

G. Replacement poles shall be located as near as possible but no more than five (5) feet from the location of the existing pole, unless such further distance is required to comply with ADA or other state of federal requirements, with the requirement to remove the abandoned pole.

H. Any replacement pole shall substantially conform to the design of the pole it is replacing or the neighboring pole design standards utilized in the contiguous right-of-way or immediate vicinity.

I. The preferred location of a small wireless facility on a pole is the location with the least visible impact.

J. Antennas, equipment enclosures, and ancillary equipment, conduit and cable, shall not dominate the building or pole upon which they are attached.

K. The City may consider the cumulative visual effects of small wireless facilities mounted on poles within the rights-of-way when assessing proposed siting locations so as to not adversely affect the visual character of the City.

L. Except for locations in the right-of-way, small wireless facilities are not permitted on any property containing a residential use in the residential zones.

M. The design standards in this section are intended to be used solely for the purpose of concealment and siting. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied in a manner that dictates the use of a particular technology, nor prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services.

5. In lieu of a variance process, if the applicant demonstrates to the City’s satisfaction that it is not feasible to site a small wireless facility consistent with the requirements of this Chapter, the City reserves the right to approve such proposed small wireless facilities if a denial would be an effective prohibition in violation of federal or state law, as determined by the City through a Type 1 review process. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


19.50.040 Facility Removal.

1. Prior to issuance of any building or construction permits for a PWSF facility, the property owner shall sign an affidavit agreeing to remove the PWSF at his or her expense pursuant to this section. The form of the affidavit shall be approved by the City Attorney.

2. In the event the use of any support structure or antenna will be discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the owner or operator shall so notify the City in writing, and the support structure or antenna shall thereafter be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City which shall have the right to request documentation and affidavits from the support structure or antenna owner or operator regarding the issue of support structure or antenna usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner or operator of the support structure or antenna or the owner of the property upon which such facility is located shall have an additional sixty (60) days within which to:

A. Reactivate the use of the support structure or antenna or transfer the support structure or antenna to another owner or operator who makes actual use of the support structure or antenna; or

B. Dismantle and remove the support structure or antenna. If such support structure or antenna is not removed within said sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment, the City may remove such support structure or antenna at the facility owner’s and property owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the support structure.

At the earlier of sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, City approval for the support structure or antenna shall automatically expire. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 9, 1999]


19.50.045 Application Requirements.

The City shall either approve or deny a PWSF application within a reasonable period of time (pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC), taking into account the nature and scope of the request and the federal and state time period requirements. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.

A pre-application meeting is encouraged prior to submitting an application for a PWSF. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to discuss the nature of the proposed deployment, review process and schedule, and applicable plans, policies and regulations.

All applications to locate a PWSF, including small wireless facilities, shall be submitted to the City with the applicable requested information (depending upon the type of facility which is involved). A detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this Chapter, and other regulations and ordinances of the City, along with other pertinent information requested by the City shall also be submitted. An applicant’s submission may utilize any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written narratives necessary to convey the following information depending upon the type of facility which is involved:

1. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed support structure, poles with small wireless facilities, antennas, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent streets, proposed means of access, and setbacks from property lines and residential zones. Locational information including GIS coordinates for placement of antennas or small wireless facilities on utility poles if applicable. The City may waive or modify the requirement for a full, detailed site plan if the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure.

2. Scaled elevation drawings of the proposed support structure or pole, and equipment enclosure.

3. Photo simulations of the proposed facility from public rights-of-way, public properties and affected residentially-zoned properties. Photo simulations must include all cable, conduit and/or ground mounted equipment necessary for and intended for use in the deployment regardless of whether the additional facilities are to be constructed by a third party.

4. Legal description of the lot, if applicable.

5. Except for small wireless facilities on existing and replacement poles, approximate distance between the proposed antennas and the nearest residentially zoned property.

6. A landscape plan showing size, type, and location of specific landscape, screening and fencing materials, if applicable.

7. Manufacturer’s information indicating compliance with adopted noise standards.

8. The applicant must show that it has an underlying lease right or other authorization from the owner of the pole or structure for the installation of its PWSF on such pole or structure. For City-owned poles or structures, the applicant must obtain a lease agreement from the City.

9. If the applicant is applying for a small wireless network, the applicant can batch multiple small wireless facilities in one application. The applicant is encouraged to batch the small wireless facilities within an application in a contiguous service area. The City may approve, deny or conditionally approve all or any portion of the small wireless facilities proposed in the application. The denial of one or more small wireless facility locations within one submission shall not be the sole basis for a denial of other locations or the entire application for small wireless facilities.

10. The applicant shall submit a sworn affidavit signed by an RF Engineer with knowledge of the proposed project affirming that the PWSF will be compliant with all FCC and other governmental regulations in connection with human exposure to radio frequency emissions for every frequency at which the PWSF will operate (“Emissions Report”). If facilities necessary to the PWSF are to be provided by a third party, and if such facilities will emit RF emissions, an additional Emissions Report shall address the cumulative impact of the RF emissions and certify compliance with federal requirements. A modification of the facility by an Eligible Facilities Request requires a new RF certification. For small wireless facilities, an applicant may provide one Emissions Report within the same batch of applications if the applicant is using the same small wireless facility configuration for all installations within that batch or may submit one Emissions Report for each subgroup installation identified in the batch.

11. Any application for a PWSF which contains an element which is not exempt from SEPA review shall simultaneously apply under Chapter 43.21C RCW.

12. Any applicant may withdraw an application at any time, provided the withdrawal is in writing and signed by all persons who signed the original application or their successors in interest. When a withdrawal is received, the application shall be deemed null and void. If such withdrawal occurs prior to the Director’s decision, then reimbursement of fees submitted in association with said application shall be prorated to withhold the amount of city costs incurred in processing the application prior to time of withdrawal. If such withdrawal is not accomplished prior to the Director’s decision, there shall be no refund of all or any portion of such fee.

13. Failure of an applicant to provide additional information as requested pursuant to the Director within sixty (60) days of notice by the Director shall be deemed a denial of that application, unless an extension period has been approved by the Director.

14. Such additional information as the City may require to evaluate the proposed PWSF. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 10, 1999]


19.50.050 Third Party Review.

In certain instances there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the PWSF applicant. The City may require such a technical review, to be paid for by the PWSF applicant. The selection of the third party expert will be by mutual agreement between the applicant and the City. Such mutual agreement not to be unreasonably withheld by either party. The third-party expert shall have recognized training and qualifications in the field of radio frequency engineering or structural engineering, as appropriate. The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the personal wireless services, facilities and other matters as described herein, and not a subjective review of the site selection. In particular, but without limitation, the expert shall be entitled to provide a recommendation on the height of the proposed facilities relative to the applicant’s coverage objectives and system design parameters, or the structural requirements for accommodating collocation. Such a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the City or other interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the City may require changes to the application for the PWSF that comply with the recommendations of the expert. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 385 § 1, 2003, Ord. 265 § 11, 1999]


19.50.055 Bonds.

1. Prior to issuance of any construction permits for the proposed PWSF (which includes any new or replacement poles for small wireless facilities), the applicant shall submit a completion bond, or equivalent financial security, equal to 150% of the cost of installation of site improvements associated with the PWSF.

2. Prior to final inspection of the project, the applicant shall submit a landscape maintenance bond, or equivalent financial security, equal to 100% of the cost of the landscaping and irrigation installation. The length of the bond, or equivalent financial security, shall cover the first two growing seasons following installation of the landscaping. The City may waive the bond, or equivalent financial security, requirement if the applicant submits a copy of a valid contract with a landscaper or landscape maintenance firm to maintain and replace the landscaping as required in this section. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 385 § 1, 2003, Ord. 265 § 12, 1999]


19.50.060 Other Wireless Communication Facilities.

All of the provisions of this Chapter, which address personal wireless services and personal wireless service facilities, shall also be deemed to cover other wireless communications facilities (and, in particular, but without limitation, television and AM/FM radio towers) to the maximum extent allowed by law. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 13, 1999]


19.50.065 Conflict.

To the extent that any provisions of this Chapter are inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision of the Zoning Code, Comprehensive Plan or any ordinance or regulation of the City, the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to control. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 265 § 14, 1999]


19.50.070 Eligible Facilities Requests.

1. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to Eligible Facilities Requests only as described in this section and shall not apply throughout this chapter.

A. “Base Station”: A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein nor any equipment associated with a tower. Base Station includes, without limitation:

i. Equipment associated with wireless communications services as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

ii. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems (“DAS”) and small wireless networks).

iii. Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed (with jurisdiction) under this section, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (1)(A)(i) and (ii) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (1)(A)(i) and (ii) of this section.

B. “Collocation”: The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes.

C. “Eligible Facilities Request”: Any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:

i. Collocation of new transmission equipment;

ii. Removal of transmission equipment; or

iii. Replacement of transmission equipment.

D. “Eligible support structure”: Any tower or base station as defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City.

E. “Existing”: A constructed tower or base station is existing if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

F. “Substantial Change”: A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:

i. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater;

ii. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet;

iii. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and Base Stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

iv. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

v. It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

vi. It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified above.

G. “Tower”: Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul and the associated site.

H. “Transmission equipment”: Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

2. Application. The Director shall prepare and make publicly available an application form used to consider whether an application is an Eligible Facilities Request. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification.

3. Qualification as an Eligible Facilities Request. Upon receipt of an application for an Eligible Facilities Request, the Director shall review such application to determine whether the application qualifies as an Eligible Facilities Request.

4. Timeframe for Review. Within sixty (60) days of the date on which an applicant submits an Eligible Facilities Request application, the Director shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by BMC 19.50.035.

5. Tolling of the Time Frame for Review. The sixty (60) day review period begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the Director and the applicant or in cases where the Director determines that the application is incomplete. The timeframe for review of an Eligible Facilities Request is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.

A. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the Director shall provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

B. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the Director’s notice of incompleteness.

C. Following a supplemental submission, the Director will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this subsection. Second or subsequent notice of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

6. Determination That Application Is Not an Eligible Facilities Request. If the Director determines that the applicant’s request does not qualify as an Eligible Facilities Request, the Director shall deny the application.

7. Failure to Act. In the event the Director fails to approve or deny a request for an Eligible Facilities Request within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the applicant notifies the Director in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


19.50.075 New Structures in the Rights-of-Way and Concealment Element Designs.

This section applies to all small wireless facilities requiring new support structures or poles in the public rights-of-way.

1. New support structures or poles in the public rights-of-way are permitted only when the applicant establishes that the following pursuant to a Type 1 process:

A. The proposed small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing utility pole, light pole, electrical transmission tower or on a site outside of the public rights-of-way such as a public park, public property, parking lot pole or in or on a non-residential use in a residential zone whether by roof or panel-mount or separate structure; and

B. The proposed small wireless facility receives approval for a Concealment Element Design; and

C. The proposed small wireless facility also complies with shoreline, critical areas requirements, and SEPA, if applicable; and

D. The location of the small wireless facility is physically possible, does not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the clear zone, complies with ADA and city construction and sidewalk clearance standards and state and federal regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the rights-of-way, does not interfere with utility or safety fixtures (e.g., fire hydrants, traffic control devices), and does not adversely affect the public welfare, health or safety.

2. The applicant shall show that the proposed small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing structure pursuant to subsection (1)(A) of this section due to valid considerations including but not limited to physical constraints and technological feasibility. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the facility, its relationship to other sites in the applicant’s network (within and outside of Burien City limits), and, an evaluation of existing available land, buildings and appropriate structures within 500 feet of the proposed site.

3. The Concealment Element Design shall include the design of the screening, fencing or other concealment technology for a base station, structure, tower, utility pole, or equipment structure, and all related transmission equipment or facilities associated with the proposed small wireless facility, including but not limited to fiber and power connections.

A. The Concealment Element Design should seek to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of small wireless installations. For small wireless facilities, the proposed utility pole or structure should have similar designs to existing neighboring poles in the public rights-of-way, including to the extent technically feasible similar height and if neighboring poles are decorative, they shall mimic the design of the decorative poles. Other concealment methods include, but are not limited to, integrating the installation with architectural features or building design components, utilization of coverings or concealment devices of similar material, color and texture — or the appearance thereof — as the surface against which the installation will be seen or on which it will be installed, landscape design, or other camouflage strategies appropriate for the type of installation. Applicants are required to utilize designs in which all wirelines and conduit are installed internally in the structure. If evaluating concealment strategies for ground mounted equipment, the applicant is encouraged to use concealment techniques such as benches, kiosks, trash cans, planters, and other items which may be considered public amenities.

B. If the Director has already approved a Concealment Element Design either for the applicant or another small wireless facility along the same public street or the same pole type, then the applicant shall utilize a substantially similar Concealment Element Design, unless it can show that such Concealment Element Design is not physically or technologically feasible, or that such deployment would overwhelm the pole design.

C. Any proposed new poles shall not be more than ten (10) feet above the existing poles on the same public street.

4. Even if an alternative location is established pursuant to subsection (1)(A) of this section, the City may determine, pursuant to a Type 1 process, that a new pole in the public rights-of-way is in fact a superior alternative based on the impact to the City, the Concealment Element Design, the City’s Comprehensive Plan and the added benefits to the community.

5. Prior to the issuance of a permit to construct a new structure or pole in the public street, the applicant must obtain a site-specific agreement to locate such new structure or pole. This requirement also applies to replacement structures when the replacement structure is higher than the replaced structure, and the overall height of the replacement structure and the proposed small wireless facility is more than sixty feet. [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018]


Chapter 19.55 Non-Conformance

19.55.005    User guide

19.55.010    Purpose

19.55.015    General

19.55.020    Abatement of illegal uses, structures or site improvements

19.55.025    Nonconforming and continuing uses

19.55.030    Nonconforming structures

19.55.035    Nonconforming site improvements


19.55.005 User Guide

This chapter establishes when and under what circumstances nonconforming aspects of a use, structure or site improvement must be brought into conformance with this Code. You need to consult the provisions of this chapter only if there is some aspect of a use, structure or site improvement that is not permitted or does not comply with this Code. [Ord. 268 § 2, 1999]


19.55.010 Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to establish the legal status of a nonconformance by creating provisions through which a nonconformance may be maintained, altered, reconstructed, expanded or terminated. [Ord. 268 § 3, 1999]


19.55.015 General

1. This chapter applies to any use, structure or site improvement that does not conform to this Code as adopted or as amended.

2. If a use, structure or site improvement conformed to the applicable Zoning Code in effect at the time the use, structure or site improvement was constructed or initiated, that use, structure or site improvement may continue and need not be brought into conformance with this Code unless a provision of this Chapter requires conformance.

3. No nonconformance may in any way be enlarged, expanded, increased, intensified, compounded or made greater, except as permitted in this chapter. If a use, structure or site improvement is on or within 100 feet of any critical area, the provisions of BMC Chapter 19.40 apply.

4. The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or relieve a property owner from compliance with:

A. The requirements of the City of Burien Construction Code; or

B. The provisions of this Code beyond the specific nonconformance addressed by this chapter.

5. Any valid conditional use, variance, or permit approved under BMC Chapter 19.65 prior to the date that the use, structure or site improvement became non-conforming shall be permitted to continue in accordance with such approval.

6. If this Code requires that a use or structure be reviewed by any of the processes described in BMC Chapter 19.65, a proposal for expansion or modification of an existing use, structure or site improvement shall also be reviewed pursuant to such process if:

A. The area devoted to the use and/or structure is expanded by more than 10 percent; or

B. The Director determines that the change or alteration will have significantly more or different impact on the surrounding area than does the present development. In determining impact, the Director shall consider the scale of the proposed expansion or modification, and expected changes to traffic, noise, hours of operation, and parking. [Ord. 268 § 4, 1999]


19.55.020 Abatement of illegal uses, structures or sites

Any use, structure or site improvement that did not comply with the Zoning Code requirements in effect at the time it was established or constructed, and does not comply with this Code as now or hereafter amended, is illegal and shall be discontinued, terminated or brought into conformance with the provisions of this Code as now or hereafter amended. [Ord. 268 § 5, 1999]


19.55.025 Nonconforming and continuing uses

A nonconforming or continuing use may be continued and is transferable to a new owner or tenant, subject to the following conditions:

1. If a use is a nonconforming or continuing use, the applicable use zone chart in BMC Chapter 19.15 does not establish what regulations of this Code apply to that use in that zone. To determine which regulations apply, the Director will select the use in that zone that is most similar to the nonconforming or continuing use.

2. The following applies only to a continuing use:

A. The gross floor area and the area devoted to outdoor use, activity or storage may be expanded under the following conditions:

i. Such expansion shall comply with applicable development regulations in BMC Chapter 19.15 (including but not limited to setbacks and landscaping); and

ii. Expansion may occur on contiguous lots if on November 1, 1999, the continuing use and contiguous lot were owned by the same property owner and have remained joined through any ownership transfer.

B. A continuing use must be brought into conformance or discontinued if the use has ceased for 12 or more consecutive months.

3. Except as authorized in BMC 19.55.025.4 or .5, any nonconforming use that does not qualify as a continuing use under BMC 19.55.025.2 must be brought into conformance or discontinued if:

A. The applicant is increasing the gross floor area of any structure that houses or supports the nonconforming use; or

B. The applicant is increasing the area devoted to outdoor use, activity or storage associated with the nonconforming use; or

C. The nonconforming use has ceased for 12 or more consecutive months;

4. The Director, through a Type 1 review, may allow up to a 10 percent increase in the area of land or structure occupied by the nonconforming use on the date of adoption of this Code, or any subsequent amendments. In deciding whether to grant such request, the Director shall use the criteria in BMC 19.55.025.5.

5. The City Council, through the Type 3 review process, may modify or waive any of the provisions in BMC 19.55.025.2 or 3, based on a finding that the proposal:

A. Does not create an expansion that would be detrimental to adjacent properties; and

B. Improves aspects of safety or function of the nonconformance. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 268 § 6, 1999]


19.55.030 Nonconforming structures

A nonconforming structure may remain and be used, provided that:

1. A nonconforming structure shall not be expanded unless the expansion conforms to the regulations of this Code or as follows:

A. A structure in an RS or RM zone with nonconforming setbacks may extend horizontally and vertically along existing building setbacks (see Figure 19.55-1) if the proposed expansion:

i. Will not endanger public safety; and

ii. Will not interfere with adopted City plans or regulations requiring additional right-of-way width; and

iii. Is not an expansion of a setback previously authorized by a City of Burien variance process or Type 1, 2, or 3 land use review. In this case, a new variance or Type 1, 2 or 3 land use review application is required; and

iv. Will not create any new nonconformance in height or setback.

B. An increase in nonconforming building coverage and/or impervious surface coverage is permitted when each new square foot of impervious surface is offset by a reduction of two square feet of existing impervious surface, or until the site is in conformance with the current requirements for the maximum allowed impervious surface coverage.

2. If moved, the structure shall be made to conform to this Code;

3. If the structure is damaged or destroyed, it may be reconstructed or repaired provided that:

A. The fire or other casualty was not intentionally caused by the applicant or owner of the structure; and

B. The damage or destruction was not due to abatement or voluntary demolition beyond 50% of the assessed value of the nonconforming structure as established by the most current county assessor’s tax roll; and [Ord. 523 § 1, 2009]

C. Except as allowed in BMC 19.55.030.1, the extent of the previously existing nonconformance is not increased and a new nonconformance is not created; and

D. A complete building permit application for repair or reconstruction is submitted within 12 months of the occurrence of the damage or destruction; and

E. Construction conforms with the provisions of the City of Burien Construction Code in effect at the time when the complete building permit application is submitted.

4. The City Council, through the Type 3 review process, may modify or waive any of the provisions in Sec. 19.55.030.1 through 3 above, based on a finding that the proposal:

A. Does not create an expansion that would be detrimental to adjacent properties; and

B. Improves aspects of safety or function of the nonconformance.

5. Any nonconforming structure for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Code as now or hereafter amended, may be completed and used in accordance with the provisions of this Code as now or hereafter amended, provided that such structure is completed essentially in accordance with the plans and specifications on which the building permit was issued. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 268 § 7, 1999]


19.55.035 Nonconforming site improvements

A nonconforming site improvement shall be made conforming if:

1. The structure or use associated with the nonconforming site improvement is enlarged or expanded;

2. The use associated with the nonconforming site improvement changes to a new use that requires different and greater site improvements. For example, if a new use requires more parking under this Code than the old use, then the additional parking stalls required for the new use must be provided.

3. The structure associated with the nonconforming site improvement is damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty, and the valuation of the damage exceeds 50 percent of the current King County assessment value for the land and improvements, as determined by BMC Title 15 (definition of valuation);

4. The Director may modify or waive any of the provisions in Sec. 19.55.035.1 through 3 above, based on a written finding that the proposal:

A. Would not be detrimental to adjacent properties; and

B. Complies with the purpose and intent of the site improvement that is nonconforming;

The Director’s decision may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner using the appeal process established for an appeal of a Type 1 decision.

5. Any nonconforming site improvement for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Code, may be completed and used in accordance with the provisions of this Code, as amended, provided that the site improvement construction is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications on which the building permit was issued. [Ord. 268 § 8, 1999]



FIGURE 19.55-1
[IMAGE]



Chapter 19.65 Procedures 

19.65.010    User Guide 

19.65.015    Purpose and Scope

19.65.017    Exemptions

19.65.020    Framework for Decisions

19.65.025    Pre-application Meeting

19.65.030    Applications

19.65.035    Notice of Complete Application

19.65.040    Notice of Application

19.65.045    Notice of Open Record Predecision Hearing

19.65.050    Project Timelines

19.65.055    Notice of Decision

19.65.057    Modification of Decision

19.65.060    Judicial Appeal

19.65.063    Expiration of Approvals

19.65.065    Type 1 Decisions

19.65.070    Type 2 Decisions

19.65.075    Type 3 Decisions

19.65.080    Type 4 Decisions

19.65.085    Variances

19.65.090    Rezones

19.65.095    Comprehensive Plan Amendments

19.65.100    Zoning Code Amendments

19.65.105    Administrative Design Review

19.65.110    Repealed


19.65.010 User guide. 

Various places in this Code indicate that certain developments, activities, permits or uses are permitted only if approved through a Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 review process. If you are interested in obtaining approval for something requiring a Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 decision, you should read this chapter. In general, sections .020 through .063 apply to all Type 1, 2 and 3 reviews. Sections .065 through .080 apply, as applicable, to Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 reviews. Section .085 applies to requests for variance of certain provisions of this Code, which is a Type 1 decision. Section .090 applies to rezoning of land (changing the City’s zoning map), which is a Type 3 or Type 4 decision. Section .095 applies to changing the text or map of the City’s Comprehensive Plan, which is a Type 4 decision. Section .100 applies to changing the text of the City’s Zoning Code, which is a Type 4 decision. Section .105 applies to administrative design review, which is either an administrative or Type 1 decision.

For shoreline developments, additional procedures may apply. See Chapter 20.35 BMC, Administration and Shoreline Permit Procedures. [Ord. 706 § 1, 2019; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 479 §1, 2007, Ord. 396 §1, 2003]


19.65.015 Purpose and scope.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard procedures for Type 1, 2, 3 and 4 decisions made by the City of Burien. The procedures are designed to promote timely and informed public participation, eliminate redundancy in the application, permit review and appeal processes, minimize delay and expense, and result in development approvals that further City goals and policies as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. As required by RCW 36.70B.060, these procedures provide for an integrated and consolidated land use permit process. The procedures integrate the environmental review process with the procedures for review of land use decisions and provide for the consolidation of appeal processes for land use decisions. This chapter also provides review procedures and criteria for variances, rezones, Comprehensive Plan amendments, Zoning Code amendments, and administrative design review. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007, Ord. 396 §1, 2003]


19.65.017 Exemptions.

1. The following permits and approvals are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter and from RCW 36.70B.060 through 36.70B.080 and RCW 36.70B.110 through 36.70B.130: landmark designations, street vacations, street use permits and right-of-way permits, and other permits or approvals to use, vacate or transfer streets, public rights-of-way, parks and similar types of public property.

2. The following permits and approvals are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter and from RCW 36.70B.060 and RCW 36.70B.110 through 36.70B.130: building and other construction permits, lot line adjustments, final plats, or similar administrative approvals categorically exempt from SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 14.10 BMC). [Ord. 700 § 1, 2018; Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.65.020 Framework for decisions.

1. Land use decisions are classified into three processes (Types 1, 2 and 3) based on who makes the decision, the amount of discretion exercised by the decision maker, the level of impact associated with the decision, the amount and type of public input sought, and the type of appeal opportunity. The Director shall determine the proper procedure for all land use decisions. If there is a question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher numbered procedure. An application involving two or more decisions shall be processed collectively under the highest numbered procedure required for any of the requested applications.

2. SEPA threshold determinations shall be processed as outlined in Chapter 14.10 BMC.

3. Type 1 decisions are administrative decisions made by the Director. Type 2 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the Hearing Examiner following a recommendation by the Director and an open record hearing. Type 3 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the City Council based on an open record hearing and recommendation by the Hearing Examiner. See Table 19.65.020-1 for a summary of these processes.

4. Type 4 decisions are not land use decisions, but are legislative non-project decisions. Type 4 decisions are made by the City Council following a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission, under its authority to establish policies and regulations regarding future private and public development and management of public lands. See Table 19.65.020-1 for a summary of the Type 4 process.



 

TABLE 19.65.020-1 

	 	LAND USE DECISIONS	LEGISLATIVE DECISION

	 	Type 1 (see BMC 19.65.065)	Type 2 (see BMC 19.65.070)	Type 3 (see BMC 19.65.075)	Type 4 (see BMC 19.65.080)

	Public hearing held by:	None	Hearing Examiner (Open Record Hearing)	Hearing Examiner (Open Record Hearing)	Planning Commission

	Decisionmaker:	Director	Hearing Examiner	City Council (Closed Record Hearing or Meeting)	City Council

	City appeal heard by:	Hearing Examiner (Open Record Appeal)	City Council (Closed Record Appeal)	None	None

	State appeal heard by:*	Superior Court	Superior Court	Superior Court	Growth Management Hearings Board

* – Shoreline management permits must first be appealed to State Shorelines Hearing Board.

[Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.025 Pre-application meeting.

1. A pre-application meeting is required prior to submitting an application for Type 1, 2 and 3 decisions and is strongly encouraged for other decisions. The purpose of a pre-application meeting is to discuss the nature of the proposed development, application and permit requirements, fees, review process and schedule, and applicable plans, policies and regulations. Upon written request from the applicant, the Director may waive the pre-application meeting for a minor project or if the applicant is familiar with City requirements and procedures.

2. The request for a pre-application meeting shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development on an application form provided by the Department of Community Development. The information requested on the form must be completed and all information submitted prior to the Department scheduling the meeting.


19.65.030 Applications.

1. Who may apply.

A. The applicant may apply for any Type 1, 2, or 3 decision.

B. A property owner may apply for a Type 4 rezone of his or her property.

C. The City Council, Planning Commission or the Director of any City department may initiate a Type 4 decision.

D. Any person may request an interpretation of the Zoning or Subdivision Code. In addition, the Director may issue interpretations of the Zoning or Subdivision Codes.

2. Submittal requirements. The Director shall prepare written submittal requirements, including type, detail, and number of copies for an application to be complete. The Director may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of an application. The Director may require additional material such as maps, studies, or models when the Director determines such material is needed to adequately assess the proposed project.


19.65.035 Notice of Complete Application.

1. Within 28 calendar days after receiving an application for a Type 1, 2 or 3 decision, the Director shall provide to the applicant a written determination that the application is complete, or that the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete. If the Director does not provide a written determination within the 28 calendar days, the application shall be deemed complete as of the end of the 28th calendar day.

2. If the additional information requested by the Director is not fully submitted within 90 calendar days, the application shall be considered withdrawn and any unspent filing fees shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant may submit a written request for extension of this deadline. The Director may grant such extension, if the applicant is actively working on obtaining the requested information, and such extension is in the interests of the City.

3. Within 14 calendar days after receiving any additional information needed to make the application complete, the Director shall provide to the applicant a written determination that the application is complete, or that the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

4. A permit application is complete for the purposes of this Section when it meets the submittal requirements established by the Director in Section 19.65.030.2, even though additional information may be required or subsequent project modifications may occur. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the Director from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the determination of completeness or later, if new information is required to complete review of the application or substantial changes in the permit application are proposed.


19.65.040 Notice of Application.

1. Time Frame for Issuance of Notice of Application. Within 14 calendar days after the City has made a determination of completeness of a Type 1, 2 or 3 application, the City shall issue a notice of application in the manner described in this section. If any open record predecision hearing is required for the requested decision(s), the notice of application shall be provided at least 14 days prior to the open record hearing.

2. Contents. The notice of application shall contain at least the following information:

A. The date of application, the date of the notice of completion for the application and the date of the notice of application;

B. A description of the proposed application, a list of the project permits included in the application and, if applicable, a list of any studies requested under RCW 36.70B.070;

C. The identification of other permits not included in the application, to the extent known by the City;

D. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project, and, if not otherwise stated on the document providing notice of application, the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

E. A statement of the limits of the public comment period. The comment period for all applications subject to review under this section is 21 calendar days beginning on the day following the date of notice of application;

F. A statement of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights;

G. The date, time, place and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled at the date of notice of the application;

H. A statement of the preliminary determination of consistency, if one has been made at the time of notice, and of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and consistency.

I. If the City is using the optional DNS process (WAC 197-11-355), additional information shall be added to the notice as required by WAC 197-11-355(2).

J. Any other information determined appropriate by the City, such as the City’s likely threshold determination, if complete at the time of issuance of the notice of application.

3. Distribution. A notice of application shall be distributed as follows:

A. Mailed via first class mail to agencies with jurisdiction and property owners of record within 500 feet of the subject property.

B. Posted on one or more notice boards on or near the subject property, and on the notice board at City Hall. The Director shall establish standards for size, color, layout, design, wording and placement of the signs and notice boards.

C. Published in the City’s official newspaper.

4. Public Comments. Public comments on the notice of application must be received in the Department of Community Development by 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered, sent by facsimile or sent by e-mail as indicated on the Notice of Application. Comments should be as specific as possible.

5. Issuance of a Decision or Recommendation. Except for a determination of significance, the City may not issue its SEPA threshold determination or issue a decision or recommendation on a Type 1, 2 or 3 application until the expiration of the public comment period on the notice of application.


19.65.045 Notice of Open Record Predecision Hearing.

1. Contents. If an open record predecision hearing is required, the Director shall prepare a notice of the hearing containing at least the following information:

A. The name of the applicant and, if applicable, the project name;

B. The street address of the site, or if not available, a locational description on non-legal language along with a vicinity map that identifies the site;

C. A brief description of the requested permit application;

D. The date, time and place of the hearing;

E. The location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

F. A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments or testimony to the hearing body and to appear at the public hearing to give comments or testimony orally;

G. A statement that only persons who submit written or oral comments or testimony prior to the close of the hearing record may appeal the decision (if applicable).

2. Distribution. At least 14 days prior to the hearing, a notice of open record predecision hearing shall be distributed as follows:

A. Mailed via first class mail to property owners of record within 500 feet of the subject property, and parties of record that submitted written comments or testimony in response to the Notice of Application.

B. Posted on one or more notice boards on or near the subject property, and on the notice board at City Hall. The Director shall establish standards for size, color, layout, design, wording and placement of the signs and notice boards.

C. Published in the City’s official newspaper. [Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.65.050 Project Timelines.

Director shall establish reasonable and predictable timelines for review of land use applications and shall provide target dates for decisions on such applications. For purposes of calculating timelines and counting days of permit processing, the applicable time period shall begin on the first working day following the date the application is determined to be complete and shall only include the time during which the City can proceed with review of the application. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.055 Notice of Decision.

When a decision is made to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Type 1, 2 or 3 application, the Director shall provide notice of the decision to the applicant, parties of record and the King County Assessor’s Office. The notice of decision shall, at a minimum, contain the following elements:

1. The name of the applicant and, if applicable, the project name;

2. The street address of the site, or if not available, a locational description in non-legal language;

3. A brief description of the requested permit application;

4. A statement of the Director, Hearing Examiner or City Council’s (whichever is applicable) decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application;

5. The date of the decision and the date on which the Notice of Decision was distributed;

6. A statement that affected property owners may request a change in valuation for property tax purposes notwithstanding any program of revaluation.

7. A statement describing the process for appealing the decision and the deadline for filing of an appeal.


19.65.057 Modification of Decision.

The Director may approve a proposal for modification of a specific use or site plan approved through this chapter if:

1. The proposed modification does not violate specific conditions of approval or applicable codes and ordinances; and either

A. The area devoted to the use and/or structure is expanded by 10 percent or less above the amount approved in the Type 1, 2 or 3 review process; or

B. The Director determines that the change or alteration will not have significantly more or different impact on the surrounding area than does the present development. In determining impact, the Director shall consider the scale of the proposed expansion or modification, and expected changes to traffic, noise, hours of operation, and parking. [Ord. 479 §1, 2007]


19.65.060 Judicial Appeal.

1. A final City decision on a Type 1, 2 or 3 application, except for shoreline permits, may be appealed to Superior Court by filing a land use petition meeting the requirements set forth in Chapter 36.70C RCW. The petition must be filed and served upon all necessary parties as set forth in state law and within the 21-day time period as set forth in RCW 36.70C.040. Requirements for fully exhausting City administrative appeal opportunities must be fulfilled. An appeal of a Shoreline Substantial Development Permit, a Shoreline Conditional Use Permit, or a Shoreline Variance shall be to the State Shoreline Hearings Board and shall be filed within 21 days as set forth in RCW 90.58.180.

2. A final City action on a legislative Type 4 decision may be appealed to the Growth Management Hearings Board as set forth in BMC 19.65.080.8 and RCW 36.70A.290.


19.65.063 Expiration of Approvals.

Approval of a Type 1, 2 or 3 application shall expire two years from the date of the City’s final decision on the Type 1, 2 or 3 application, unless one of the following actions occurs prior to the end of the two year term:

1. A complete building permit application is filed. If the building permit application expires, is canceled or withdrawn within the two-year term, the applicant may re-apply for the building permit within the two-year term without the Type 1, 2 or 3 approval expiring. If the building permit application expires, is canceled or withdrawn after the end of the two-year term, it cannot be re-submitted or renewed, and a new Type 1, 2 or 3 application must be filed.

2. If 19.65.063.1 is not applicable, the applicant must begin construction authorized by the Type 1, 2 or 3 approval.

3. If 19.65.063.1 and 2 are not applicable, the applicant must begin the use of land authorized by the Type 1, 2 or 3 approval.

4. For approvals specifically allowing phased construction, the two-year term may be extended as part of the findings, conclusions and conditions of the approval.

5. Extensions. The applicant may apply to the Director for a one-time extension of up to one year, to the two year expiration period. The applicant shall submit a letter demonstrating that substantial progress is being made toward developing the site consistent with the land use decision, and that circumstances beyond his/her control prevent compliance with the two year expiration period. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 313 §1, 2000]


19.65.065 Type 1 Decisions

1. General. A Type 1 decision is an administrative decision made by the Director, based upon the decision criteria set forth in the Code for each type of Type 1 application. City processing of a Type 1 application begins with a determination of completeness (BMC 19.65.035). Once the application is determined to be complete, the City issues public notice in the form of a Notice of Application (BMC 19.65.040). An informational meeting may be required for projects which may be controversial. After the 21-day public comment period ends, the City issues a SEPA threshold determination, if required. The threshold determination may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s decision on the application. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the EIS must be completed prior to issuance of the Director’s decision. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal must be resolved prior to issuance of the Director’s decision. The Director’s decision is appealable to the Hearing Examiner (BMC 19.65.065.5). The Director’s decision, or, if appealed, the Hearing Examiner’s action on the appeal is the final City decision on a Type 1 application.

2. State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). If required by the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), a threshold determination will be issued by the Responsible Official. The threshold determination is also a Type 1 decision and may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s decision on the underlying land use decision. However, if an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the threshold determination will be issued early and the EIS will be completed prior to issuance of the underlying land use decision. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal must be resolved prior to the issuance of the land use decision.

3. Public Meetings. The Director may require the applicant to sponsor and participate in a public meeting to inform citizens about a proposal. When required, public meetings shall be held as early in the review process as possible. Notice of the public meeting shall be provided in the same manner as required for the notice of application. The public meeting notice should be combined with the notice of application whenever possible.

4. Director’s Decision.

A. Criteria for Decision. The Director shall use the criteria listed in the provision of this Code describing the requested use or decision in deciding upon the application. In addition, the Director may approve the application only if:

i. It is consistent with all applicable development regulations and, to the extent there is no applicable development regulation, the Comprehensive Plan; and

ii. It is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone in which the site is located; and

ii. It is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.

B. Decision. The Director shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny an application. The Director’s decision shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA. The applicant carries the burden of proof that a preponderance of the evidence supports approval of the application or approval with conditions or modifications.

C. Written Decision. The Director shall distribute a written report supporting the decision. The report shall contain all of the following:

i. The Director’s decision;

ii. Any conditions included as part of the decision;

iii. Findings of fact upon which the decision, including any conditions, was based and the conclusions derived from those facts;

iv. A statement explaining the appeal process.

5. Appeal of Type 1 Decisions.

A. Parties of record may appeal the decision by filing a written statement setting forth:

i. Facts demonstrating that the person is adversely affected by the decision;

ii. A concise statement identifying the specific findings of fact or conclusions which are being appealed;

iii. The specific relief requested; and

iv. Any other information reasonably necessary to make a decision on the appeal.

B. The written statement of appeal and appeal fee, if any, must be received by the City Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 14th day after issuance of the Notice of Decision; except that if the Director’s decision is consolidated with a threshold Determination of Non-significance under the State Environmental Policy Act for which a comment period pursuant to WAC 197-11-340 must be provided, the appeal period for the consolidated decision shall be 21 days.

6. Notice of Appeal Hearing. If a Type 1 decision is appealed, an open record appeal hearing before the Hearing Examiner shall be set and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all parties of record by the Director. Notice shall be mailed no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain the following items, at a minimum:

A. Appellant name and project name (if applicable)

B. The street address of the subject property or a description in non-legal terms of the property’s location.

C. A brief description of the decision of the Director which is being appealed.

D. A statement of the scope of the appeal including a summary of the specific errors alleged in the letter of appeal.

E. The date, time and place of the appeal hearing before the Hearing Examiner.

7. Staff Report on the Appeal. The Director shall prepare a staff report analyzing the specific elements of the Director’s decision disputed in the letter of appeal. At least seven (7) calendar days before the hearing, the Director shall distribute copies of the staff report to the Hearing Examiner and all parties of record.

8. Hearing Examiner Hearing on Appeal. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct an open record appeal hearing on a Type 1 appeal. The scope of the appeal is limited to the specific elements of the Director’s decision disputed in the letter of appeal, and the Hearing Examiner may only consider comments, testimony and arguments on these specific elements. Only parties of record may participate in the appeal. These persons may participate in either or both of the following ways:

A. By submitting written comments or testimony to the Hearing Examiner prior to the hearing.

B. By appearing in person, or through a representative, at the hearing and submitting written or oral testimony directly to the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner may reasonably limit the extent of the oral testimony to facilitate the orderly and timely conduct of the hearing.

9. Hearing Examiner Decision on Appeal.

A. Criteria. The Hearing Examiner may grant the appeal or grant the appeal with modifications if the appellant has carried the burden of proof and the Hearing Examiner finds the decision of the Director is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence. In all other cases, the appeal shall be denied. The Hearing Examiner shall accord substantial weight to the decision of the Director and SEPA Responsible Official.

B. Conditions. The Hearing Examiner may impose conditions as part of the granting of an appeal or granting of an appeal with modifications to ensure conformance with the criteria under which the application was made.

C. Findings. The Hearing Examiner shall adopt findings and conclusions which support its decision on the appeal.

10. Time Period to Complete Appeal Process. The Hearing Examiner’s decision on a Type 1 appeal shall be issued within 90 days from the date the original administrative appeal period closed, unless all parties to an appeal have agreed to an extended time period.

11. Effect of Decision. Type 1 decisions of the Director and SEPA threshold determinations are final decisions, effective on the day following the expiration of any associated administrative appeal period. If an administrative appeal is filed, the decision is not final until the appeal is heard and decided by the Hearing Examiner. The Director’s decision, or Hearing Examiner’s decision on appeal, is the City’s final decision on the application.

12. Appeal to Superior Court. A final decision by the Hearing Examiner on a Type 1 appeal may be appealed to Superior Court as set forth in BMC 19.65.060.1. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 269 §28, 1999]


19.65.070 Type 2 Decisions

1. General. A Type 2 land use decision is a quasi-judicial decision made by the Hearing Examiner, following a recommendation by the Director, and is based upon the decision criteria set forth in the Code for each type of Type 2 application. City processing of a Type 2 application begins with a determination of completeness (BMC 19.65.035). Once the application is determined to be complete, the City issues public notice in the form of a Notice of Application (BMC 19.65.040). An informational meeting may be required for projects which may be controversial. After the 21-day public comment period ends, the City issues a SEPA threshold determination, if required. The threshold determination may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s recommendation on the application. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the EIS must be completed prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal will also be resolved prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation.

Following issuance of the Director’s recommendation, an open record hearing will be held by the Hearing Examiner. If a SEPA Determination of Non Significance (DNS) was issued and an appeal of the DNS was filed, the appeal hearing on the DNS will be combined with the public hearing on the Director’s recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Hearing Examiner will issue a written report which approves, approves with modification, or denies the application.

The Hearing Examiner’s decision on the Type 2 application is appealable to the City Council. The Hearing Examiner’s decision, or if appealed, the City Council action on the appeal is the final City decision on a Type 2 application.

2. State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

A. If required by the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and Chapter 14.10 BMC, a threshold determination will be issued by the Responsible Official. The threshold determination is a Type 1 decision and may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s recommendation on the underlying land use decision.

B. An appeal of a threshold determination authorized by Chapter 14.10 BMC shall be consolidated with the Hearing Examiner’s hearing on the underlying land use application. The Hearing Examiner’s decision on the SEPA appeal is the City’s final action related to SEPA.

C. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the threshold determination will be issued early and the EIS will be completed prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal must be resolved prior to the issuance of the Director’s recommendation.

3. Public Meetings. The Director may require the applicant to sponsor and participate in a public meeting to inform citizens about a proposal. When required, public meetings shall be held as early in the review process as possible. Notice of the public meeting shall be provided in the same manner as required for the notice of application. The public meeting notice will be combined with the notice of application whenever possible.

4. Director’s Recommendation. The Director shall prepare a written recommendation to the Hearing Examiner for approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or for denial of the application. The Director’s recommendation shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA.

5. Hearing Examiner Public Hearing.

A. Participation in Hearing/Parties of Record. Any person may participate in the Hearing Examiner open record hearing and become a party of record by submitting written comments to the Director prior to the hearing or by submitting written or oral comments at the hearing.

B. Hearing Record. The Hearing Examiner shall create a complete record of the public hearing including all exhibits introduced at the hearing and an electronic sound recording of each hearing.

6. Hearing Examiner Decision.

A. Criteria for Decision. The Hearing Examiner shall use the criteria listed in the provision of this Code describing the requested use or decision in deciding upon the application. In addition, the Hearing Examiner may approve the application only if:

i. It is consistent with all applicable development regulations and, to the extent there is no applicable development regulation, the Comprehensive Plan; and

ii. It is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone in which the site is located; and

iii. It is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.

B. Decision. The Hearing Examiner shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny an application. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA. The applicant carries the burden of proof that a preponderance of the evidence supports approval of the application or approval with conditions or modifications.

C. Written Decision. Within 10 working days following the close of the record, the Hearing Examiner shall distribute a written report supporting the decision. The report shall contain all of the following:

i. The Hearing Examiner’s decision;

ii. Any conditions included as part of the decision;

iii. Findings of fact upon which the decision, including any conditions, was based and the conclusions derived from those facts;

iv. A statement explaining the appeal process.

D. Distribution. The Director shall mail the written decision, bearing the date it is mailed, to all parties of record.

7. Appeal of Type 2 Decisions.

A. Parties of record may appeal the decision by filing a written statement setting forth:

i. Facts demonstrating that the person is adversely affected by the decision;

ii. A concise statement identifying the specific findings of fact or conclusions which are being appealed;

iii. The specific relief requested; and

iv. Any other information reasonably necessary to make a decision on the appeal.

B. The written statement of appeal and appeal fee, if any, must be received by the City Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 14th day after issuance of the Notice of Decision.

8. Notice of Appeal Hearing. If a Type 2 decision is appealed, a closed record appeal hearing before the City Council shall be set and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all parties of record by the City Clerk. Notice shall be mailed no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain the following items, at a minimum:

A. Appellant name and project name (if applicable).

B. The street address of the subject property or a description in non-legal terms of the property’s location.

C. A brief description of the decision of the Hearing Examiner which is being appealed.

D. A statement of the scope of the appeal including a summary of the specific errors alleged in the letter of appeal.

E. The date, time and place of the appeal hearing before the City Council.

9. Staff Report on the Appeal. The Director shall prepare a staff report analyzing the specific elements of the Hearing Examiner’s decision disputed in the letter of appeal. At least seven (7) calendar days before the hearing, the City Clerk shall distribute copies of the staff report to the City Council and all parties of record.

10. City Council Hearing on Appeal. The City Council shall conduct a closed record hearing on a Type 2 appeal. The City Council shall make an electronic sound recording of each appeal hearing. The scope of the appeal is limited to the specific elements of the Hearing Examiner’s decision disputed in the letter of appeal, and the City Council may only consider comments, testimony and arguments on these specific elements. Argument on the appeal is limited to information contained in the record developed before the Hearing Examiner and must specify the findings or conclusions which are the subject of the appeal, as well as the relief requested from the Council. Only parties of record may participate in the appeal. These persons may participate in either or both of the following ways:

A. By submitting written comments or testimony to the City Clerk prior to the hearing.

B. By appearing in person, or through a representative, at the hearing and submitting written or oral testimony directly to the City Council. The City Council may reasonably limit the extent of the oral testimony to facilitate the orderly and timely conduct of the hearing.

11. City Council Decision on Appeal.

A. Criteria. The City Council may grant the appeal or grant the appeal with modifications if the appellant has carried the burden of proof and the City Council finds the decision of the Hearing Examiner is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence. In all other cases, the appeal shall be denied. The City Council shall accord substantial weight to the decision of the Hearing Examiner.

B. Conditions. The City Council may impose conditions as part of the granting of an appeal or granting of an appeal with modifications to ensure conformance with the criteria under which the application was made.

C. Findings. The City Council shall adopt findings and conclusions which support its decision on the appeal.

D. Required Vote. A vote to grant the appeal or grant the appeal with modifications must be by a majority vote of the membership of the City Council. Any other vote constitutes denial of the appeal.

12. Time Period to Complete Appeal Process. The City Council’s decision on a Type 2 appeal shall be issued within 60 days from the date the original administrative appeal period closed, unless all parties to an appeal have agreed to an extended time period.

13. Effect of Decision. Type 2 decisions of the Hearing Examiner are final decisions, effective on the day following the expiration of any associated administrative appeal period. If an administrative appeal is filed, the decision is not final until the appeal is heard and decided by the City Council. The Hearing Examiner’s decision, or City Council’s decision on appeal, is the City’s final decision on the application.

14. Appeal to Superior Court. A final decision by the City Council on a Type 2 appeal may be appealed to Superior Court as set forth in BMC 19.65.060.1. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.075 Type 3 Decisions

1. General. A Type 3 land use decision is a quasi-judicial decision made by the City Council, following a recommendation by the Director, and public hearing and recommendation by the Hearing Examiner. The decision is based upon the decision criteria set forth in the Code for each type of Type 3 application. City processing of a Type 3 application begins with a determination of completeness (BMC 19.65.035). Once the application is determined to be complete, the City issues public notice in the form of a Notice of Application (BMC 19.65.040). An informational meeting may be required for projects which may be controversial. After the 21-day public comment period ends, the City issues a SEPA threshold determination, if required. The threshold determination may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s recommendation on the application. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the EIS must be completed prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal will also be resolved prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation.

Following issuance of the Director’s recommendation, an open record hearing will be held by the Hearing Examiner. If a SEPA Determination of Non Significance (DNS) was issued and an appeal of the DNS was filed, the appeal hearing on the DNS will be combined with the public hearing on the Director’s recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Hearing Examiner will issue a written report which recommends approval, approval with modification, or denial of the application and any SEPA appeal.

The City Council action on the Hearing Examiner’s recommendation on the Type 3 application is the final City decision on a Type 3 application.

2. State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

A. If required by the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and Chapter 14.10 BMC, a threshold determination will be issued by the Responsible Official. The threshold determination is a Type 1 decision and may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s recommendation on the underlying land use decision.

B. An appeal of a threshold determination authorized by Chapter 14.10 BMC shall be consolidated with the Hearing Examiner’s hearing on the underlying land use application. The Hearing Examiner’s decision on the SEPA appeal is the City’s final action related to SEPA.

C. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the threshold determination will be issued early and the EIS will be completed prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation. If the requirement to prepare an EIS is appealed by the applicant, that appeal will be resolved prior to the issuance of the Director’s recommendation.

3. Public Meetings. The Director may require the applicant to sponsor and participate in a public meeting to inform citizens about a proposal. When required, public meetings shall be held as early in the review process as possible. Notice of the public meeting shall be provided in the same manner as required for the notice of application. The public meeting notice will be combined with the notice of application whenever possible.

4. Director’s Recommendation. The Director shall prepare a written recommendation to the Hearing Examiner for approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or for denial of the application. The Director’s recommendation shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA.

5. Hearing Examiner Public Hearing

A. Participation in Hearing/Parties of Record. Any person may participate in the Hearing Examiner open record hearing and become a party of record by submitting written comments to the Director prior to the hearing or by submitting written or oral comments at the hearing.

B. Hearing Record. The Hearing Examiner shall create a complete record of the public hearing including all exhibits introduced at the hearing and an electronic sound recording of each hearing.

6. Hearing Examiner Recommendation.

A. Criteria for Recommendation. The Hearing Examiner shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or denial of an application. The Hearing Examiner’s recommendation shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any recommended conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA. The applicant carries the burden of proof that a preponderance of the evidence supports approval of the application or approval with conditions or modifications.

B. Written Decision. Within 10 working days following the close of the record, the Hearing Examiner shall distribute a written report supporting the recommendation. The report shall contain all of the following:

i. The Hearing Examiner’s recommendation;

ii. Any conditions included as part of the recommendation;

iii. Findings of fact upon which the recommendation, including any conditions, was based and the conclusions derived from those facts;

iv. A statement explaining the City Council decision process.

C. Distribution. The Director shall mail the written recommendation, bearing the date it is mailed, to all parties of record.

7. City Council Decision on the Application.

A. General. The City Council shall, at a public meeting, consider and take final action on a Type 3 application.

B. Elements to be Considered. The City Council shall not accept new written or oral information on the application, but shall consider the complete record developed before the Hearing Examiner, including the Hearing Examiner’s recommendation.

C. Criteria for Decision. The City Council shall use the criteria listed in the provision of this Code describing the requested use or decision in deciding upon the application. In addition, the City Council may approve the application only if:

i. It is consistent with all applicable development regulations and, to the extent there is no applicable development regulation, the Comprehensive Plan; and

ii. It is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone in which the site is located; and

iii. It is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.

D. Decision. The City Council may approve the application, approve the application with modifications, deny the application or remand the application to the Hearing Examiner for an additional hearing limited to specific issues identified by the Council. The Council may, based on the record, include conditions in order to ensure conformance with the criteria under which the application was made. The City Council shall adopt written findings of fact and conclusions derived from those facts which support the decision of the Council.

E. Required Vote. If the City Council’s decision on the application is for approval, or approval with modifications, the Council shall by majority vote of the membership of the Council adopt an ordinance or resolution containing the findings of fact and conclusions supporting the Council’s decision. If the City Council’s decision on the application is to remand the application back to the Hearing Examiner, the Council shall, by motion, identify those specific findings, conclusions and/or conditions to be reconsidered by the Hearing Examiner. Any other vote constitutes a denial of the application.

8. Effect of Decision. Type 3 decisions of the City Council to approve or deny an application are final decisions of the City on the application, effective on the day on which the ordinance or resolution is effective.

9. Appeal to Superior Court. A final decision by the City Council on a Type 3 application may be appealed to Superior Court as set forth in BMC 19.65.060.1. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.080 Type 4 Decisions

1. General. A Type 4 land use decision is a legislative non-project decision made by the City Council under the City Council’s authority to establish policies and regulations regarding future private and public development and management of public lands. The process usually includes a public hearing by the Planning Commission and action by the City Council. The decision is based upon the decision criteria set forth in this Code for each type of Type 4 application.

2. State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

A. If required by the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and Chapter 14.10 BMC, a threshold determination will be issued by the Responsible Official. The threshold determination is a Type 1 decision and may be issued in conjunction with the Director’s recommendation on the Type 4 decision.

B. An appeal of a threshold determination authorized by Chapter 14.10 BMC shall be to the Growth Management Hearings Board pursuant to RCW 36.70A.290.

C. If an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required, the threshold determination may be issued early and the EIS completed prior to issuance of the Director’s recommendation. Alternatively, the City may prepare an “integrated GMA document” under the provisions and procedures of WAC 197-11.

3. Planning Commission Procedure.

A. General. Type 4 proposals will usually be introduced to the Planning Commission, which may schedule study sessions as needed to consider the proposal. Prior to making a recommendation, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing. After the public hearing and after any further study sessions as may be needed, the Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the City Council through the applicable department Director and City Clerk.

B. Criteria. The Planning Commission may recommend the Council adopt or adopt with modifications a proposal if it complies with the applicable decision criteria of the Zoning Code. In all other cases, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial of the proposal.

C. Limitation on Modification. If the Planning Commission recommends a modification which results in a proposal not reasonably foreseeable from the notice provided pursuant to BMC 19.65.080.4, the Planning Commission shall conduct a new public hearing on the proposal as modified.

D. Required Vote. A vote to recommend adoption of the proposal or adoption with modification must be by a majority vote of the Planning Commission members present and voting.

4. Public Hearing Notice.

A. Contents. The Director shall prepare a notice of the Planning Commission or City Council public hearing containing at least the following information:

i. The name of the applicant and, if applicable, the project name;

ii. The street address of the site, or if not available, a locational description on non-legal language along with a vicinity map that identifies the site;

iii. A brief description of the requested action;

iv. The date, time and place of the hearing;

v. The location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

vi. A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments or testimony to the hearing body and to appear at the public hearing to give comments or testimony orally;

B. Distribution. At least 14 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the Director shall provide for notice of the public hearing to be published in the City’s official newspaper. If the proposal involves specific property, rather than an area-wide or zone-wide change, the notice shall also be mailed via first class mail to property owners of record within 500 feet of the specific property, and shall also be posted on one or more notice boards on or near the specific property. The Director shall establish standards for size, color, layout, design, wording and placement of the signs and notice boards.

5. Director’s Recommendation. The Director shall prepare a written recommendation to the Planning Commission for approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or for denial of the application. The Director’s recommendation shall be based on the applicable Zoning Code decision criteria, shall include any conditions to ensure consistency with City zoning regulations, and may include mitigation measures proposed under SEPA.

6. Public Hearing.

A. Participation in Hearing. Any person may participate in the public hearing by submitting written comments to the Director prior to the hearing or by submitting written or oral comments at the hearing.

B. Hearing Record. The Planning Commission or City Council shall create a complete record of the public hearing including all exhibits introduced at the hearing and an electronic sound recording of each hearing.

7. City Council Decision on the Application.

A. General. The City Council shall consider at a public meeting each recommendation transmitted by the Planning Commission and each proposal before the Council at the Council’s own direction. The Council may hold a public hearing pursuant to the procedures in BMC 19.65.080.4 and BMC 19.65.080.6. The Council shall take legislative action on the proposal in accordance with State law.

B. City Council Action. The City Council may take one of the following actions:

i. Adopt an ordinance or resolution adopting the proposal or adopting the proposal with modifications; or

ii. Adopt a motion denying the proposal; or

iii. Refer the proposal back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings, in which case the City Council shall specify the time within which the Planning Commission shall report back to the City Council with a recommendation.

8. Effect of Decision. Type 4 decisions of the City Council are final decisions of the City, effective on the day on which the ordinance or resolution is effective.

9. Appeal to Growth Management Hearings Board. The action of the City Council on a Type 4 proposal may be appealed together with any SEPA Threshold Determination by filing a petition with the Growth Management Hearings Board pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.70A.290. The petition must be filed within the 60-day time period set forth in RCW 36.70A.290(2). [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.085 Variances.

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the process and criteria for a variance from the provisions of this Code. A variance is a mechanism by which the City may grant relief from the provisions of this Code where practical difficulty renders compliance with the provisions of the Code an unnecessary hardship, where the hardship is a result of the physical characteristics of the site and where the purpose of the Code and of the Comprehensive Plan can be fulfilled.

2. Process. Variances shall be considered using the Type 1 review process.

3. Criteria. The City may approve or approve with modifications an application for a variance from the provisions of this Code if:

A. The variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone of the site; and

B. The variance is necessary because of the unique size, shape, topography or location of the site; and

C. The site is deprived, by the provisions of this Code, of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and same zone as the site; and the variance is the minimum necessary to provide the site with those rights and privileges; and

D. The need for the variance is not the result of deliberate actions of the applicant or property owner; and

E. Granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the site is located; and

F. The variance is not inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and

G. The variance is not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the provision being varied.

4. Limitation on authority. The City shall not grant a variance to:

A. The provisions of BMC 19.15 establishing the allowable uses in each zone; or

B. The provisions of BMC 19.65 or any other procedural or administrative provision of this Code; or

C. Any provision of this Code which, by the terms of that provision, is not subject to a variance; or

D. Any conditions of approval established during prior permit review; or

E. The provisions of BMC 19.40, Critical Areas.


19.65.090 Rezones.

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the process and criteria for a rezone of property from one zoning designation to another. Changes to the zoning map that are Citywide, area-wide, or have area-wide significance are processed as area-wide amendments pursuant to subsection 2 of this section. All other rezones shall be processed as site-specific rezones pursuant to subsection 3 of this section.

2. Area-wide rezones.

A. Process: An area-wide rezone application is processed as a Type 4 legislative decision pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.

B. Applicant: Anyone may apply for an area-wide rezone.

C. Criteria for approval: The City Council may approve an area-wide rezone only if all of the following criteria are met:

i. The rezone is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and

ii. The rezone will advance the public health, safety, or welfare; and

iii. The rezone will not have significant adverse environmental impacts that are materially detrimental to adjacent properties or other affected areas.

D. Comprehensive Plan Consistency: If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required in order to satisfy BMC 19.65.090.2.C.i, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval on the area-wide rezone.

3. Site-specific rezones.

A. Process: A site-specific rezone application is processed as a Type 3 quasi-judicial decision pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.

B. Applicant: The City, federal, state or local agencies, owner(s) of the property proposed for rezoning, or their designated agents may initiate a request for a site-specific rezone.

C. Criteria for Approval: The City may grant a site-specific rezone only if all of the following criteria are met:

i. The rezone is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and

ii. The rezone will advance the public health, safety, or welfare; and

iii. The rezone will not have significant adverse environmental impacts that are materially detrimental to adjacent properties or other affected areas; and

iv. The rezone is necessary because at least one of the following is met:

a. Conditions in the immediate vicinity or neighborhood have changed so that it is in the public interest to approve the rezone, or

b. The rezone will correct a zone classification or zone boundary that was inappropriate when established, or

c. The rezone is necessary to achieve consistency with the Comprehensive Plan land use map.

D. Comprehensive Plan Consistency: If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required in order to satisfy subsection 3.C.i of this section, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to the granting of an approval on the rezone.

4. Map change. Following approval of a rezone, the City shall amend the zoning map to reflect the change in zoning designation. The City shall also indicate on the zoning map the number of the ordinance adopting the rezone.

5. Repealed. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 479 §1, 2007; Ord. 396 §1, 2003]


19.65.095 Comprehensive Plan Amendments.1

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for plan amendments pursuant to the requirements of Growth Management Act (GMA) (RCW 36.70A.130(1)). Comprehensive plan amendments may be proposed to any element including goals, policies, or plan maps. Amendments to the plan may require and include amendments to supporting plans or ordinances.

2. Process. Amendments to the comprehensive plan may be considered by the City once every calendar year, using the Type 4 review process (BMC 19.65.080) and the timing indicated below. More frequent amendments may be allowed if the amendment complies with RCW 36.70A.130.

A. By January 1, the City will issue notice of the annual Comprehensive Plan amendment request deadline. The amendment request deadline is March 1.

B. The Director will create a preliminary docket of amendment requests received by the March 1 deadline. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public meeting on the preliminary docket to consider testimony and make recommendations to the City Council on which amendments to consider, and may recommend a priority be assigned to each proposed amendment.

C. The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission on the preliminary docket, and by May 1 adopt by resolution a final docket of Comprehensive Plan amendments for consideration. [Ord. 397 §4, 2003]

3. Concurrent area-wide rezones. A proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment that also requires an area-wide rezone shall be considered concurrently, and all public notice must reflect the dual nature of the request.

4. Docketing Criteria. The City Council shall use the following criteria for deciding whether a proposed amendment is added to the docket in subsection 2.C of this section:

A. The request has been filed in a timely manner, and either:

B. State law requires, or a decision of a court or administrative agency has directed, such a change; or

C. All of the following criteria are met:

i. The proposed amendment presents a matter appropriately addressed through the Comprehensive Plan; and

ii. The City has the resources, including staff and budget, necessary to review the proposal; and

iii. The proposal does not raise policy or land use issues that are more appropriately addressed by an ongoing work program item approved by the City Council; and

iv. The proposal will serve the public interest by implementing specifically identified goals of the Comprehensive Plan or a new approach supporting the City’s vision; and

v. The proposal has not been considered by the City Council in the last three (3) years. This time limit may be waived by the City Council, if the proponent establishes that there exists a change in circumstances that justifies the need for the amendment.

5. Expansion of Land Use Map Amendment. The City may propose to expand the geographic scope of an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan land use map to allow for consideration of adjacent property, similarly situated property, or area-wide impacts. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether to expand the geographic scope of a proposed land use map amendment:

A. The effect of the proposed amendment on the surrounding area or city;

B. The effect of the proposed amendment on the land use and circulation pattern of the surrounding area or city; and

C. The effect of the proposed amendment on the future development of the surrounding area or city.

6. Amendment Decision Criteria. The City Council may approve or approve with modifications a Comprehensive Plan amendment if all of the following criteria are met:

A. The proposed amendment is the best means for meeting an identified public benefit; and

B. The proposed amendment is consistent with the Growth Management Act, applicable Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) plans, King County Countywide Planning Policies and Burien Comprehensive Plan; and

C. The proposed amendment will result in a net benefit to the community; and

D. The revised Comprehensive Plan will be internally consistent; and

E. The capability of the land can support the projected land use; and

F. Adequate public facility capacity to support the projected land use exists, or can be provided by the property owner(s) requesting the amendment, or can be cost-effectively provided by the City or other public agency; and

G. The proposed amendment will be compatible with nearby uses; and

H. The proposed amendment would not prevent the City from achieving its Growth Management Act population and employment targets; and

I. For a Comprehensive Plan land use map change, the applicable designation criteria for the proposed land use designation are met and either of the following is met:

i. Conditions have changed since the property was given its present Comprehensive Plan designation so that the current designation is no longer appropriate; or

ii. The map change will correct a Comprehensive Plan designation that was inappropriate when established.

7. Comprehensive Plan and Map Change. Following approval of a Comprehensive Plan amendment, the City shall amend the Comprehensive Plan text and map, as applicable, to reflect the change in text or plan designation. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.100 Zoning Code Amendments.

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the process and criteria for amendment of this Code.

2. Process. Zoning Code amendments shall be considered using the Type 4 review process.

3. Initiation of zoning code amendment request. A zoning code amendment request may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, or Director.

4. Criteria. The City may approve or approve with modifications a proposal to amend the text of this Code if:

A. The amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and

B. The amendment bears a substantial relation to the public health, safety, or welfare; and

C. The amendment is in the best interest of the community as a whole.

5. Code change. Following approval of an amendment, the City shall amend this Code to reflect the change. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.65.105 Administrative Design Review.

1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the process and criteria for administrative design review (ADR). [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

2. Applicability.

A. Major new construction or modification in the DC and SPA-1 zones is subject to the provisions of BMC 19.47, 19.49 and the procedures for ADR contained in this section. [Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

B. All other changes to existing structures and sites in the DC and SPA-1 zones do not require ADR approval, unless a design departure is requested. However, the portion of the structure or site being changed must comply with the applicable design objectives and standards in BMC 19.47 and BMC 19.49. This includes, but is not limited to, exterior modifications, including paint, material, roof or facade changes; parking area restriping or redesign; and landscaping. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999, Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

3. Process. The Director shall review applications for ADR according to the procedures established for a Type 1 review (BMC 19.65.065). BMC 19.65.040 (Notice of Application) does not apply, unless SEPA review is required. For large or complex projects, the Director may retain design professionals at the applicant’s expense to review ADR applications submitted by the applicant. The Director shall establish a roster of qualified licensed design professionals in the fields of architecture, landscape architecture and/or urban design to assist the City in the ADR process. When the Director has determined the need for assistance, prior to or following the pre-application meeting, the Director shall prepare a scope of work and select at least 3 firms from the roster to prepare specific cost and schedule proposals for completing the scope of work. These proposals shall be reviewed by the Director, and if found acceptable, shall be given to the applicant for selection. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

4. Criteria for Decision. In addition to the criteria for approval of a Type 1 review in BMC 19.65.065.4.A, the Director shall determine whether the proposal complies with the applicable design objectives and standards in BMC 19.47 or BMC 19.49. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999, Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

5. Design Departure.

A. General. This section provides a mechanism for obtaining approval from the City for departing from strict adherence to the design standards.

B. Process. If a design departure is requested, the ADR decision will be reviewed and decided upon using the Type 1 review process, described in BMC 19.65.065.

C. Criteria: The City may grant a design departure from BMC 19.47 or BMC 19.49 only if it finds that either: there is a compelling reason to deviate from the specific standards or the intent of the standards can be met, and that:

i. All of the following requirements are met:

a. The request is consistent with and fulfills the policy basis for the applicable design standards, and

b. The departure will not have any substantial detrimental effect on nearby properties and the City as a whole, and

c. The departure manifests high quality design and/or innovative and appropriate use of materials that will create a high quality development, and

d. The departure will result in increased pedestrian activity and visual interest along the street; or

ii. All of the following requirements are met:

a. The size, configuration, topography, or location of the site is unusual and was not contemplated in the design standards, and

b. Because of these unusual circumstances, application of the design standards to the site would not result in a project that fulfills the policy basis for the design standard, and

c. The proposed departure will result in a development which fulfills the policy basis for the design regulations and will result in high quality development sensitive to its surroundings. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999, Ord. 441 § 12, 2005]

6. Modifications.

A. The Director may approve a modification to the ADR approval for the proposed development if:

i. The need for the modification was not known and could not reasonably have been known before the ADR approval was granted; and

ii. The modification is minor and will not, in any substantial way, change the proposed development; and

iii. The development that will result from the modification will be consistent with the design standards.

B. Any modification, other than as specified in subsection 6.A of this section, must be reviewed and decided upon as a new ADR approval under this Chapter. [Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]

7. Appeals. The applicant may appeal denial of a time extension by filing a written statement of appeal and appeal fee, if any, to the City Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 14th day after issuance of the written denial of the requested extension. The appeal will be processed as an appeal of a Type 1 decision pursuant to Section 19.65.065. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 273 § 1, 1999]


19.65.110 Repealed [Ord. 479 §1, 2007, Ord. 396 § 1, 2003]

1

Code reviser’s note: Ord 560 § 5 provides, in part, “...the amendments to BMC 19.65.095.2.A, B and C shall take effect September 1, 2012.” 


Chapter 19.70 Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services

19.70.010    Purpose

19.70.020    General Requirements.

19.70.030    Adequate Sewage Disposal.

19.70.040    Adequate Water Supply.

19.70.050    Surface Water Management.

19.70.060    Adequate Roads.

19.70.070    Adequate Roads – Road Capacity Level of Service (“LOS”) Standard.

19.70.080    Adequate Roads – Applicability of Capacity Standard.

19.70.090    Adequate Roads – General Conditions.

19.70.100    Adequate Vehicular Access.

19.70.110    Adequate Fire Protection.


19.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are adequate or will be provided in a timely manner consistent with the public facilities and services planning goal of the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 by:

1. Specifying the on-site and off-site facilities and services that must be in place or otherwise assured of timely provision prior to development;

2. Allocating the cost of those facilities and services fairly; and

3. Providing a general framework for relating development standards and other requirements of this code to:

A. Adopted service level standards for public facilities and services;

B. Procedural requirements for phasing development projects to ensure that services are provided as development occurs; and

C. The review of development permit applications. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(510), 1993]


19.70.020 General Requirements.

1. All new development proposals including any use, activity, or structure allowed by Chapter 19.15 BMC that requires the city of Burien approval shall be adequately served by the following facilities and services prior to the time of occupancy, plat recording, or other land use approval, as further specified in this chapter:

A. Sewage disposal;

B. Water supply;

C. Surface water management;

D. Roads and access;

E. Fire protection service; and

F. Schools.

2. Regardless of the number of sequential permits required, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied only once to any single development proposal. If changes and modifications result in impacts not considered when the proposal was first approved, the city shall consider the revised proposal as a new development proposal. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 20, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(511), 1993]


19.70.030 Adequate Sewage Disposal.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private sewage disposal system, including both collection and treatment facilities as follows:

1. A public sewage disposal system is adequate for a development proposal provided that:

A. For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval or other land use approval the site of the proposed development is served by an existing disposal system consistent with the Sewerage General Plan, and the disposal system has been approved by the department as being consistent with applicable state and local design and operating guidelines;

B. For the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section is installed to serve each building or lot;

C. For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan the approved public sewage disposal system set forth in subsection 1.A of this section shall be installed to serve each lot respectively; or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the city of Burien for the future installation of an adequate sewage disposal system. The bond may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of such facilities within two years of recording; and

2. A private individual sewage system is adequate, if an on-site sewage disposal system for each individual building or lot is installed to meet the requirements and standards of the department of public health as to lot size, soils, and system design prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(512), 1993]


19.70.040 Adequate Water Supply.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private water supply system as follows:

1. A public water system is adequate for a development proposal provided that:

A. For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval or other land use approval, the applicant must demonstrate that the existing water supply system serving the site:

i. Complies with the applicable planning, operating and design requirements of Chapter 246-290 WAC; Chapters 14.42 and 14.44 KCC and KCC Title 17; Coordinated Water System Plans; KCC Title 12, KCC Title 13 and other applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of the King 

County board of health; and any limitation or condition imposed by the city-approved comprehensive plan of the water purveyor; and

ii. The proposed improvements to an existing water system have been reviewed by the department and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in paragraph A of this subsection; or

iii. A proposed new water supply system has been reviewed by the department and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in paragraph A of this subsection;

B. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public water system and any system improvements set forth in subsection 1.A of this section shall be installed to serve each building or lot respectively; and

C. For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan, either the approved public water supply system or system improvements set forth in subsection 1.A of this section shall be installed to serve each lot or a bond or similar security shall be deposited with the city of Burien and may be assigned to a purveyor to assure the construction of required water facilities in Group A systems as defined by board of health regulations, within two years of recording; and

2. An on-site, individual water system is adequate and the plat or short plat may receive preliminary and final approval, and a building or change of use permit may be issued if:

A. The buildings or lots to be served are located outside of a city approved water purveyor service area; or

B. The water purveyor has indicated that service cannot be provided in compliance with the purveyor’s approved comprehensive plan; and

C. The Seattle-King County department of public health has approved the proposed method of water supply in accordance with the applicable King County board of health rules and regulations and this section. The applicant shall provide appropriate information to demonstrate to the department and the Seattle-King County department of public health that a private individual water system will be adequate. The Seattle-King County department of public health may require installation of private individual water systems prior to final approval of a plat or short plat where information is insufficient to show an adequate water supply can be made available. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(513), 1993]


19.70.050 Surface Water Management.

All new development shall be served by an adequate surface water management system as follows:

1. The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a surface water management system approved by the Public Works department as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements of the Surface Water Design Manual and BMC Title 13;

2. A variance request from the requirements of BMC Title 13 shall be reviewed as set forth in BMC Title 13 and does not require a variance from this title. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 21, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(514), 1993]


19.70.060 Adequate Roads.

1. All new development shall be served by adequate roads. Roads are adequate if the development’s traffic impacts on surrounding public roads are acceptable under the level-of-service standards as stated in this section and the compliance procedures established in BMC 19.70.070 and 19.70.080.

2. The renewal of permits or the issuance of a new permit for existing uses constitutes a new development proposal only if it will generate additional traffic above that currently generated by the use.

3. A variance request from BMC Title 12 shall be reviewed as set forth in BMC Title 12 and does not require a variance from this title. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 22, 1999; Ord. 28 § 1(515), 1993]


19.70.070 Adequate Roads – Road Capacity Level of Service (“LOS”) Standard.

The following calculated level-of-service standards shall be considered adequate and shall apply to all public roads:

1. LOS standard D for designated vehicle priority roadways;

2. LOS standard E for downtown Burien streets;

3. LOS C for all other roadway facilities and services; LOS standard D for the intersection of SW 128th Street and Ambaum Boulevard SW;

4. As mandated by state law, the city of Burien adopts LOS “D” for SR-509 and SR-518 (highways of statewide significance) and an LOS of “E/mitigated” for the segment of SR-509 from First Avenue South to the Burien city limits (highway of regional significance), or whichever LOS is currently adopted by the Washington State Department of Transportation. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 431 § 1, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(516), 1993]


19.70.080 Adequate Roads – Applicability of Capacity Standard.

The road adequacy standards as stated in BMC 19.70.070 shall apply to all public county, city or state roads, other than freeways; provided, that no improvements to state roads shall be required unless the state requests such improvements and there is an agreement between the state, city and applicant. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 431 § 1, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(517), 1993]


19.70.090 Adequate Roads – General Conditions.

1. A development proposal which will have a direct traffic impact on a roadway or intersection which results in a calculated level of service worse than set forth in BMC 19.70.070 shall not be approved unless:

A. All transportation facilities are adequate at the time of development and transportation impacts will not negatively impact or reduce LOS elsewhere in the city; or

B. Funding is in place to complete the necessary improvements or strategies to accommodate transportation impacts within six years. Improvements are considered funded only when:



i. Incorporated into the adopted city budget, or

ii. Upon grant agreement, or

iii. The applicant agrees to fund needed improvements, or

iv. Upon a legally enforceable mechanism, such as a local improvement district, or

v. Some combination of the above; or

C. The applicant phases the project or uses transportation demand management (“TDM”) techniques to reduce the number of peak hour trips generated by the project to attain the LOS required in BMC 19.70.070 or better; or

D. The city of Burien has established a date for final approval of subdivisions to become effective corresponding with the anticipated date of award of a construction contract for county, city, or state improvements needed to provide LOS D or better, or when the calculated nonproject LOS is E or F, to provide LOS E or better; provided such effective approval date may be established only when the anticipated date of award of construction contract is within 12 months of final approval; or

E. The roadway or intersection has already been improved to its ultimate roadway section and the applicant agrees to use TDM incentives and/or phase the development proposal as determined by the city of Burien.

2. Developments proposed which will have a direct impact on city traffic facilities or designated areas pursuant to BMC 19.70.080 may attain the LOS specified in the adopted interlocal agreements rather than meeting BMC 19.70.070. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 431 § 1, 2005; Ord. 28 § 1(518), 1993]


19.70.100 Adequate Vehicular Access.

All new development shall be served by adequate vehicular access as follows:

1. The property upon which the development proposed is to be located has direct access to:

A. A public or private street that meets city road standards or is formally declared acceptable by the city road engineer; or

B. The property has access to such a street over a private driveway approved by the city;

2. The proposed circulation system of a proposed subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall intersect with existing and anticipated streets abutting the site at safe and convenient locations, as determined by the department and the city road engineer; and

3. Every lot upon which one or more buildings is proposed to be erected or traffic generating use is proposed to be established, shall establish safe access as follows:

A. Safe passage from the street right-of-way to building entrances for transit patrons and other pedestrians, in accordance with the design standards set forth in BMC 19.20;

B. Direct access from the street right-of-way, fire lane or a parking space to any part of the property as needed to provide public services in accordance with adopted standards (e.g., fire protection, emergency medical service, mail delivery or trash collection); and

C. Direct access from the street right-of-way, driveway, alley or other means of ingress/egress approved by the city of Burien, to all required off-street parking spaces on the premises. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(521), 1993]


19.70.110 Adequate Fire Protection.

All new development shall be served by adequate fire protection as set forth below:

1. The site of the development proposed is served by a water supply system that provides at least minimum fire flow and a road system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other fire protection requirements for buildings as required by the fire code and International Codes, building and construction standards;

2. A variance request from the requirements established by the fire code, shall be reviewed as set forth in the fire code and does not require a variance from this title. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(522), 1993]


Chapter 19.75 Temporary Use Permits

19.75.010    Uses Requiring Temporary Use Permits.

19.75.020    Exemptions to Permit Requirement.

19.75.030    Duration and Frequency.

19.75.040    Parking and Traffic Control.

19.75.050    Temporary Construction Buildings.

19.75.060    Temporary Construction Residence.

19.75.070    Temporary Mobile Home for Medical Hardship.

19.75.080    Temporary Real Estate Offices.

19.75.090    Temporary Use Permit.


19.75.010 Uses Requiring Temporary Use Permits.

Except as provided by BMC 19.75.020, a temporary use permit shall be required for:

1. Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency; or

2. Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but which exceeds the intended scope of the original land use approval. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(546), 1993]


19.75.020 Exemptions to Permit Requirement.

1. The following uses shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit when located in the CN, CI, CC, CR, DC, SPA-1, SPA-3, O, AI or I zones for the time period specified below:

A. Uses not to exceed a total of 30 days each calendar year:

i. Christmas tree lots; and

ii. Produce stands.

B. Uses not to exceed a total of 14 days each calendar year:

i. Amusement rides, carnivals, or circuses;

ii. Community festivals; and

iii. Parking lot sales.

2. Any use not exceeding a cumulative total of two days each calendar year shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit.

3. Any community event held in a public park and not exceeding a period of seven days shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit.

4. The city may revoke or suspend a permit if circumstances under which the permit was issued are no longer present or the conditions of the permit are violated. Any appeal of such a revocation or suspension, or denial of the initial application, shall be to the city manager or a designee. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 269 § 23, 1999; Ord. 50 §§ 2, 3, 1993; Ord. 28 § 1(547), 1993]


19.75.030 Duration and Frequency.

Temporary use permits shall be limited in duration and frequency as follows:

1. The temporary use permit shall be effective for 180 days from issuance;

2. The temporary use shall not exceed a total of 60 days, provided that this requirement applies only to the days that multiple or nonsuccessive event(s) actually take place;

3. The temporary use permit shall specify a date upon which the use shall be terminated and removed; and

4. A temporary use permit shall not be granted for the same temporary use on a property more than once per calendar year provided that a temporary use permit may be granted for multiple events over a maximum 180-day period. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(548), 1993]


19.75.040 Parking and Traffic Control.

1. Parking and access for proposed temporary uses shall be approved by the city. [Ord. 28 § 1(549), 1993]

2. The applicant for a proposed temporary use shall provide any parking/traffic control attendants as specified by the City. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(550), 1993]


19.75.050 Temporary Construction Buildings.

Temporary structures for storage of tools and equipment or for supervisory offices may be permitted for construction projects, provided that such structures are:

1. Allowed only during periods of active construction; and

2. Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(551), 1993]


19.75.060 Temporary Construction Residence.

1. A mobile home may be permitted on a lot as a temporary dwelling for the property owner, provided a building permit for a permanent dwelling on the site has been obtained.

2. The temporary mobile home permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months. The permit may be extended for one additional period of 12 months if the permanent dwelling is constructed with a finished exterior by the end of the initial approval period.

3. The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

A. The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

B. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent residence, whichever occurs first. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(552), 1993]


19.75.070 Temporary Mobile Home for Medical Hardship.

1. A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary dwelling on the same lot as a permanent dwelling, provided:

A. The applicant demonstrates the temporary dwelling is necessary to provide daily care to an individual certified by a physician as needing such care;

B. The primary provider of daily care shall reside on-site; and

C. The mobile home together with the permanent residence shall meet the setback, height, building footprint, and lot coverage provisions of the applicable zone.

2. Temporary mobile home permits for medical hardships shall be effective for 12 months. Extensions of the temporary mobile home permit may be approved in 12-month increments subject to demonstration of continuing medical hardship.

3. The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

A. The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

B. The cessation of provision of daily care. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(553), 1993]


19.75.080 Temporary Real Estate Offices.

One temporary real estate office may be located on any new residential development, provided that activities are limited to the initial sale or rental of property or units within the development. The office use shall be discontinued within one year of recording of a subdivision or short subdivision or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy apartment development. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(554), 1993]


19.75.090 Temporary Use Permit.

A temporary use permit shall be granted by the city, only if the applicant demonstrates that:

1. The proposed temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare;

2. The proposed temporary use is compatible with existing land use in the immediate vicinity in terms of noise and hours of operation;

3. Adequate public off-street parking and traffic control for the exclusive use of the proposed temporary use can be provided in a safe manner; and

4. The proposed temporary use is not otherwise permitted pursuant to BMC 19.75.010 in the zone in which it is proposed. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(608), 1993]


Chapter 19.80 Enforcement

19.80.010    Purpose.

19.80.020    Authority and Application.

19.80.030    Violations Defined.

19.80.040    Permit Suspension, Revocation or Modification.

19.80.050    Initiation of Revocation or Modification Proceedings.


19.80.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote compliance with this title by establishing enforcement authority, defining violations, and setting standards for initiating the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.15 BMC, when violations of this title occur. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(614), 1993]


19.80.020 Authority and Application.

The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this code and approval conditions attached to any land use approval, through revocation or modification of permits, or through the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of BMC 8.45. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(615), 1993]


19.80.030 Violations Defined.

No building permit or land use approval in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be issued. Structures or uses which do not conform to this title, except legal nonconformances specified in BMC 19.55 and approved variances, are violations subject to the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of Chapter 1.15 BMC, including but not limited to:

1. Establishing a use not permitted in the zone in which it is located;

2. Constructing, expanding or placing a structure in violation of setback, height and other dimensional standards in this title;

3. Establishing a permitted use without complying with applicable development standards set forth in other titles, ordinances, rules or other laws, including but not limited to road construction, surface water management, the Fire Code, and rules of the department of public health;

4. Failing to carry out or observe conditions of land use or permit approval, including contract development standards;

5. Failing to secure required land use or permit approval prior to establishing a permitted use; and

6. Failing to maintain site improvements, such as landscaping, parking or drainage control facilities as required by this code or other city of Burien ordinances. [Ord. 560 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(616), 1993]


19.80.040 Permit Suspension, Revocation or Modification.

1. Permit suspension, revocation or modification shall be carried out through the procedures set forth by the city council of the city of Burien. Any permit, variance, or other land use approval issued by the city of Burien pursuant to this title may be suspended, revoked or modified on one or more of the following grounds:

A. The approval was obtained by fraud;

B. The approval was based on inadequate or inaccurate information;

C. The approval, when given, conflicted with existing laws or regulations applicable thereto;

D. An error of procedure occurred which prevented consideration of the interests of persons directly affected by the approval;

E. The approval or permit granted is being exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval or in violation of any statute, law or regulation;

F. The use for which the approval was granted is being exercised in a manner detrimental to the public health or safety;

G. The holder of the permit or approval interferes with the director or any authorized representative in the performance of his or her duties; or

H. The holder of the permit or approval fails to comply with any notice and order issued by the city of Burien.

2. Authority to revoke or modify a permit or land use approval shall be exercised by the issuer, as follows:

A. The council may, after a recommendation from the hearing examiner, revoke or modify any Type 3 land use approval or preliminary subdivision;

B. The hearing examiner may revoke or modify any Type 2 land use approval, provided that if it was reviewed through a public hearing, a new public hearing shall be held on its revocation or modification; and

C. The director may revoke or modify any permit or other land use approval issued by the director. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 61, 1993; Ord. 28 § 1(617), 1993]


19.80.050 Initiation of Revocation or Modification Proceedings.

1. The city council of the city of Burien may suspend any permit, variance or land use approval issued by any city of Burien issuing agency and processed by the department of community development pending its revocation or modification, or pending a public hearing on its revocation or modification;

2. The issuing agency may initiate proceedings to revoke or modify any permit or land use approval it has issued; and

3. Persons who are aggrieved may petition the issuing agency to initiate revocation or modification proceedings, and may petition the director to suspend a permit, variance or land use approval pending a public hearing on its revocation or modification. [Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 28 § 1(618), 1993]




Chapter 19.85 Protection and Preservation of Landmarks 

19.85.010    Purpose. 

19.85.020    King County Code Chapter 20.62 Adopted. 

19.85.030    Landmarks Commission Created – Membership and Organization. 

19.85.040    Review of Building and Related Permits. 

19.85.050    Appeal Procedure. 

19.85.060    Redesignation of Existing Landmarks. 


19.85.010 Purpose. 

The purposes of this chapter are to:

1. Designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures, trees and objects which reflect significant elements of the city of Burien’s, the county’s, the state’s, and the nation’s cultural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, architectural, ethnic, archaeological, engineering, historic, and other heritage;

2. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;

3. Stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks;

4. Encourage, protect and enhance the city of Burien’s tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism;

5. Promote the continued use, exhibition and interpretation of significant sites, districts, buildings, structures, trees and objects for the education, inspiration, and welfare of the people of the city of Burien;

6. Promote and continue incentives for ownership and utilization of landmarks;

7. Assist, encourage and provide incentives to public and private owners for preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, and use of landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures, trees and objects;

8. Work cooperatively with other jurisdictions to identify, evaluate, and protect historic resources in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012, Ord. 545 § 1, 2010, Ord. 130 § 1, 1995]


19.85.020 King County Code Chapter 20.62 Adopted. 

The following sections of Chapter 20.62 King County Code (KCC) are incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this chapter:

1. KCC 20.62.020 – Definitions, except as follows:

A. Paragraph H. is changed to read: ““Director” is the director of the city of Burien department of community development or his/her designee.”

B. Add paragraph Z: ““Council” is the city of Burien city council.”

C. Paragraph I. is changed to read: ““District” is a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, trees or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history.”

D. Paragraph L. is changed to read: ““Historic resource” is a district site, building, structure, tree or object significant in national, state or local history, architecture, archaeology, and culture.”

2. KCC 20.62.040 – Designation Criteria, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “city of Burien.”

3. KCC 20.62.050 – Nomination Procedure, except that property owner written consent is required prior to King County acceptance of a nomination request.

4. KCC 20.62.070 – Designation Procedure, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “city of Burien.”

5. KCC 20.62.080 – Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure, except the last sentence of paragraph A thereof. 

6. KCC 20.62.100 – Evaluation of Economic Impact, except as follows:

A. Paragraph B.8.c.(1) change to read “A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in historic restoration or rehabilitation, or an ISA Certified Arborist if the landmark is a Heritage tree, as to the structural soundness of the landmark and its suitability for restoration or rehabilitation”;

B. Add Paragraph B.8.c.(4) “For removal of a Heritage tree the testimony of ISA Certified arborist experienced in assessing tree health stating as to the tree’s current health and if it is or is not a potential danger needing to be removed.”

7. KCC 20.62.130 – Penalty for Violation of Section 20.62.080 (subsection (5) of this section).

8. KCC 20.62.140 – Special Valuation for Historic Properties except as follows:

A. Paragraph C change to read “All King County Landmarks designated and protected under this chapter shall be eligible for special valuation in accordance with chapter 84.26 RCW. Except Heritage trees are not eligible for special valuation consideration.”

9. Permit applications for changes to landmark properties shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to subsection (5) of this section. Upon receipt of an application for a development proposal, which affects a King County landmark or an historic resource that has received a preliminary determination of significance as defined in subsection (1) of this section, the application circulated to the King County historic preservation officer shall be deemed an application for a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to subsection (5) of this section, if accompanied by the additional information required to apply for such certificate. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.85.030 Landmarks Commission Created – Membership and Organization. 

1. The King County Landmarks Commission (“Commission”), established pursuant to King County Code (KCC), Chapter 20.62, is hereby designated and empowered to act as the landmarks commission for the city of Burien pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

2. The special member of the commission, provided for in Section 20.62.030 of the King County Code, shall be appointed by the city council. Such special member shall have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. Such appointment shall be made for a three-year term. Such special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special member may be reappointed but may not serve more than two consecutive, three-year terms. Such special member shall be deemed to have served one full term, if such special member resigns at any time after appointment or if such special member serves more than two years of an unexpired term. The special member of the commission shall serve without compensation. 

3. The commission shall file its rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter, with the city clerk. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.85.040 Review of Building and Related Permits. 

The official responsible for the issuance of building and related permits shall promptly refer applications for permits which “affect” historic buildings, structures, objects, sites, districts, Heritage trees, or archaeological sites to the King County Historic Preservation Officer (HPO) for review and comment. For the purposes of this section, “affect” shall be defined as an application for change to the actual structure, on a property with a landmark structure or designated as a landmark property, or on an adjacent property sharing a common boundary line. The responsible official shall seek and take into consideration the comments of the HPO regarding mitigation of any adverse effects affecting historic buildings, structures, objects, sites, Heritage trees, or districts. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.85.050 Appeal Procedure. 

1. A party of record aggrieved by a decision of the commission designating or rejecting a nomination for designation of a landmark or issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such decision pursuant to the procedures established for a Type 1 Decision in BMC 19.65.065.5 through 19.65.065.12. 

2. If, after the appeal hearing, the hearing examiner determines:

A. An error in fact was made by the commission, the hearing examiner shall remand the proceeding to the commission for reconsideration; or

B. The decision of the commission is based on an error in judgment or conclusion, the hearing examiner may modify or reverse the decision of the commission. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


19.85.060 Redesignation of Existing Landmarks. 

All King County landmarks designated pursuant to the provisions of KCC 20.62 that are in compliance with this chapter and that are located within the boundaries of the city shall be subject to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and considered city of Burien landmarks. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2017; Ord. 567 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012]


Title 20 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM 

Chapters:

20.10    User’s Guide

20.20    General Goals and Policies

20.25    Shoreline Environment Designations

20.30    Shoreline Uses and Modifications Policies and Regulations 

20.35    Administration and Shoreline Permit Procedures 

20.40    Shoreline Definitions 


Chapter 20.10 USER’S GUIDE

Sections:

20.10.001    Overview of State Shoreline Management Act.

20.10.005    City of Burien shoreline jurisdiction.

20.10.010    Components of Burien shoreline master program.

20.10.015    Amendments and state role.


20.10.001 Overview of State Shoreline Management Act.

The State of Washington Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW) was passed by the Legislature in 1971 and adopted by the public in a 1972 referendum. The following is an excerpt from the Shoreline Management Act stating Washington State’s policy regarding shorelines. Complete text of RCW 90.58.020:

The legislature finds that the shorelines of the state are among the most valuable and fragile of its natural resources and that there is great concern throughout the state relating to their utilization, protection, restoration, and preservation. In addition it finds that ever increasing pressures of additional uses are being placed on the shorelines necessitating increased coordination in the management and development of the shorelines of the state. The legislature further finds that much of the shorelines of the state and the uplands adjacent thereto are in private ownership; that unrestricted construction on the privately owned or publicly owned shorelines of the state is not in the best public interest; and therefore, coordinated planning is necessary in order to protect the public interest associated with the shorelines of the state while, at the same time, recognizing and protecting private property rights consistent with the public interest. There is, therefor, a clear and urgent demand for a planned, rational, and concerted effort, jointly performed by federal, state, and local governments, to prevent the inherent harm in an uncoordinated and piecemeal development of the state’s shorelines.

It is the policy of the state to provide for the management of the shorelines of the state by planning for and fostering all reasonable and appropriate uses. This policy is designed to insure the development of these shorelines in a manner which, while allowing for limited reduction of rights of the public in the navigable waters, will promote and enhance the public interest. This policy contemplates protecting against adverse effects to the public health, the land and its vegetation and wildlife, and the waters of the state and their aquatic life, while protecting generally public rights of navigation and corollary rights incidental thereto.

The legislature declares that the interest of all of the people shall be paramount in the management of shorelines of statewide significance. The department, in adopting guidelines for shorelines of statewide significance, and local government, in developing master programs for shorelines of statewide significance, shall give preference to uses in the following order of preference which:

(1) Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest;

(2) Preserve the natural character of the shoreline;

(3) Result in long term over short term benefit;

(4) Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;

(5) Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shorelines;

(6) Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline;

(7) Provide for any other element as defined in RCW 90.58.100 deemed appropriate or necessary.

In the implementation of this policy the public’s opportunity to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of natural shorelines of the state shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible consistent with the overall best interest of the state and the people generally. To this end uses shall be preferred which are consistent with control of pollution and prevention of damage to the natural environment, or are unique to or dependent upon use of the state’s shoreline. Alterations of the natural condition of the shorelines of the state, in those limited instances when authorized, shall be given priority for single-family residences and their appurtenant structures, ports, shoreline recreational uses including but not limited to parks, marinas, piers, and other improvements facilitating public access to shorelines of the state, industrial and commercial developments which are particularly dependent on their location on or use of the shorelines of the state and other development that will provide an opportunity for substantial numbers of the people to enjoy the shorelines of the state. Alterations of the natural condition of the shorelines and shorelands of the state shall be recognized by the department. Shorelines and shorelands of the state shall be appropriately classified and these classifications shall be revised when circumstances warrant regardless of whether the change in circumstances occurs through man-made causes or natural causes. Any areas resulting from alterations of the natural condition of the shorelines and shorelands of the state no longer meeting the definition of “shorelines of the state” shall not be subject to the provisions of chapter 90.58 RCW.

Permitted uses in the shorelines of the state shall be designed and conducted in a manner to minimize, insofar as practical, any resultant damage to the ecology and environment of the shoreline area and any interference with the public’s use of the water.

In 1995, the Legislature amended the Growth Management Act (GMA) and the Shoreline Management Act (SMA) to partially integrate the two statutes. The amendments incorporated the goals and policies of the SMA as the fourteenth goal of the GMA, specifically designating the goals and policies of a local shoreline master program as a segment of the jurisdiction’s comprehensive plan. All other portions of the SMP shall be considered a part of the jurisdiction’s development regulations (RCW 36.70A.480). The diagram below indicates the relationship.

Figure 1: Relationship of Shoreline Master Program to GMA
[IMAGE]


The SMA is administered through a cooperative program between local governments and the Department of Ecology (Ecology), whereby local communities prepare a shoreline master program (SMP) that is adopted under guidelines established by Ecology. The SMP serves to regulate development along shorelines of the state and establish a comprehensive vision of how the shoreline areas will be used and developed over time.

The SMP is a comprehensive use plan for local shoreline areas that includes desired goals and policies consistent with SMA policy (RCW 90.58.020); maps, diagrams and charts or other descriptive material and text; use and development regulations; and administrative procedures for the shoreline permitting process. The Ecology SMP guidelines (Chapter 173-26 WAC) establish general goals and policies, and standards and criteria for regulations. The SMP is based on state guidelines, but tailored to the specific conditions and needs of individual communities. The SMP is also meant to be a comprehensive vision of how the shoreline area will be used and developed over time.

Under the SMA, shoreline jurisdiction generally includes water areas of the state, the lands underlying them, and areas that are 200 feet landward of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) of said waters that have been designated as “shorelines of statewide significance” or “shorelines of the state.” These designations were established in 1971, and are described in RCW 90.58.030 (Definitions and concepts). Generally, “shorelines of statewide significance” include marine waters below extreme low water, rivers west of the Cascade Range that have a mean annual flow of 1,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) or greater, rivers east of the Cascade Range that have a mean annual flow of 200 cfs or greater, and freshwater lakes with a surface area of 1,000 acres or more. “Shorelines of the state” are generally described as all marine shorelines and shorelines of all other streams or rivers having a mean annual flow of 20 cfs or greater and lakes with a surface area greater than 20 acres. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.10.005 City of Burien shoreline jurisdiction.

Although there are a number of water bodies, including streams, lakes and marine shorelines, within the city of Burien, only two are regulated under the SMA. The shoreline jurisdiction within the city limits of the city of Burien includes approximately five miles of marine shoreline along Puget Sound and Lake Burien. There are no “shorelines of the state” associated with rivers or streams in the city. The portions of Puget Sound within the city limits are defined as “shorelines of statewide significance” waterward of the line of extreme low tide (RCW 90.58.030(2)(e)(iii), Shorelines of Statewide Significance). The marine shoreline has been given a special status because it is considered a major resource from which all people in the state derive benefit.

Under the SMA, the shoreline area to be regulated under the city’s SMP must include marine waters and shorelands, defined as the upland area within 200 feet of the OHWM, as well as any associated wetlands (RCW 90.58.030, Definitions and concepts). All proposed uses and development occurring within shoreline jurisdiction must conform to Chapter 90.58 RCW, the Shoreline Management Act, and this shoreline master program. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.10.010 Components of Burien shoreline master program.

The city of Burien shoreline master program was originally adopted at the time of the city’s incorporation in 1993. Under new shoreline master program guidelines adopted by Ecology in 2004, cities within King County are required to update their local shoreline master programs.

Figure 2: Structure of City of Burien Shoreline Master Program
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.10.015 Amendments and state role.

The city of Burien shoreline master program may be amended when new information is obtained, local circumstances change, or shoreline management approaches are improved. The city will follow procedures identified in BMC 19.65.080 (Type 4 Decisions) for Type 4 legislative decisions which allow for public notice and hearing, review and recommendation by the shoreline administrator and the city planning commission with formal approval given by the city council. After local adoption, all amendments to the city of Burien shoreline master program must be approved by the Washington State Department of Ecology before they can be locally in effect.

Appeals of approved amendments to the Burien shoreline master program are under the jurisdiction of the Central Puget Sound Growth Management Hearings Board. Appeals involving a shoreline permit are under the jurisdiction of the State of Washington Shorelines Hearings Board. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


Chapter 20.20 GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES

Sections:

20.20.001    Purpose.

20.20.005    General goals and policies.

20.20.010    Economic development element.

20.20.015    Shoreline public access element.

20.20.020    Recreation element.

20.20.025    Circulation element.

20.20.030    Land use element.

20.20.035    Conservation element.

20.20.040    Historic, cultural, scientific, and educational element.

20.20.045    Flood prevention and minimization element.

20.20.050    Restoration element.


20.20.001 Purpose.

The shoreline master program goals and policies of this chapter reflect the aspirations and concerns that Burien citizens and stakeholders expressed about the city’s shorelines during community and shoreline advisory committee meetings. These goal and policy statements, along with the shoreline land use map, are the foundation for specific guidelines concerning how to regulate and manage activities occurring within the city’s shoreline jurisdiction.

The goals and policies of this element apply to all water bodies and shorelands that meet the definitions set forth in RCW 90.58.030 (Definitions and concepts) unless otherwise specifically stated in the goal or policy. Burien’s shorelines include those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters. Water bodies in Burien that meet the applicable definitions include Puget Sound waterward to mid channel and Lake Burien. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.005 General goals and policies.

Goal ALL: Develop, implement, and maintain a shoreline master program that results in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes, balances public and private interests in the shoreline, and considers other relevant programs.

(1) Policy ALL 1. The shoreline master program shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes.

(2) Policy ALL 2. Regulation and management of Burien’s shorelines should be guided by ongoing and comprehensive science.

(3) Policy ALL 3. The city should be proactive in managing activities within the shoreline jurisdiction.

(4) Policy ALL 4. Implement an adaptive management approach to respond to changes and to ensure continued effectiveness.

(5) Policy ALL 5. The shoreline master program should balance private use and enjoyment of tidelands and adjacent lands with the greater public benefit that shorelines provide, while recognizing the rights of individuals to use and develop private property in a manner consistent with city and other applicable regulations.

(6) Policy ALL 6. When shoreline master program regulations are developed and applied, they should consider site-specific characteristics.

(7) Policy ALL 7. Regulation and management of the city’s shorelines should be coordinated with relevant local, state, federal, and other programs. Such programs include, but are not limited to, those administered by: city of Seattle, city of Normandy Park, city of SeaTac, King County, Washington Department of Ecology, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Washington Department of Natural Resources, Puget Sound Partnership, United States Army Corps of Engineers, Muckleshoot Tribe, Puyallup Tribe, and Water Resource Inventory Area 9.

(8) Policy ALL 8. Consider an incentive base system to encourage redevelopment projects to comply with accepted shoreline best management practices and standards. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.010 Economic development element.

Goal ED: Ensure healthy, orderly economic growth by allowing those economic activities which will be an asset to the local economy and which result in the least possible adverse effect on the quality of the shoreline and surrounding environment.

(1) Policy ED 1. Protect the beauty and function of the natural environment to maintain a community where people want to live and work.

(2) Policy ED 2. Promote actions ensuring a clean and attractive community. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.015 Shoreline public access element.

Goal PA: Increase and enhance public access to shoreline areas, consistent with the natural shoreline character, private property rights, and public safety.

(1) Policy PA 1. Developments, uses, and activities on or near the shoreline should not impair or detract from public access to the water.

(2) Policy PA 2. Publicly owned shorelines should be limited to water-dependent or public recreational uses, otherwise such shorelines should remain protected open space.

(3) Policy PA 3. Public access to the city’s shorelines should be designed to provide for public safety and to minimize potential impacts to private property and individual privacy rights.

(4) Policy PA 4. Public access should be provided as close as possible to the water’s edge with no net loss of shoreline ecological function and without adversely impacting private property rights and personal privacy rights. Public access should be designed for handicapped and physically impaired persons.

(5) Policy PA 5. The city should seek opportunities to develop new public access areas in locations dispersed throughout the shoreline.

(6) Policy PA 6. The vacation or sale of street ends, other public rights-of-way and tax title properties that abut shoreline areas shall be prohibited except as provided for in RCW 35.79.035 (Streets – Vacation). The city should protect these areas for public access and public viewpoints.

(7) Policy PA 7. Waterfront street ends should be recognized as:

(a) An important community resource that provides visual and physical access to the Puget Sound;

(b) Special use parks which serve the community, yet fit and support the character of the surrounding neighborhoods;

(c) A destination resource, where limited facilities and enhancements are provided.

(8) Policy PA 8. The city should manage and develop waterfront street ends by:

(a) Supporting their use by residents citywide, yet ensuring that the street ends and their supporting facilities are developed at a level or capacity which is appropriate to the neighborhood character, promotes safety, protects private property rights and individual privacy, and is consistent with city risk management practices;

(b) Ensuring that public parking is available and limited to a level appropriate to the capacity of the public access site, and is harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood;

(c) Ensuring that the waterfront street ends are preserved and maintained with limited enhancements, such as places to sit or rest which fit in with the natural environment of the area;

(d) Installing signs that indicate the public’s right of access, the rules of use, and penalties for misuse;

(e) Installing limited trail improvements and enhancements to allow access to the water;

(f) Protecting adjacent private property including but not limited to protecting individual privacy rights and ensuring public safety; and

(g) Developing a street ends plan that promotes waterfront access and public safety.

(9) Policy PA 9. Waterfront street ends or other shoreline access should be planned in conjunction with the affected neighborhoods. However, the broader community should be notified during the public notification process.

(10) Policy PA 10. The city should disseminate information that identifies all locations for public access to the shorelines.

(11) Policy PA 11. The public’s visual access to the city’s shorelines from streets, paths, trails and designated viewing areas should be conserved and enhanced.

(12) Policy PA 12. Public views from the shoreline upland areas should be enhanced and conserved, while recognizing that enhancement of views should not be necessarily construed to mean removal of vegetation.

(13) Policy PA 13. Promote a coordinated system of connected pathways, sidewalks, passageways between buildings, beach walks, and shoreline access points that increase the amount and diversity of opportunities for walking and chances for personal discoveries. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.020 Recreation element.

Goal REC: Develop a well-maintained, interconnected system of multi-functional parks, recreation facilities, and open spaces that: is attractive, safe, and accessible for all geographic regions and population segments within the city; supports the community’s well-established neighborhoods and small town atmosphere; protects private property rights and results in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes.

(1) Policy REC 1. Recreation facilities in the shoreline area should be restricted to those dependent upon a shoreline location, or those benefiting from a shoreline or in-water location that are in the public interest.

(2) Policy REC 2. Recreational developments should be located, designed and operated to be compatible with, and minimize adverse impacts on, environmental quality and valuable natural features as well as on adjacent surrounding land and water uses. Favorable consideration should be given to proposals which complement their environment and surrounding land and water uses, and result in no net loss of ecological functions.

(3) Policy REC 3. Public information and education programs should be developed and implemented to help ensure that the public is aware of park regulations and private property rights, and to prevent the abuse of the shoreline and its natural ecological system.

(4) Policy REC 4. The city shall plan to provide, in coordination with other agencies, a range of park facilities that serve a variety of recreational and open space purposes. Such planning should use the following designations and guidelines to provide such diversity:

(a) Mini or Pocket Park.

(i) Use Description. Passive recreation or specialized facilities that may serve a concentrated or limited population such as children or senior citizens.

(ii) Service Area. Approximately one-third of a mile radius.

(iii) Size. No minimum to approximately one acre.

(iv) Desirable Characteristics. These parks should be in close proximity to dwellings and/or other centers of activity. Mini parks should be designed for intensive use and should be accessible and visible from surrounding area.

(v) Examples. In Burien these types of parks are primarily private parks consisting of beach access for adjacent subdivisions, view appreciation areas (bench or platform), picnic tables and trees in a small area, children’s play area, game tables, or planted areas.

(vi) Other Considerations. Since maintenance costs of these smaller parks are high relative to their service areas, few jurisdictions are able to meet the desired quantity. This type of park is most suitable to provide unique local needs, such as shore access, or as a consideration in the design of new development. The city should seek a variety of means for financing and maintaining mini parks, including considering opportunities for community stewardship and grant or private funding.

(b) Regional Parks.

(i) Use Description. Areas of natural or ornamental quality for outdoor recreation such as picnicking, boating, beach activities, swimming, and trails. Such parks may contain special amenities, facilities or features that attract people from throughout the surrounding region. Such facilities require extensive on-site parking and good access by automobile.

(ii) Service Area. Approximately one-half to one hour driving time.

(iii) Size. Approximately 90 acres.

(iv) Desirable Characteristics. Contiguous to or encompassing significant natural resources.

(v) Examples. Seahurst Park.

(c) Special Use Park.

(i) Use Description. Specialized or single-purpose recreational activities such as walking and bicycle trails, street ends, or areas that preserve buildings, sites or features of historical significance.

(ii) Service Area. Variable.

(iii) Size. Depends on nature of facility.

(iv) Desirable Characteristics. Compatibility with adjacent facilities and uses.

(v) Examples. Examples within Burien shoreline consist primarily of designated viewpoints and historical markers, and waterfront street ends (including those at SW 170th Pl., SW 163rd Pl., and at the intersection of Maplewild Ave. SW and SW 172nd St.).

(d) Conservancy Park.

(i) Use Description. Conservancy parks are formally designated public resource areas. In such parks the primary management objectives are protection and management of historical, cultural and natural resources, including fish and wildlife habitat areas, and may include appropriate passive recreational activities.

(ii) Service Area. None.

(iii) Size. As appropriate for the resource.

(iv) Desirable Characteristics. As appropriate for the resource.

(v) Examples. Currently Salmon Creek Ravine is most appropriately classified in this category although its feasibility for including other types of park activities consistent with its character should be evaluated. This category would also apply to any significant formally designated land, protected wetlands or steep slope areas by private or public means.

(5) Policy REC 5. Access for motorized vessels should be discouraged at Seahurst Park. Access for nonmotorized craft should be considered if access for such craft can be provided in an environmentally sensitive manner.

(6) Policy REC 6. Where appropriate, recreational developments should make adequate provisions for:

(a) Vehicular and pedestrian access, both on site and off site;

(b) Proper water supply and sewage waste disposal methods;

(c) Security and fire protection;

(d) The prevention of overflow and trespass onto adjacent properties, including but not limited to landscaping, fencing and posting of property; and

(e) Buffering of such development from adjacent private property or natural area.

(7) Policy REC 7. Trails and pathways on steep shoreline bluffs should be located, designed and maintained to protect bank stability without the need for shoreline armoring.

(8) Policy REC 8. Mooring buoys, in general, are beneficial in enabling increased recreational opportunities. However, the city should ensure that their possible negative effects on physical and visual environments are avoided.

(9) Policy REC 9. Artificial marine life habitats should be encouraged in order to provide increased aquatic life for recreation. Such habitats should be constructed in areas of low habitat diversity and in consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(10) Policy REC 10. The linkage of shoreline parks, recreation areas and public access points with linear systems, such as hiking paths, bicycle paths, easements and/or scenic drives, should be encouraged.

(11) Policy REC 11. Development of recreational facility along city shorelines should implement low-impact development techniques whenever feasible. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.025 Circulation element.

Goal CI: Provide safe, reasonable, and adequate circulation systems in the shoreline area that will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile shoreline features and existing ecological systems, while contributing to the functional and visual enhancement of the shoreline.

(1) Policy CI 1. Minimize impacts to the topography and other natural characteristics of the shoreline by appropriately locating transportation routes. New roadways for vehicle circulation should be located outside of or minimized within the shoreline area.

(2) Policy CI 2. Cross Puget Sound bridges should be prohibited within the Burien shoreline jurisdiction.

(3) Policy CI 3. Provide and/or enhance physical and visual public access along shoreline public roads and trails when appropriate given topography, views, natural features, and surrounding land uses.

(4) Policy CI 4. Public transit systems should provide service to designated public parks within the city.

(5) Policy CI 5. Wherever practicable, safe pedestrian and bicycle movement on and off roadways in the shoreline area should be encouraged as a means of personal transportation and recreation.

(6) Policy CI 6. Parking in shoreline areas should directly serve a permitted shoreline use. Parking developed for public access points should be limited to the number of spaces consistent with the capacity of those public access points and is harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood.

(7) Policy CI 7. Parking facilities should be located and designed to minimize adverse impacts, including those related to: storm water runoff; water quality; visual qualities; public access; and vegetation and habitat maintenance.

(8) Policy CI 8. Parking should be planned to achieve optimum use. Where possible, parking should serve more than one use.

(9) Policy CI 9. Utilities are necessary to serve shoreline uses and shall be properly installed so as to protect the shoreline and water from contamination and degradation.

(10) Policy CI 10. Utility facilities and rights-of-way should be located outside of the shoreline area to the maximum extent possible. When utility lines require a shoreline location, they should be placed underground.

(11) Policy CI 11. Utility facilities should be designed and located in a manner which preserves the natural landscape and shoreline ecology and minimizes conflicts with present and planned land uses.

(12) Policy CI 12. Parking for non-water-dependent uses should be located as far away as feasible from shorelines. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.030 Land use element.

Goal USE: Provide functional and attractive shoreline uses that are appropriate in scale, configuration, and location, and are sensitive to and do not degrade habitat and ecological systems and other shoreline resources.

(1) Policy USE 1. The shoreline master program shall govern the development of all designated shorelines of the city. Lands adjacent to these areas shall be managed in a manner consistent with the shoreline master program.

(2) Policy USE 2. The city will strive to ensure that basic community values are reflected in the city’s land use and decision making processes, while recognizing the rights of individuals to use and develop private property in a manner consistent with city regulations.

(3) Policy USE 3. Ensure the appropriate location, design, and operation of all activities, development, and redevelopment in the shoreline.

(4) Policy USE 4. Incentives should be available to encourage the removal and/or reduction of nonconformances.

(5) Policy USE 5. If feasible, septic systems should be connected to the sanitary sewer system where connections are available.

(6) Policy USE 6. Any existing single-family lot that was legally subdivided or legally created prior to enactment of subdivision statutes prior to incorporation or annexation shall be considered a legally conforming lot for building purposes, providing the size of the lot was not reduced by more than 50 percent through acquisition for public purposes, and on such lots new homes may be built and existing houses may be expanded and remodeled; provided, that applicable setbacks, lot coverage, critical area restrictions, design review requirements (if any), height limits and other applicable regulations in the zoning code are met.

(7) Policy USE 7. When determining buildable lot size for residential development, the area of a lot covered by water (including but not limited to lakes or the Puget Sound) shall not be included in the calculation.

(8) Policy USE 8. The planned densities for single-family development should encourage a lower development potential in areas with development constraints.

(9) Policy USE 9. The low density residential neighborhood designation will provide for low density residential development. Development within this designation includes existing neighborhoods that are zoned for four units net per acre or less.

(a) Allowed Uses and Description. The low density residential neighborhood designation allows single-family residential uses and their accessory uses at a density of four units per net acre or less, due to the constraints posed by critical areas. This policy may be implemented by more than one zoning category, based on the ability of the land and public facilities to support development. Development standards, for such items as impervious surfaces, streetscapes, sidewalks and storm water drainage, may vary within each zoning category based on the existing character of the area.

(b) Designation Criteria. Properties designated low density residential neighborhood should reflect the following criteria:

(i) The area is already generally characterized by single-family residential development at four units per acre or less;

(ii) Relative to other residential areas within the city, the area is characterized by lower intensity development as shown on Map LU-2 of the comprehensive plan;

(iii) The land is designated as a potential landslide hazard area, steep slope area, or wetland on the city of Burien’s critical areas map;

(iv) The existing and planned public facilities for the area cannot adequately support a higher density; and

(v) The area is subject to existing impacts from high levels of airport-related noise.

(10) Policy USE 10. Clustering of housing units may be allowed on lots designated for residential development that contain steep slopes and are located adjacent to an urban environment.

(11) Policy USE 11. As slope increases, development intensity, site coverage, and vegetation removal should decrease and thereby minimize the potential for drainage problems, soil erosion, siltation and landslides. Slopes of 40 percent or greater should be retained in a natural state, free of structures and other land surface modifications.

(a) Single-family homes and detached single-family garages on existing legally established lots are exempted from this restriction; provided, that:

(i) The application of this restriction would deny any appropriate use of this property;

(ii) There is no other appropriate economic use with less impact;

(iii) The proposed development does not pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare on or off the development site;

(iv) Any alterations permitted to the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for economic use of the property;

(v) An analysis of soils, footings and foundations, and drainage be prepared by qualified professionals, certifying that the proposed activity is safe and will not adversely affect the steep slope hazard area or buffer;

(vi) There are adequate plans, as determined by the city, for storm water and vegetation management;

(vii) It is the applicant’s responsibility to show that these provisions are met through an appropriate mechanism such as, or similar to, the SEPA process.

(b) Short plats or other divisions of an existing legal lot shall only be approved if all resulting lots are buildable under this restriction.

(c) It is the applicant’s responsibility to show that these provisions are met through an appropriate mechanism such as, or similar to, the SEPA process.

(12) Policy USE 12. The city should prohibit development on areas prone to erosion and landslide hazards. Further, the city should restrict development on potentially unstable land to ensure public safety and conformity with existing natural constraints, unless the risks and adverse impacts associated with such development can be appropriately mitigated.

(13) Policy USE 13. Land uses on steep slopes should be designed to prevent property damage and environmental degradation, and to enhance open space and wildlife habitat.

(14) Policy USE 14. Where there is a high probability of erosion, grading should be kept to a minimum and disturbed vegetation should be restored as soon as feasible. In all cases, the city shall require appropriate site design and construction measures to control erosion and sedimentation.

(15) Policy USE 15. The city should have development standards that promote the siting of new structures such that they will not require shoreline stabilization and protective measures in the future.

(16) Policy USE 16. Shoreline stabilization and protective measures should be limited in number and extent. The use of “soft” stabilization and protective measures, such as vegetation, is preferred over the use of “hard” measures, such as concrete bulkheads.

(17) Policy USE 17. Encourage joint-use activities in proposed shoreline developments.

(18) Policy USE 18. Wakes generated by vessels operating in the shoreline area should be minimized in order to reduce adverse impacts on the shoreline environment.

(19) Policy USE 19. Limit use of pesticides and herbicides within shoreline jurisdiction.

(20) Policy USE 20. Development should be designed to minimize impacts to both views of the shoreline and views from the water. Building orientation, height and the creation of view corridors shall be considered in site and structure design. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.035 Conservation element.

Goal CON: Preserve and enhance shoreline natural resources in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare; maintain the integrity of the natural environment; and preserve the quality of life in Burien.

(1) Policy CON 1. Protect critical areas and shoreline ecological processes and functions through regulatory and nonregulatory means. Protection may include acquisition of key properties, regulation of development, and incentives to encourage ecologically sound design.

(2) Policy CON 2. The city shall ensure that uses and development in shoreline areas are compatible with the shoreline environments designated in this shoreline master program. Adherence to these designations will ensure that sensitive habitat, ecological systems, and other shoreline resources are protected.

(3) Policy CON 3. The city of Burien’s critical areas map shall be used as a reference for identifying the city’s critical areas. Other unmapped critical areas do exist throughout the city. Any site containing critical areas within shoreline jurisdiction is subject to the special development regulations and conditions found in this shoreline master program.

(4) Policy CON 4. Development should be directed toward areas where their adverse impacts on critical areas can be minimized.

(5) Policy CON 5. New development or redevelopment should avoid or mitigate additional loss of shoreline ecological functions. Developments should be encouraged to improve ecological functions and restore riparian buffers.

(6) Policy CON 6. The city shall maintain a system of development regulations and a permitting system to prevent the destruction of critical areas. Development regulations should at a minimum address wetland protection, aquifer recharge areas important for potable water, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded areas, and geologically hazardous areas.

(7) Policy CON 7. The city shall require permit review approval before any activity or construction is allowed to occur in, adjacent to, or impact a critical area.

(8) Policy CON 8. The city shall develop land use regulations to buffer critical areas from the impacts of adjacent land uses.

(9) Policy CON 9. The city requires the use of best available science for protecting critical areas within the community pursuant to the Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.172(1) (Critical Areas).

(10) Policy CON 10. The city should provide education and technical assistance on low-impact development techniques.

(11) Policy CON 11. Provide public outreach and education about shoreline ecological functions and processes, and engage the public in stewardship and enhancement activities.

(12) Policy CON 12. Encourage minimizing the amount of impervious surfaces in new development through the use of appropriate low-impact development techniques and removing paved areas or using retrofit options in existing developments, where applicable, to minimize runoff.

(13) Policy CON 13. The city shall consider the impacts of new development on water quality as part of its environmental review process and require where appropriate any mitigation measures.

(14) Policy CON 14. Educate the public on water quality issues and impacts of storm water flow.

(15) Policy CON 15. Educate individuals and households about different ways to reduce pollution.

(16) Policy CON 16. If no feasible alternative exists, a limited amount of development may occur on wetlands and floodplains. In these instances, a broad range of site planning techniques should be explored to minimize impacts on these critical areas.

(17) Policy CON 17. All wetland functions should be considered in evaluating wetland mitigation proposals, including fish and wildlife habitat, flood storage, water quality, recreation, educational opportunities, and aesthetics.

(18) Policy CON 18. The city will protect wetlands by maximizing infiltration opportunities and promoting the conservation of forest cover and native vegetation.

(19) Policy CON 19. Mitigation for any adverse impacts on wetlands shall be provided in the same basin within which the impacts occur.

(20) Policy CON 20. The city shall consider the impacts of new development on the quality of land, wildlife and vegetative resources as a part of its environmental review process and require any appropriate mitigating measures. Such mitigation may involve the retention of significant habitats.

(21) Policy CON 21. The city shall encourage an increase in tree canopies through the addition and the preservation of existing vegetation and use of landscaping as an integral part of development plans.

(22) Policy CON 22. The city should require development proposals to include nonstructural measures to stabilize soils, hillsides, bluffs and ravine sidewalls and to promote wildlife habitat by removing invasive vegetation and retaining or restoring native vegetation.

(23) Policy CON 23. The city should consider developing policies that balance the removal of vegetation to preserve and enhance views with the need to retain vegetation to promote slope stability and open space.

(24) Policy CON 24. Enhance riparian vegetation to improve shoreline ecological functions and processes where possible.

(25) Policy CON 25. The city should maintain and enhance existing species and habitat diversity including fish and wildlife habitat that supports the greatest diversity of native species.

(26) Policy CON 26. All development activities shall be located, designed, constructed and managed to avoid disturbance of adverse impacts to fish and wildlife resources, including spawning, nesting, rearing and habitat areas and migratory routes.

(27) Policy CON 27. Fish and wildlife habitat should be protected, conserved and enhanced, including:

(a) Habitats for species which have been identified as endangered, threatened, or sensitive by the state or federal government;

(b) Priority species and habitats listed in the adopted King County comprehensive plan, October 2008, as amended;

(c) Shellfish areas;

(d) Kelp and eelgrass beds;

(e) Herring and smelt spawning areas; and

(f) Wildlife habitat networks designated by the city.

(28) Policy CON 28. Fish and wildlife should be maintained through conservation and enhancement of terrestrial, air and aquatic habitats.

(29) Policy CON 29. The city should ensure that habitat networks throughout the city are designated and mapped. The network should be of sufficient width to protect habitat and dispersal zones for small mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. These networks should be protected through incentives, regulation and other appropriate mechanisms. Site planning should be coordinated during development review to ensure that connections are made or maintained amongst segments of the network.

(30) Policy CON 30. Native plant communities and wildlife habitats shall be integrated with other land uses where possible. Development shall protect wildlife habitat through site design and landscaping. Landscaping, screening, or vegetated buffers required during development review shall retain, salvage and/or reestablish native vegetation whenever feasible. Development within or adjacent to wildlife habitat networks shall incorporate design techniques that protect and enhance wildlife habitat values.

(31) Policy CON 31. The city shall promote voluntary wildlife enhancement projects which buffer and expand existing wildlife habitat, through educational and incentive programs for individuals and businesses.

(32) Policy CON 32. The city shall seek to retain as open space those areas that provide essential habitat for any rare, threatened or endangered plant or wildlife species.

(33) Policy CON 33. The city should maintain, protect and enhance greenbelts, riparian corridors and wildlife habitat corridors so that the extent and intensity of the built environment is balanced by these natural features.

(34) Policy CON 34. The city shall work with property owners to encourage nonpurchase options such as conservation easements, current use easements, and development covenants to preserve open space and greenbelts within the city’s neighborhoods. The city should also accept donations of properties where public access is anticipated or planned. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.040 Historic, cultural, scientific, and educational element.

Goal HCSE: Identify, protect, preserve, and restore buildings, sites, and areas in the shoreline having historic, cultural, scientific, or educational value for educational purposes, scientific endeavors, and enjoyment by the general public.

(1) Policy HCSE 1. The city should protect buildings, sites, and areas in the shoreline having historic, cultural, scientific, or educational value through designation, acquisition by purchase or gift, and incentives for preservation.

(2) Policy HCSE 2. Ensure that properties having historic, cultural, scientific, or educational value are protected from undue adverse impacts associated with public or private uses and activities.

(3) Policy HCSE 3. The city should consider developing and implementing measures which preserve trees of historical significance.

(4) Policy HCSE 4. Encourage educational projects and programs, including signage, that foster a greater appreciation of the importance of buildings, sites, and areas in the shoreline having historic, cultural, scientific, or educational value, as well as of shoreline management and environmental conservation. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.045 Flood prevention and minimization element.

Goal FLD: Prevent and minimize flood damage to public and private property by locating development away from flood-prone areas and by protecting and restoring shoreline ecological functions and processes.

(1) Policy FLD 1. Discourage new development in shoreline areas that would be harmed by flood conditions, or which would create or intensify flood hazard impacts on other properties.

(2) Policy FLD 2. The capacity of natural drainage courses shall not be diminished by development or other activities.

(3) Policy FLD 3. New structural flood hazard reduction measures shall only be allowed where demonstrated to be necessary, and when nonstructural methods are infeasible and mitigation is accomplished. New structural flood reduction measures shall be located landward of associated wetlands and buffer areas, except where no alternative exists as documented in a geotechnical analysis.

(4) Policy FLD 4. Monitor sea level rise and accordingly adjust development standards and building setbacks to minimize flooding potential. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.20.050 Restoration element.

Goal REST: Restore areas which are ecologically degraded to the greatest extent feasible while maintaining appropriate use of the shoreline.

(1) Policy REST 1. Promote restoration actions that are doable, practical, and effective.

(2) Policy REST 2. The city shall be a good steward of public lands and should integrate restoration and/or enhancement of fish and wildlife habitats into capital improvement projects whenever feasible.

(3) Policy REST 3. Establish incentives that provide opportunities for new development or redevelopment activities in the shoreline to restore impaired ecological functions and processes. Incentives might include, but are not limited to: flexible development standards (e.g., setbacks, height limits, lot coverage), reduced or waiver of permit fees, and tax relief.

(4) Policy REST 4. The city shall promote voluntary shoreline enhancement projects through educational and incentive programs for individuals and organizations.

(5) Policy REST 5. The city should implement the restoration plan associated with this shoreline master program.

(6) Policy REST 6. Improve natural stream and shoreline conditions to an environmental quality level that supports the return and continuation of salmon runs and eliminates fish blockages.

(7) Policy REST 7. Stream banks and stream channels should be maintained or restored to their natural condition wherever such conditions or opportunities exist.

(8) Policy REST 8. Increase availability of large woody debris and opportunities for recruitment in the nearshore zone.

(9) Policy REST 9. Restore degraded shoreline areas with native species.

(10) Policy REST 10. The city should investigate partnerships with local environmental groups, city, state or county agencies, or tribes to implement projects and conduct follow-up monitoring and reporting. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


Chapter 20.25 SHORELINE ENVIRONMENT DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

20.25.001    Shorelines of statewide significance.

20.25.005    Shoreline environment designation map.

20.25.010    Aquatic.

20.25.015    Urban conservancy.

20.25.020    Shoreline residential.

20.25.025    Shoreline environment designation map.


20.25.001 Shorelines of statewide significance.

The State of Washington Shoreline Management Act (SMA) designates certain shoreline areas as shorelines of statewide significance. These shorelines are considered important major resources from which all people in the state derive benefit. The SMA states that local shoreline master programs must give preference to uses which favor public and long-term interests of the people of the state. In the city of Burien, only the marine shorelines below the extreme low tide are designated shorelines of statewide significance. Lake Burien is a “shoreline of the state” and is not a “shoreline of statewide significance.” The following policies apply to Burien’s marine shorelines:

(1) Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest.

(2) Preserve the natural character of the shoreline.

(3) Result in long-term over short-term benefit.

(4) Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline.

(5) Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shoreline.

(6) Increase recreational opportunities for the public on the shoreline. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.25.005 Shoreline environment designation map.

The shoreline designation map, Figure 3, establishes the general locations of each of the shoreline designations within the city of Burien. This map generally illustrates the extent of shoreline jurisdiction, but is only a depiction that will need to be reviewed and determined on a case-by-case basis based on the relevant definitions in the SMA. In the event that there are any undesignated shorelines of the state, they will be automatically designated “urban conservancy” under this SMP. If any part of a proposed development or activity is located within shoreline designation, the entire proposal must be reviewed for consistency with the city of Burien’s shoreline master program. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.25.010 Aquatic.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the “aquatic” shoreline environment designation is to protect, restore, and manage the unique characteristics and resources of shoreline areas waterward of the ordinary high water mark, including both Lake Burien and Puget Sound. This is accomplished by managing water-dependent uses and modifications to:

(a) Preserve/restore ecological functions of the nearshore area;

(b) Preserve critical saltwater and freshwater habitat;

(c) Provide public access and recreation opportunities;

(d) Assure compatibility between shoreland and aquatic uses.

(2) Criteria for Designation. An “aquatic” shoreline environment designation is assigned to lands waterward of the ordinary high water mark for both saltwater and freshwater bodies of water, including any submerged or intertidal areas. For the city of Burien, this designation applies to Lake Burien and all marine (Puget Sound) areas waterward of the ordinary high water mark out to the center of the channel within the city limits. The aquatic shoreline environment designation includes the water surface together with the underlying lands and the water column.

(3) Management Policies.

(a) Shoreline uses and modifications should be compatible with the adjoining shoreline environment and designed and managed to prevent degradation of water quality and alteration of natural hydrographic conditions.

(b) New over-water structures should be allowed only for water-dependent uses, public access, or ecological restoration if it can be clearly shown that the cumulative environmental impacts of such structures will not cause significant adverse impacts to protected species.

(c) The size of new over-water structures should be limited to the minimum necessary to support the structure’s intended use and should support multiple uses.

(d) All developments and uses on navigable waters or their beds should be located and designed to minimize interference with surface navigation and moorage.

(e) All developments and uses should consider impacts to public views and access and allow for the safe, unobstructed passage of fish and wildlife, particularly those species dependent on migration.

(f) Restoration opportunities associated with project impacts should be encouraged in the aquatic environment.

(g) Uses that adversely impact the ecological functions of critical saltwater and freshwater habitats should not be allowed except where necessary to achieve the objectives of RCW 90.58.020 (Shoreline Management Act), and then only when their impacts are mitigated according to the sequence described in WAC 173-26-201(2)(e) (Environmental Impact Mitigation) necessary to achieve no net loss of ecological functions.

(h) Shoreline uses and modifications should be designed and managed to prevent degradation of water quality and alteration of natural hydrographic conditions. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.25.015 Urban conservancy.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the “urban conservancy” shoreline environment designation is to protect and restore ecological functions of open space, floodplains, and other sensitive lands where they exist in urban and developed settings, while allowing a variety of compatible uses. This designation focuses on providing public access for the enjoyment of marine and lake shorelines by allowing the development of public recreational facilities.

(2) Criteria for Designation. An “urban conservancy” environment designation is assigned to areas within shoreline jurisdiction that are suitable for public access, water enjoyment recreational uses and active recreation developments. These are areas that are developed at a low density including residences and outdoor recreation. The urban conservancy environment is bounded on the north by the northern end of Seahurst Park and on the south by the southern end of Eagle Landing Park.

(3) Management Policies.

(a) Uses that preserve or restore the natural character of the shoreline area or promote preservation of open space and critical areas should be the primary allowed uses.

(b) Public access and public recreation objectives should be implemented if feasible and wherever any significant ecological impacts can be mitigated.

(c) Water-oriented uses should be given priority over non-water-oriented uses with water-dependent uses given the highest priority.

(d) New development should be designed and located to preclude the need for shoreline armoring, vegetation removal, flood control, and other shoreline modifications.

(e) Standards should be established for shoreline stabilization measures, vegetation conservation, water quality, and shoreline modifications. These standards shall ensure that new development does not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions or further degrade other shoreline values. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.25.020 Shoreline residential.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the “shoreline residential” environment designation is to accommodate residential development and appurtenant structures as well provide appropriate public access.

(2) Criteria for Designation. A “shoreline residential” environment designation is assigned to shoreline areas that are predominantly single-family or multifamily residential development or are planned and platted for residential development. These are areas that are developed at a moderate density or intensity including residences and outdoor recreation. Low intensity institutional uses may be allowed if their impacts on the shoreline environment are mitigated. The shoreline residential environment includes all shorelands from the northern city limits to the north end of Seahurst Park, from the southern end of Eagle Landing Park to the southern city limits, and all of Lake Burien.

(3) Management Policies.

(a) Residential and accessory uses, recreation facilities and public access shall be the preferred uses.

(b) Multifamily and multi-lot residential and recreational developments should provide public access and joint use for community recreational facilities.

(c) Water-oriented recreational uses should be allowed.

(d) Any new development or redevelopment should utilize low-impact development techniques where feasible.

(e) Standards for building setbacks, lot coverage limitations, riparian buffers, shoreline stabilization, vegetation conservation, critical area protection, and water quality shall be set to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(f) Public access and public recreation objectives should be implemented if feasible and wherever any significant ecological impacts can be mitigated. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.25.025 Shoreline environment designation map.

Figure 3: Shoreline Environment Designation Map
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


Chapter 20.30 SHORELINE USES AND MODIFICATIONS POLICIES AND REGULATIONS* 

Sections:

20.30.001    Shoreline permit matrix. 

20.30.005    Applicability.

20.30.007    Existing development.

20.30.010    Impact mitigation.

20.30.015    Land use.

20.30.020    Archaeological and historic resources.

20.30.025    Critical areas. 

20.30.030    Flood hazard reduction.

20.30.035    Public access.

20.30.040    Shoreline vegetation.

20.30.045    Water quality, storm water and nonpoint pollution.

20.30.050    Dimensional standards for shoreline development.

20.30.055    Shoreline buffers.

20.30.060    Select shoreline uses and modifications.

20.30.065    Aquaculture. 

20.30.070    Bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures.

20.30.075    Over-water structures – Including docks, piers and floats.

20.30.080    Habitat restoration and enhancement.

20.30.085    Recreational development.

20.30.090    Recreational mooring buoys.

20.30.095    Residential development.

20.30.100    Transportation facilities and parking.

20.30.105    Utilities.

*The appendices referenced in this chapter are available at the city of Burien.


20.30.001 Shoreline permit matrix. 

Figure 4: Shoreline Permit Matrix  

	Type of Shoreline Permit Required for New Shoreline Uses and Modifications*

	 	Shoreline Environment Designations (Please see Chapter 20.25 BMC for shoreline designation descriptions and BMC 20.25.025, Figure 3, for a map showing the locations of each designation)

	 	Shoreline Residential	Aquatic	Urban Conservancy

	Aquaculture	X	CU1	X

	Boat Mooring Buoy	N/A	P3	N/A

	Boat Ramp	X	X	X

	Boat House (covered moorage)	X	X	X

	Shoreline Stabilization Structures	 	 	 

	•    Breakwater and Other In-Water Structures	N/A	X6	N/A

	•    Bulkheads	SDP4	CU	SDP4

	•    Upland Structures (retaining walls and bluff walls)**	SDP	N/A	SDP

	Personal Wireless Service Facility	CU	N/A	X

	Community Beach	CU	CU	X

	Community Residential Facility	CU	X	X

	Docks, Piers and Floats	CU	CU	CU

	Docks, Piers and Floats – Residential	SDP5	SDP5	X

	Dredging	N/A	X	N/A

	Fill2	X	X	X

	Floating Home	N/A	X	N/A

	Flood Hazard Reduction	SDP	CU	SDP

	Forest Practices9	CU	N/A	CU

	Grading	CU	N/A	CU

	Government Facility	CU	X	CU

	Habitat Enhancement or Restoration	SDP	SDP	SDP

	Industrial and Ports	X	X	X

	Mining	X	X	X

	Office	X	X	X

	Public Park and Recreation Facilities	SDP	SDP	SDP

	Recreation	SDP	SDP	SDP

	Residential – Single-Family**	SDP8	X	SDP8

	Residential – Multifamily	SDP	X	CU

	Commercial Use and Development	X7	X	X7

	Schools	CU	N/A	CU

	Transportation Facilities and Parking	SDP	X	SDP

	Utilities	SDP	CU	SDP

	P	Permitted – Allowed when meeting the requirements for the given use. A shoreline substantial development permit (SDP) or shoreline exemption may be needed. See WAC 173-27-040(2) for a complete list of development exempt from a substantial development permit.

	SDP	Shoreline substantial development permit (city decision) – See Chapter 20.35 BMC for specific procedures.

	CU	Shoreline conditional use permit (requires a Department of Ecology decision if locally approved) – See Chapter 20.35 BMC for specific procedures. A SDP may also be required.

	X	Prohibited.

	N/A	Not applicable.

	1	Prohibited in critical saltwater habitats and Lake Burien.

	2	Allowed if necessary to construct a permitted use.

	3	Private mooring buoys are exempt from the shoreline substantial development permit process but shall comply with BMC 20.30.090 (Recreational mooring buoys) which prohibits mooring buoys on Lake Burien.

	4	Construction of the normal protective bulkhead common to single-family residences must comply with BMC 20.30.070 (Bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures) but is not required to obtain a substantial development permit.

	5	Construction of a dock, including a community dock, designed for pleasure craft only, for the private noncommercial use of the owner, lessee, or contract purchaser of single-family and multiple-family residences, shall not require a substantial development permit if below the thresholds set forth in WAC 173-27-040(2)(h), but shall comply with all other applicable sections of this master program.

	6	Allowed only for protection or restoration of ecological functions.

	7	Bed and breakfast establishments are allowed in shoreline residential environment (BMC 20.30.095). Limited commercial recreation activities in Seahurst Park (BMC 20.30.085).

	8	A conditional use permit is required for construction within the shoreline buffer. A variance is required for any development waterward of the existing home within the buffer; however, a variance is not required if the common-line setback option of BMC 20.30.095(2)(c) is utilized.

	9	A forest practice that only involves timber cutting is not a development under the Act and does not require a shoreline substantial development permit or a shoreline exemption. A forest practice that includes activities other than timber cutting may be a development under the Act and may require a substantial development permit, as required by WAC 222-50-020.

	*	Shoreline uses not listed in the matrix above are subject to a shoreline conditional use permit.

	**	Exempt from shoreline substantial development permit requirements if this is for construction of only one detached unit built by an owner, lessee, or contract purchaser who will be occupying the residence, in accordance with WAC 173-27-040(2)(g) (single-family residential exemption), as amended.

[Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.005 Applicability.

The following provisions shall apply to all uses and activities within the city of Burien’s shoreline jurisdiction unless otherwise noted. These regulations are based on general goals and policies without regard to shoreline designation based upon elements of the shoreline detailed in Chapter 20.20 BMC consistent with RCW 90.58.100(2) (SMP required contents) and implement the principles as established in WAC 173-26-186 (Governing principles of the guidelines) and WAC 173-26-221 (General master program provisions).

(1) Land use.

(2) Archaeological and historic resources.

(3) Critical areas.

(4) Flood hazard reduction.

(5) Public access.

(6) Shoreline vegetation conservation.

(7) Water quality, storm water, and nonpoint pollution. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.007 Existing development.

(1) Existing Single-Family Homes, Appurtenances, and Other Existing Structures. Single-family homes, appurtenances and other structures that were legally established by October 17, 2013, are considered to be conforming to the SMP. All such structures may be reconstructed within the existing footprint subject only to those building standards that prevail throughout the city of Burien for the associated zoning designation. Any addition, expansion or reconstruction beyond the existing footprint of the single-family home, appurtenance or other structure must comply with the SMP. Any single-family home to which a variance is issued shall be considered a conforming structure.

The ability to reconstruct a structure within its existing footprint does not imply an ability to create, enlarge or expand structures for flood hazard reduction (see BMC 20.30.030), or bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures (see BMC 20.30.070).

Replacement of any portion of any structure shall comply with the SMP requirements for materials that come in contact with the waters of Puget Sound and Lake Burien pursuant to BMC 20.30.045(2) (Water quality, storm water and nonpoint pollution).

(2) Other Existing Uses. Uses that were legally established by October 17, 2013, are considered to be conforming to the SMP. Any enlargement or expansion of the use must comply with the SMP. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.010 Impact mitigation.

(1) Policy.

(a) Adverse impacts to the ecological functions and values shall be mitigated to result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and process.

(b) Mitigation for adverse impacts of new development projects should first consider enhancement of degraded conditions to offset the impacts of the new development near shoreline resources.

(For additional policy guidance, please refer to BMC 20.20.005, 20.20.035, 20.25.010(3), 20.25.015(3) and 20.25.020(3).)

(2) Regulations.

(a) All shoreline development and uses shall occur in a manner that results in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, through the location and design of all allowed development and uses. In cases where impacts to shoreline ecological functions from allowed development and uses are unavoidable, those impacts shall be mitigated according to the provisions of this section.

(b) To the extent Washington’s State Environmental Policy Act of 1971 (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW (State environmental policy), is applicable, the analysis of environmental impacts from proposed shoreline uses or developments shall be conducted consistent with the rules implementing SEPA (BMC Title 14 (Environmental Protection) and WAC Chapter 197-11 (SEPA rules)).

(c) Where required, mitigation measures shall be applied in the following sequence of steps listed in order of priority:

(i) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(ii) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

(iii) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(iv) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation maintenance;

(v) Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;

(vi) Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking the appropriate corrective measures.

(d) In determining appropriate mitigation measures applicable to shoreline development, lower priority measures shall be applied only where higher priority measures are determined to be infeasible or inapplicable.

(e) Required mitigation shall not be in excess of that necessary to assure that proposed uses or development will result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(f) When requiring compensatory measures or appropriate corrective measures pursuant to the priority of mitigation sequencing above, preferential consideration shall be given to measures that replace the impacted functions directly and in the immediate vicinity of the impact. However, alternative compensatory mitigation within the watershed that addresses limiting factors or identified critical needs for shoreline resource conservation based on watershed or comprehensive resource management plans applicable to the area of impact may be authorized. Compensatory mitigation of impacts from new development projects should first consider enhancement of degraded conditions to offset the impacts of the new development near shoreline resources. If this is not feasible the second priority should focus mitigation on areas that are in need of restoration. Authorization of compensatory mitigation measures may require appropriate safeguards, terms or conditions as necessary to ensure no net loss of ecological functions.

(g) Mitigation for new development in the shoreline buffer is required if:

(i) Native vegetation is cleared; and/or

(ii) New impervious surface is created; and/or

(iii) New partially functioning area is created.

A procedure for evaluating impacts and determining requirements for mitigation is described in BMC 20.30.055 (Shoreline buffers).

Alternatively, the applicant may choose to secure the services of a qualified professional to develop a report to demonstrate that the no-net-loss standard will be met. The shoreline administrator may choose to develop standards for guiding the development of this report.

Please also refer to BMC 20.30.050, Dimensional standards for shoreline development, and BMC 20.30.055, Shoreline buffers, for specific requirements. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.015 Land use.

The following provisions apply to all development and uses regardless of whether a shoreline substantial development permit is required.

(1) Policies.

(a) Preference for shoreline permitted uses shall first be given to water-dependent uses, then to water-related and water enjoyment uses.

(b) The city should be proactive in enforcing shoreline regulations and provide sufficient resources to ensure enforcement occurs.

(For additional policy guidance, please refer to BMC 20.20.030, 20.25.010(3), 20.25.015(3) and 20.25.020(3).)

(2) Regulations.

(a) The application of master program policies and regulations to all uses and related modifications shall assure no net loss of ecological functions necessary to sustain shoreline natural resources.

(b) Water-dependent uses shall only be allowed over water if the over-water location is necessary for the operation of the water-dependent use. Uses which are not water dependent shall not be permitted over water unless specifically stated otherwise in the regulations for the applicable shoreline environment. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.020 Archaeological and historic resources.

According to the state shoreline management guidelines, if archaeological or historic resources have been identified in shoreline jurisdiction, the local government is required to collect information about these resources and contact the State Historic Preservation Office and local affected Indian tribes. The county and the state maintain inventories of both archaeological and historic resources. These sites and artifacts are protected by several state provisions:

Chapter 27.53 RCW – Archaeological Sites and Resources. This state law makes it illegal to knowingly disturb an archaeological site on public or private lands without a state-issued permit.

Chapter 27.44 RCW – Indian Graves and Records. This state law makes it illegal to knowingly disturb Native American cairns, petroglyphs and graves on public or private lands without a state-issued permit. Selling any Native American Indian artifacts or remains removed from a cairn or grave is also illegal.

Chapter 25-48 WAC – Archaeological Excavation and Removal Permit. This provision establishes procedures for application for and issuance of state permits for excavation and/or removal of archaeological sites and resources.

(1) Policy. The city should ensure conservation of significant archeological and historic amenities in the shoreline areas and include on the inventory of registered sites maintained by the Washington State Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, and tribally identified sites.

(For additional policies refer to BMC 20.20.040.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Archaeological sites located in shoreline jurisdiction are subject to state and federal regulations as well as to the city of Burien shoreline master program.

(b) When an application for work in the shoreline area documented to contain archaeological resources is filed the application shall include an evaluation by a professional archaeologist coordinated with affected tribes.

(c) All shoreline permits shall contain the requirement to stop work immediately and notify the city, affected tribes and the Washington State Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation if an artifact is discovered. The property owner will be required to provide for a site inspection and evaluation by a professional archaeologist for review by the relevant tribes and agencies prior to proceeding with the development or activity.

(d) Archaeological excavations may be permitted subject to the provisions of this shoreline program. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.025 Critical areas. 

Critical areas include the following areas and ecosystems: wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded areas, and geologically hazardous areas. Critical saltwater and critical freshwater habitats are also types of critical areas within shoreline jurisdiction.

(1) Policies.

(a) In assessing the potential for net loss of ecological functions or processes, project specific and cumulative impacts should be considered. 

(b) Development standards for density, frontage improvements, setbacks, impervious surface, shoreline stabilization, vegetation conservation, buffers, critical areas, and water quality should protect existing shoreline ecological functions and processes. During permit review, the shoreline administrator should consider the expected impacts associated with proposed shoreline development when assessing compliance with this policy.

(For additional policy guidance, please refer to BMC 20.20.035, 20.25.010(3), 20.25.015(3) and 20.25.020(3).)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Chapter 19.40 BMC, Critical Areas (city of Burien Ordinance 623, adopted June 15, 2015) has been reviewed for consistency with Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC and shall apply to the shoreline jurisdiction with the following exceptions:

(i) The exemptions and exceptions contained in BMC 19.40.070(3) and (4) apply only to the critical areas provisions and are not exemptions from substantial development permits. The exceptions contained in BMC 19.40.070(5) do not apply and are not considered part of the SMP.

(ii) BMC 19.40.290(2)(B)(iii) does not apply and is not considered part of the SMP. For a landslide hazard area buffer of less than 25 feet, in addition to the items required in BMC 19.40.120, a shoreline variance shall be required.

(iii) BMC 19.40.410(2)(B) does not apply and is not considered part of the SMP. Filling is prohibited in the aquatic environment per BMC 20.30.001, Figure 4.

(iv) BMC 19.40.300(3)(C) (Category III and IV wetland exemption) does not apply and is not considered part of the SMP. 

(v) BMC 19.40.350(2)(F)(ii) is amended as follows: 

Standard buffer width averaging may be allowed by the Director (in accordance with an approved critical area review) if:

 ii. Minimum buffer width is the greater of seventy-five percent (75%) of the standard buffer width or twenty-five (25) feet;

(vi) The standard wetland buffers identified in the table in BMC 19.40.310(2)(B) are amended as follows:

Wetland Buffers 

	Wetland Category	Buffer width if wetland scores 3 – 5 habitat points	Buffer width if wetland scores 6 – 7 habitat points	Buffer width if wetland scores 8 – 9 habitat points

	Category I	75 ft	110 ft	225 ft

	Category II	75 ft	110 ft	225 ft

	Category III	60 ft	110 ft	225 ft

	Category IV	50 ft

(b) Development proposals shall adhere to the applicable submittal requirements (a critical area report specific to the critical area) as specified in the critical areas ordinance regulations adopted as part of this SMP.

(c) Development shall not intrude into, over, or within 10 feet from critical saltwater habitats (e.g., eelgrass) except when an alternative alignment or location is not feasible and the development would result in no net loss of critical saltwater habitat.

(d) When this master program requires mitigation, the mitigation sequence described in BMC 20.30.010 (Impact mitigation) shall be followed. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 640 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.030 Flood hazard reduction.

The following provisions apply to actions taken to reduce flood damage or hazard, as well as to uses, development and shoreline modifications that may increase flood hazards. Flood hazard reduction measures may consist of nonstructural measures such as setbacks, land use controls, wetland restoration, biotechnical measures, and storm water management. Flood hazard reduction measures may also include structural measures such as floodwalls, dikes and elevation of structures consistent with the National Flood Insurance Program.

(1) Policies.

(a) All new shoreline development and uses shall be located and designed to prevent the need for shoreline stabilization and structural flood hazard reduction measures for the life of the development.

(b) Flood protection structures may be allowed in shoreline jurisdiction if a shoreline substantial development permit is obtained. Structures that are near and generally parallel to the ordinary high water mark shall be considered a bulkhead and require a conditional use permit consistent with bulkhead regulations. (See BMC 20.30.001, Figure 4.)

(c) New and expanded public flood protection measures may be permitted subject to city of Burien review and approval of a critical area study and the approval of a federal biological assessment by the federal agency responsible for reviewing actions related to a federally listed species.

(d) New structural flood protection measures should only be allowed when necessary to protect existing development or to facilitate restoration projects.

(e) When emergency repair of flood protection structures is necessary, permits for the work, including mitigation, should be obtained upon abatement of the emergency or the structure must be removed.

(For additional policies refer to BMC 20.20.045.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Nonstructural flood protection measures shall be used instead of structural solutions unless the project proponent demonstrates that a nonstructural solution is not feasible and there would be no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(b) All flood protection measures, including repair and maintenance, shall conform to standards set forth in approved floodplain management plans, when available.

(c) Flood protection shall not have adverse impacts on the property of others.

(d) Flood control methods must be consistent with Chapter 15.55 BMC, Flood Damage Prevention, and Chapter 19.40 BMC, Critical Areas.

(e) Subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage by conforming to the adopted base flood elevation regulations.

(f) All new shoreline development and uses, including the replacement of a destroyed home, shall be located and designed to prevent the need for new or expanded structural flood hazard reduction measures for the life of the development. Exceptions may be made for the limited instances where flood hazard reduction is necessary to protect allowed uses where no alternative locations are available and no net loss of ecological functions will result.

(g) New structural flood hazard reduction measures in shoreline jurisdiction are allowed only when it can be demonstrated by a scientific and engineering analysis that they are necessary to protect existing development or facilitate restoration projects, that nonstructural measures are not feasible, that impacts to ecological functions and priority species and habitats can be successfully mitigated so as to assure no net loss, and that appropriate vegetation conservation actions are undertaken consistent with BMC 20.30.040.

(h) Flood protection structures may be allowed in shoreline jurisdiction if a shoreline substantial development permit is obtained. In addition, flood protection structures at or near, and parallel to, the ordinary high water mark require a conditional use permit. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.035 Public access.

Public access can be either physical access or visual access. Physical access is the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, and/or to travel on the waters of the state. Visual access is to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations or access with improvements that provide only a view of the shoreline or water, but do not allow physical access to the shoreline.

(1) Policies.

(a) Public access to shoreline areas should be designed to protect private property and public health and safety.

(b) Public access should be provided as close as possible to the water’s edge with no net loss of shoreline ecological function that cannot be mitigated.

(c) Private views of the shoreline, although considered during the review process, are not expressly protected. Property owners concerned with the protection of views from private property are encouraged to obtain view easements, purchase intervening property or seek other similar private means of minimizing view obstruction.

(For additional policies refer to BMC 20.20.015, 20.25.010(3), 20.25.015(3) and 20.25.020(3).)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Public access provided by shoreline street ends, rights-of-way, and other public lands shall provide, maintain, enhance and preserve visual access to the water and shoreline in accordance with RCW 35.79.035 (Limitations on vacations of streets abutting bodies of water – Procedure).

(b) Visual access to outstanding scenic areas shall be provided with the provision of roadway design features that allow for visual access opportunities and are sensitive to adjacent land uses and neighborhood characteristics.

(c) If a public road is located within shoreline jurisdiction, any unused right-of-way shall be dedicated as public access unless vacated as set forth in RCW 35.79.035 (Limitations on vacations of streets abutting bodies of water – Procedure).

(d) Subject to constitutional limitations, public access shall be required for all new shoreline development and uses, except for water-dependent uses, individual single-family residences, and subdivisions of less than five parcels.

(e) Public access to shoreline areas shall not be required, where it is demonstrated to be infeasible because of adverse ecological impacts that cannot be mitigated, incompatible uses, safety, security, or constitutional and other legal limitations that may be applicable.

(f) The city shall utilize alternate methods of providing public access when appropriate and feasible, such as off-site improvements, viewing platforms, separation of uses through site planning and design, and restricting hours of public access.

(g) Public access improvements shall not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(h) Required public access sites shall be fully developed and available for public use at the time of occupancy or use of the development or activity.

(i) Public access easements and permit conditions shall be recorded on the deed where applicable or on the face of a plat or short plat as a condition running in perpetuity with the land and shall occur at the time of permit approval.

(j) Future actions by the applicant or other parties shall not diminish the usefulness or value of the public access site. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.040 Shoreline vegetation.

Vegetation along the shoreline plays a number of important roles including providing bank stability, habitat and wildlife corridors, shade and cover, wood and organic debris recruitment. By slowing erosion and retaining sediments, riparian vegetation reduces pollutants including nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrocarbons, PCBs, metals, and pesticides. Shoreline vegetation also prevents excessive turbidity by slowing down and filtering surface water runoff and associated sediments. This section should be used in conjunction with BMC 20.30.050 (Dimensional standards for shoreline development).

WAC 173-26-221(5)(b) (SMP Guidelines, General master program provisions, vegetation conservation) sets forth the principles on how vegetation contributes to the overall health and sustainability of our shorelines. The applicability of these principles to Burien’s SMP is supported by the appendices to this SMP (Shoreline Inventory, Shoreline Analysis and Characterization, Shoreline Cumulative Impacts Analysis and Supplemental Informational Documents).

(1) Policies.

(a) Native plant communities within shoreline jurisdiction including, but not limited to, wetlands, lakes, streams and bluffs should be protected and maintained to minimize damage to the ecology and environment of the shoreline area.

(b) Restoration and mitigation of shorelines degraded due to natural or manmade causes should, wherever feasible, use bioengineering techniques to arrest the processes of erosion and sedimentation, to improve water quality and to provide for properly functioning conditions.

(c) Vegetation within the city shoreline areas should be enhanced over time to provide a greater level of ecological functions, human safety, and property protection. This should be accomplished by managing alterations within shoreline jurisdiction and implementing vegetation management standards that will maintain or enhance the ecological functions. Emphasis on vegetation maintenance and enhancement should be focused in degraded areas and areas that are most beneficial to shoreline ecological functions.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.030 and 20.20.035.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Alterations to vegetation within shoreline jurisdiction (except for the maintenance of existing or approved conditions) are not allowed without review and approval by the city. When allowed, alterations to the vegetation shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological value or function.

(b) Alterations within the shoreline vegetation conservation buffer (except for the maintenance of existing or approved conditions) shall only be allowed through review and approval by the city of a vegetation management plan as set forth in subsection (2)(d) of this section.

(c) If mitigation of impacts is necessary, it should take the form of vegetation enhancement and result in improvements to ecological functions. The vegetation management plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional and shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 19.40 BMC (Critical Areas). Vegetation enhancement plans shall include:

(i) Revegetation of degraded buffer areas within zone 1 of the shoreline buffer (see BMC 20.30.050, Figure 5, Dimensional Standards for Shoreline Development) (or top of shore armoring if applicable) or wetland edge with dense native vegetation meeting the standards of subsections (2)(d)(iii) and (iv) of this section. The administrator may require wider widths or other improvements to mitigate greater impacts.

(ii) The above revegetation area may be modified using area averaging when existing structures encroach into zone 1 of the shoreline buffer, when access through the area to waterfront facilities is needed, or when water-dependent activities need to take place in the area.

(d) Within a shoreline vegetation conservation buffer as set forth in BMC 20.30.050 (Dimensional standards for shoreline development), alterations shall comply with the following:

(i) The applicant shall provide a vegetation management plan prepared by a qualified professional; and

(ii) The total area of vegetation removal or alteration shall be replaced at a size equal or greater to the area being altered; and

(iii) Where new or altered vegetation planting areas are proposed within the shoreline vegetation conservation buffer, either as a part of a project proposal or to replace any existing vegetation that is removed, the new vegetation shall be provided at a density to mimic natural conditions rather than a landscaped yard; and

(iv) When new vegetation planting areas are proposed within the shoreline vegetation conservation buffer, the new or altered vegetation planting areas shall consist of mix of native trees, shrubs and ground cover; and

(v) Vegetation management plans should place emphasis on surface water filtration and infiltration, and providing plantings as close to the water’s edge or edge of bulkhead as feasible within zone 1 of the shoreline buffer; and

(vi) New lawn areas are prohibited in zone 1 of the shoreline buffer due to their limited functional benefits and need for chemical and fertilizer application; and

(vii) Appropriate limitations shall be included on the use of fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides as needed to protect lake and marine water quality.

(e) Prior to issuance of a building permit, if applicable, the applicant shall submit a vegetation management plan pursuant to subsection (2)(h) of this section. The plans shall state what erosion control measures will be implemented during and after construction resulting in long-term shoreline stabilization.

(f) All clearing, grading and vegetation removal shall be the minimum necessary except for the removal of noxious and invasive vegetation. Hand equipment should be used when feasible.

(g) Consistent with existing regulations, only noxious weeds shall be removed from critical areas or their buffer without approval of the shoreline administrator. Replacement of nonnative vegetation may be allowed through approval of a vegetation management plan as prescribed in subsection (2)(h) of this section.

(h) The director shall establish standards for vegetation management plans. At a minimum, vegetation management plans shall comply with the following:

(i) Describe the area to be disturbed and the proposed vegetation to be altered; and

(ii) Outline specific actions or methods that will be used to minimize impacts to the ecological functions and values; and

(iii) Indicate how existing shoreline vegetation will be preserved and protected; and

(iv) Describe measures that will be used or enacted that will ensure any alteration and required vegetation will be maintained for a minimum of two years and preferably for the duration of the use or development; and

(v) Delineate any applicable critical area and/or buffer; and

(vi) The plan shall document how the proposed alteration will result in equal or better ecological function and value. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.045 Water quality, storm water and nonpoint pollution.

Storm water picks up oil, grease, metals, yard and garden chemicals, dirt, bacteria, nutrients, and other pollutants from paved areas, and carries them to Puget Sound and Lake Burien without treatment. The higher rate of runoff from more impervious areas also results in decreased water quality by flushing more sediment into the water.

(1) Policies.

(a) The city of Burien should protect against adverse impacts to the public health, to the land and its vegetation and wildlife, and to the waters of the state and their aquatic life, through implementation of the following principles:

(i) Prevent impacts to water quality and storm water quantity that would result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions, or a significant impact to aesthetic qualities, or recreational opportunities.

(ii) Ensure mutual consistency between shoreline management provisions and other regulations that address water quality and storm water quantity, including public health, storm water, and water discharge standards. The regulations that are most protective of ecological functions shall apply, except as otherwise provided in RCW 36.70A.480 (Shorelines of the state), regarding the level of protection for critical areas within shorelines of the state.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.035.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Construction materials that come in continuous, direct contact with surface waters shall not be treated or coated with toxic materials. Untreated wood, precast concrete, plastic or nontoxic alternatives shall be used unless the project proponent demonstrates and the city of Burien building official determines that there is no feasible alternative to toxic treatments that will provide the structural characteristics necessary for the project. Wood products treated with creosote or pentachlorophenol are prohibited on all new structures or repair projects that come in direct contact with water or could leach into surface or ground water.

(b) Low-impact development methods shall be incorporated into any development or redevelopment in shoreline jurisdiction when feasible. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.050 Dimensional standards for shoreline development.

The following buffers are based on the City of Burien Shoreline Inventory (Appendix 1), City of Burien Supplement to the Shoreline Inventory (Appendix 1.A), the City of Burien Shoreline Analysis and Characterization (Appendix 2), the City of Burien Supplement to the Shoreline Analysis and Characterization (Appendix 2.A), the City of Burien Shoreline Cumulative Impacts Analysis (Appendix 4), the City of Burien Supplement to the Cumulative Impacts Analysis (Appendix 4.A), and Supplemental Informational Documents (Appendix 5) reports contained in this shoreline master program. The shoreline buffer, common-line building setbacks and vegetation conservation buffers are calculated from the ordinary high water mark. Buffer setbacks are measured landward from the outer edge of a buffer. For measurement methods, refer to Chapter 19.17 BMC (Miscellaneous Use, Development and Performance Standards).

A significant majority of Burien’s marine shorelines are developed with single-family residential structures and appurtenances. Specifically on reaches 1, 3 and 4, on the Puget Sound, there are many structures in close proximity to the ordinary high water mark and due to this existing development pattern there are inherent conflicts in applying greater buffer widths while also retaining the ability of residents to continue to use and maintain those areas that have been historically used in conjunction with those properties. Figure 6, Shoreline Planning Areas, illustrates the locations of altered and highly altered shoreline areas.

The shoreline buffer and vegetation conservation buffers shown in Figure 5 and in this section:

(1) Do not apply to legally established structures existing on October 17, 2013.

(2) Apply to new development, new structures, and additions/expansion of legally existing structures.

Figure 5: Dimensional Standards for Shoreline Development 

	 	UC	SR-LB	SR-AL	SR-HA

	Shoreline Buffer Zone 1(1)	50 ft	30 ft	30 ft	20 ft

	Shoreline Buffer Zone 2(1)	100 ft	15 ft	15 ft	15 ft

	Vegetation Conservation(2)	200 ft	150 ft	150 ft	150 ft

	Lot Size(3)	RS-12,000	RS-12,000	RS-12,000	RS-12,000

	Building Coverage(4)	30%	35%	35%	35%

 

	UC:	Urban Conservancy

	SR-LB:	Shoreline Residential – Lake Burien

	SR-AL:	Shoreline Residential – Marine Altered

	SR-HA:	Shoreline Residential – Marine Highly Altered

	(Please refer to Figure 6 for a map detailing the locations of the areas listed above.)

 

	(1)	Consistent with Chapter 19.40 BMC, Critical Areas, and BMC 20.30.055(1). For single-family residential development in the marine altered and highly altered planning areas, development may occur in the buffers prescribed in this section pursuant to BMC 20.30.095, through the conditional use or variance permit process. Additions or expansions of primary single-family residences are not allowed in zone 1 or 2 around Lake Burien.

	(2)	See BMC 20.30.040, Shoreline vegetation, for specific requirements.

	(3)	See Chapter 19.15 BMC and BMC 19.17.170 for minimum lot area requirements.

	(4)	See Chapter 19.15 BMC.

Figure 6: Shoreline Planning Areas
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 640 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.055 Shoreline buffers.

(1) Policy. While buffer widths based on science are necessary to protect ecological functions, it presents challenges in existing heavily developed areas such as along some parts of Burien. In such areas, an alternative strategy is established using smaller buffers that are based on existing development pattern, in combination with mitigation requirements for new development that provide enhancement of the smaller buffer and other degraded features to address impacts of the new development outside the small buffer areas when part of a vegetation conservation plan.

(2) Regulations.

(a) A shoreline buffer is established for the marine shoreline and for Lake Burien. This buffer consists of two zones: zone 1 and zone 2.

(i) Zone 1 is adjacent to the ordinary high water mark (OHWM). New development that would introduce adverse impacts is strictly limited within zone 1 and, if allowed, must be mitigated to assure no net loss.

(ii) Zone 2 is adjacent to the landward side of zone 1. New development in zone 2 that would introduce adverse impacts, if allowed, must be mitigated to assure no net loss, preferentially by restoration activities in zone 1.

(iii) The size of these zones varies as shown in BMC 20.30.050, Figure 5. Distances are measured on a horizontal plane in a direction that is perpendicular to the line of the OHWM.

(b) No Net Loss Compliance. All development within the buffer as set forth in BMC 20.30.050 and this section shall demonstrate that unavoidable adverse impacts are mitigated to achieve no net loss.

(i) Achieving no net loss can be achieved by:

(A) Avoiding an adverse impact; or

(B) Relocating the adverse impact to be outside the buffer; or

(C) By mitigating the impact.

(ii) Demonstrating that the development will comply with the no net loss standard can be accomplished by one of the following methods:

(A) An applicant submitting an ecological impacts report prepared by a qualified professional; or

(B) Completion of a project worksheet as set forth in subsection (2)(e) of this section. The shoreline administrator shall verify the accuracy of the completed worksheet in conjunction with the appropriate shoreline approval process.

(iii) The shoreline administrator may prepare standards and guidelines on what shall be included in an ecological impacts report to satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with the standards.

(c) Development Standards for Zone 1.

(i) New development in zone 1 shall be primarily for the following:

(A) Maintenance of existing structures; or

(B) Restoration or remodeling of existing structures within the existing footprint; or

(C) Voluntary restoration activities; or

(D) Providing required mitigation for adverse impacts in zone 2.

(ii) An access path from zone 2 to the line of the OHWM may be allowed as an exception.

(A) An access path shall be the minimum size and designed to serve this purpose.

(B) Additional flexibility may be allowed when it is necessary to meet the needs of users with limited mobility.

(C) When feasible, access paths shall be constructed using pervious materials.

(d) Development Standards for Zone 2.

(i) New development in zone 2 shall be primarily for the following:

(A) Maintenance of existing structures; or

(B) The restoration or remodeling of existing structures within the existing footprint; or

(C) Voluntary restoration activities.

(ii) New developments that result in adverse impacts may occur in buffer zone 2, if those impacts are mitigated and the total development activity achieves no net loss. New detached accessory structures are not allowed in buffer zone 2.

(iii) New single-family homes and expansion of existing single-family homes may be allowed in buffer zone 2 through the application of the common setback provisions of BMC 20.30.095(2)(c). New and expansions of existing single-family homes around Lake Burien are not allowed in buffer zone 2.

(e) Optional Method – Demonstrating Successful Mitigation of Unavoidable Adverse Impacts. An optional prescriptive worksheet (Figure 7) may be used in lieu of an ecological impact report. This method provides a means to quantify a measurement of certain adverse impacts and the benefits of certain improvements.

(i) Adverse Impacts. The scope of adverse impacts that can be evaluated are limited to the following:

(A) Creation or expansion of impervious surfaces; and

(B) Removal of existing native vegetation.

(ii) Ecological Benefits. Improvements to ecological functions are as follows:

(A) Removal or reduction of impervious surface; and

(B) Introduction or expansion of native vegetation.

(iii) The optional worksheet review process may only be applied in the evaluation of single-family residential development proposals.

(f) Over-water structures are allowed within the buffer as provided herein. Structures and development such as viewing platforms, boardwalks, benches, and trails are allowed when associated with public access. Pursuant to BMC 20.30.095(2)(g) (Accessory Structures and Appurtenances) fences less than six feet high, stairs and trams may be allowed within the buffer.

(g) Whenever the shoreline administrator determines that monitoring has established a significant adverse deviation from predicted impacts, or that mitigation or maintenance measures have failed, the applicant or the property owner shall be required to institute corrective action(s), which shall also be subject to further monitoring as provided in this section.

(h) The shoreline administrator may require a performance bond(s) or other security in an amount sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed in a manner that complies with conditions of approval and to guarantee satisfactory workmanship and materials for a period not to exceed five years. The shoreline administrator shall establish the conditions of the bond or other security according to the nature of the proposed mitigation, maintenance or monitoring and the likelihood and expense of correcting mitigation or maintenance failures.

(i) All costs associated with the mitigation/monitoring and planning, including city expenses, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

 

Figure 7: Impact Assessment Worksheet 

	Measure of adverse impacts in zone 2	 

	1) Total square feet of new impervious surface	______ X 4 points = ______

	2) Total square feet of cleared native vegetation	______ X 2 points = ______

	3) Total measurement (add 1 and 2)	______

	 	 

	Benefit of adding native vegetation in zone 1	 

	4) Total square feet of impervious surface eliminated	______ X 4 points = ______

	5) Total square feet of partially functioning area improved	______ X 2 points = ______

	6) Benefit of improvements in zone 1 (add 4 and 5)	______

	 	 

	Benefit of improvements in zone 2	 

	7) Square feet of impervious surface to native vegetation	______ X 2 points = ______

	8) Square feet of partially functioning area to native vegetation	______ X 1 point = ______

	9) Square feet of impervious surface to partially functioning area	______ X 0.5 points = ______

	10) Benefit of improvements in zone 2 (add 7 – 9)	______

	 	 

	No Net Loss Indicator	 

	11) Measurement of adverse impacts (line 3)	______

	12) Total benefit of improvements (add 6 and 10)	______

	 	 

	The project will meet the no net loss standard if line 11, the measurement of adverse impacts, is less than or equal to line 12, the benefit of improvements.

[Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.060 Select shoreline uses and modifications.

Shoreline master programs establish a comprehensive program of use regulations for shorelines and provisions for specific uses to assure consistency with the policy of the act and where relevant within the jurisdiction. This section provides specific policies and regulations for the following types of uses and modifications:

(1) Aquaculture.

(2) Bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures.

(3) Docks, piers and floats.

(4) Habitat restoration and enhancement.

(5) Recreation.

(6) Recreational mooring buoys.

(7) Residential.

(8) Transportation facilities and parking.

(9) Utilities. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.065 Aquaculture. 

Aquaculture means the culture, harvesting or farming of food fish, shellfish, or other aquatic plants and animals. Aquaculture does not include the harvest of wild geoduck associated with the state managed wildstock geoduck fishery. Sport fishing is not considered an aquaculture activity. Aquaculture activities include the hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, harvesting, and processing of aquatic plants and animals and the maintenance and construction of necessary equipment, buildings and growing areas. Cultivation methods include but are not limited to fish pens, fish hatcheries, shellfish rafts, racks and long lines, seaweed floats and nets and the culture of clams and oysters on tidelands and subtidal areas.

(1) Policies.

(a) Aquaculture should not be permitted in areas where it would result in a net loss of ecological functions, adversely impact eelgrass and macroalgae, or significantly conflict with existing adjacent uses.

(b) Aquacultural facilities must be designed and located so as not to spread disease to native aquatic life, establish new nonnative species which cause significant ecological impacts, or significantly impact the aesthetic qualities of the shoreline.

(2) Regulations.

(a) Aquaculture shall be limited to the recovery of a native aquatic population in accordance with a government and/or tribal approved plan.

(b) Aquaculture is not permitted in areas where it would result in a net loss of ecological functions, adversely impact eelgrass and macroalgae, or significantly conflict with navigation and other water-dependent uses.

(c) Aquaculture is prohibited in critical saltwater habitat or within a 10-foot buffer from these areas.

(d) No aquatic organism shall be introduced into city of Burien shoreline areas without the prior written approval of the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife or the appropriate regulatory agency for the specific organism.

(e) No aquacultural processing, except for the sorting or culling of the cultured organism and the washing or removal of surface materials or organisms, shall be permitted waterward of the ordinary high water mark unless fully contained within a tending boat or barge.

(f) Shellfish seeding and culturing is allowed when conducted for native population recovery in accordance with a government and/or tribal approved plan. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.070 Bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures.

Shoreline stabilization includes actions taken to address erosion impacts to property and dwellings, roads and utilities, businesses, or structures caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, tides, wind, or wave action. These actions include structural and nonstructural methods.

Nonstructural methods include building setbacks, relocation of the structure to be protected, ground water management, planning and regulatory measures to avoid the need for structural stabilization.

(1) Policies.

(a) New development should be located and designed to avoid the need for future shoreline stabilization to the greatest extent feasible.

(b) New and replacement bulkheads should be designed to blend in with the natural surroundings and not detract from the aesthetic qualities or degrade the natural processes of the shoreline.

(c) Burien should take active measures to preserve natural unaltered shorelines, and prevent the proliferation of new bulkheads and other forms of shoreline armoring.

(d) Nonstructural stabilization measures including relocating structures, increasing buffers, enhancing vegetation, managing drainage and runoff and other measures are preferred over new structural shoreline armoring.

(e) Where feasible, any failing, harmful, unnecessary, or ineffective structural shoreline armoring that cannot be repaired or replaced should be removed, and shoreline ecological functions and processes should be restored using nonstructural methods.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.025 through 20.20.035.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) A shoreline stabilization structure legally existing on October 17, 2013:

(i) May be repaired and maintained.

(ii) May be replaced with a similar structure if the following apply:

(A) There is a demonstrated need to protect legally established principal uses or structures and legally established appurtenances necessary for use and enjoyment of a single-family home, which appurtenances shall not include fences, from erosion caused by currents, tidal action, or waves.

(B) The existing structure can no longer adequately serve its purpose of stabilizing the shoreline to protect established uses and structures.

(C) Replacement walls or bulkheads shall not encroach waterward of the ordinary high water mark or existing structure unless the residence was occupied prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns. In such cases, the replacement structure shall abut the existing shoreline stabilization structure.

(D) Where a net loss of ecological functions associated with critical saltwater habitats would occur by leaving the existing structure, removal of that structure may be required as part of the construction of the replacement.

(E) Soft shoreline stabilization measures that provide restoration of shoreline ecological functions may be permitted waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

(b) Jetties, breakwaters and other in-water stabilization structures except for bulkheads are prohibited except for protection or restoration of ecological functions. New bulkheads and other shoreline stabilization structures such as gabions, revetments, retaining walls and bluff walls are allowed if there would be no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and the following requirements are met:

(i) Nonstructural methods (e.g., building setbacks, biotechnical vegetation measures, anchor trees, upland drainage control, and beach enhancement) are not feasible to protect a residence or other primary structure or essential public facility.

(ii) The necessity to protect existing primary structures is demonstrated in the following manner:

(A) A geotechnical analysis, accepted by the administrator, confirming that there is a significant possibility that the primary structure will be damaged within three years as a result of shoreline erosion caused by tidal action, currents, or waves in the absence of an armoring structural solution. Normal sloughing, erosion of steep bluffs, or shoreline erosion itself, without a scientific or geotechnical analysis, is not demonstration of need.

(B) The geotechnical analysis should evaluate on-site drainage issues and address drainage problems away from the shoreline edge before considering structural shoreline stabilization.

(c) The following requirements apply to both new and replacement bulkheads:

(i) Bulkheads shall be located and constructed in a manner which will not result in adverse effects on littoral drift and adjacent properties.

(ii) Bulkheads shall not be installed solely for the purpose of creating upland by filling behind the bulkhead.

(iii) The size and quantity of material utilized for the bulkhead shall be the minimum necessary to protect the structure from the estimated energy intensity of the shoreline hydraulic system.

(iv) The maximum height of a new bulkhead on the marine shoreline shall be no greater than four vertical feet above the OHWM. The height of a replacement bulkhead shall not exceed four vertical feet above the OHWM or exceed the height of the existing bulkhead, whichever is greater.

(d) All new and replacement shoreline structures shall be designed to minimize the transmission of wave energy.

(e) All new shoreline development and uses, including the replacement of a destroyed home, shall be located and designed to prevent the need for new or expanded shoreline stabilization measures for the life of the development. Exceptions may be made for the limited instances where shoreline stabilization measures are necessary to protect allowed uses, where no alternative locations are available, and where no net loss of ecological functions will result. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.075 Over-water structures – Including docks, piers and floats.

Docks are fixed structures floating upon the water. Piers are fixed, pile-supported structures. Floats (rafts) are floating structures that are moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the water that are not directly connected to the shoreline. All of these types of over-water structures are found in the city’s shoreline jurisdiction. These structures typically require permits from local, state and federal agencies. For structures overlying state owned lands, an aquatic lands lease and authorization from the Department of Natural Resources is required. For the purposes of this section, docks, piers, and floats will be called over-water structures and addressed together unless otherwise noted. In addition to the following policies and regulations, applicants for an over-water structure should contact other permitting agencies including the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for their requirements, including dimensional standards.

(1) Policies.

(a) Over-water structures should be designed to minimize impacts to ecological functions of the water body including but not limited to water quality, anadromous and forage fish habitat, spawning and rearing areas, migration, and passage.

(b) New over-water structures should be restricted to the minimum size necessary and permitted only when the applicant has demonstrated that a specific need exists to support the intended water-dependent use.

(c) Ensure that over-water structures are designed and maintained to avoid adverse impacts to the environment and shoreline aesthetics and minimize interference with the public’s use of the water and public beach area.

(d) Encourage the use of mooring buoys in place of over-water structures.

(e) Encourage shared docks between multiple owners for single-family waterfront development to minimize over-water coverage adversely impacting shoreline ecological functions.

(f) Over-water structures should be designed to avoid the need for maintenance dredging. The moorage of a boat larger than provided for in the original moorage design shall not be grounds for approval of dredging.

(2) Regulations.

(a) New over-water structures shall be limited to those required as part of a permitted water-dependent use, ecological restoration or public access.

(b) Over-water structure design and construction shall be restricted to the minimum necessary to meet the needs of the proposed water-dependent use.

(c) Private, single residence over-water structures for the sole use of the property owner shall not be considered an outright use on city of Burien marine shorelines. An over-water structure may be allowed on the marine shoreline when the applicant has demonstrated a need for moorage and the following alternatives have been investigated and are not available or feasible:

(i) Commercial or marina moorage;

(ii) Floating moorage buoys;

(iii) Joint use moorage pier.

(d) The design and construction of over-water structures, as well as their subsequent use and operation, shall:

(i) Be capable of withstanding expected environmental conditions; and

(ii) Minimize interference with adjacent water uses and navigation; and

(iii) Minimize adverse effects on fish, shellfish, wildlife, water quality, public views and geohydraulic processes by limiting the size of the structure and the use of hazardous materials, incorporating grating to allow light passage or reflective panels to increase light refraction, and spaced and oriented to minimize shading and avoid a “wall” effect that would block or baffle wave patterns, currents, littoral drive, or movement of aquatic life forms.

(e) Over-water structures shall not be used for residential dwelling purposes nor provide moorage for boats that are occupied longer than two days unless pump-out facilities are available and then no longer than seven days total.

(f) Only joint use over-water structures are allowed for attached dwelling unit developments.

(g) Only one over-water structure is allowed for each single-family detached residential lot.

(h) No covered moorage is allowed waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

(i) When permitted, new residential development of two or more dwellings shall provide joint use or community docks, rather than individual docks, when feasible, rather than allow individual docks for each residence.

(j) Dredging associated with over-water structures is prohibited in the aquatic environment. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.080 Habitat restoration and enhancement.

Shoreline habitat and natural systems enhancement projects include those activities proposed and conducted specifically for the purpose of establishing, restoring, or enhancing habitat for priority species in shorelines. Restoration or enhancement of shoreline areas means a change of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of returning natural or historic ecological functions of a former or degraded wetland or fish and wildlife habitat conservation area.

(1) Policy.

(a) Habitat restoration or enhancement projects that are not exempt pursuant to WAC 173-27-040 (Developments exempt from substantial development permit requirement) may be allowed in shoreline jurisdiction if a shoreline substantial development permit is obtained.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.050.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Shoreline restoration or enhancement shall be designed to result in a natural shoreline with functions, vegetative communities and structure similar to what would historically have been found on the site or in the vicinity.

(b) All shoreline restoration or enhancement projects shall ensure that critical areas and their functions are not degraded by the action.

(c) Shoreline restoration projects shall implement the city’s adopted shoreline restoration plan and be conducted specifically for the purpose of establishing, restoring, or enhancing habitat for priority species in shorelines.

(d) Nonstructural approaches for shoreline restoration or enhancement shall be used for shoreline stabilization instead of bulkheads or other structural stabilization measures, where feasible.

(e) Shoreline restoration projects that are not specifically listed in the city’s adopted shoreline restoration plan shall be considered subject to approval of the shoreline administrator.

(f) Existing artificial structures on the site of a shoreline restoration or enhancement project that appear to be impeding natural recovery of a species or habitat shall be removed.

(g) When habitat is restored or enhanced, priority shall be given to retention of snags and trees that provide overhanging vegetation and/or nesting or perching branches for eagles, other raptors, or priority species.

(h) Shoreline habitat restoration or enhancement projects shall not adversely impact sediment processes, littoral drift, wetlands or fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

(i) Beach enhancement shall not be allowed within spawning, nesting or breeding habitats unless the completed project will result in a greater long-term benefit to the ecological functions and values.

(j) Restoration of native vegetation shall comply with the vegetation conservation section, BMC 20.30.040. In addition to the provisions of BMC 20.30.040, a revegetation plan shall include a monitoring and maintenance program that shall, at a minimum, include the following:

(i) Goals and objectives for the mitigation plan; and

(ii) Criteria for assessing the effectiveness of the mitigation; and

(iii) Monitoring plan including annual progress reports submitted to the shoreline administrator. The plan shall be in effect for a period of time sufficient to establish that performance standards have been met as determined by the shoreline administrator, but no less than five years; and

(iv) A contingency/adaptive management plan.

(k) Restoration resulting in movement of the OHWM shall meet the following standards:

(i) The shoreline administrator may grant relief from shoreline master program development standards and use regulations when the following apply:

(A) A shoreline restoration project causes or would cause a landward shift in the ordinary high water mark, resulting in the following:

1. a. Land that had not been regulated under this shoreline master program prior to construction of the restoration project is brought under shoreline jurisdiction; or

b. Additional regulatory requirements apply due to a landward shift in required shoreline buffers or other regulations of the shoreline master program; and

2. Application of shoreline master program regulations would preclude or interfere with use of the property permitted by other development regulations, thus presenting a hardship to the project proponent;

(B) The proposed relief meets the following criteria:

1. The proposed relief is the minimum necessary to relieve the hardship;

2. After granting the proposed relief, there is net environmental benefit from the restoration project;

3. Granting the proposed relief is consistent with the objectives of the shoreline restoration project and consistent with the shoreline master program; and

4. Where a shoreline restoration project is created as mitigation to obtain a development permit, the project proponent required to perform the mitigation is not eligible for relief under this section; and

(C) The application for relief must be submitted to the Department of Ecology for written approval or disapproval. This review must occur during the Department of Ecology’s normal review of a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, or variance. If no such permit is required, then the Department of Ecology shall conduct its review when the city of Burien provides a copy of a complete application and all supporting information necessary to conduct the review.

1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2)(k)(ii) of this section, the Department of Ecology shall provide at least 20 days’ notice to parties that have indicated interest to the Department in reviewing applications for relief under this section, and post the notice on their website.

2. The Department shall act within 30 calendar days of close of the public notice period, or within 30 days of receipt of the proposal from the local government if additional public notice is not required.

(ii) The public notice requirements of subsection (2)(k)(i)(c) of this section do not apply if the relevant shoreline restoration project was included in a shoreline master program or shoreline restoration plan as defined in WAC 173-26-201 (Comprehensive process to prepare or amend shoreline master programs), as follows:

(A) The restoration plan has been approved by the Department of Ecology under applicable shoreline master program guidelines;

(B) The shoreline restoration project is specifically identified in the shoreline master program or restoration plan or is located along a shoreline reach identified in the shoreline master program or restoration plan as appropriate for granting relief from shoreline regulations; and

(C) The shoreline master program or restoration plan includes policies addressing the nature of the relief and why, when, and how it would be applied.

(iii) A substantial development permit is not required on land that is brought under shoreline jurisdiction due to a shoreline restoration project creating a landward shift in the ordinary high water mark. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.085 Recreational development.

Shoreline recreational development includes facilities for activities such as hiking, fishing, picnicking, swimming, photography and viewing. It also includes facilities for more intensive uses, such as parks. This section applies to both publicly and privately owned shoreline facilities intended for use by the public or private group, association, or individual.

(1) Policies.

(a) Allow a variety of active and passive recreation opportunities in the shoreline areas.

(b) Encourage provision of view points, rest areas and picnic facilities in public shoreline areas.

(For additional policy guidance, including policies that provide for public access planning as set forth in WAC 173-26-221(4)(c) (General master program provisions, Planning process to address public access), please see BMC 20.20.020.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Commercial recreational development or use in Seahurst Park shall be consistent with the provisions of this section.

(b) Recreation facilities shall be designed to take maximum advantage of and enhance the natural character of the shoreline area.

(c) Recreation areas shall promote public health, safety and security and not materially interfere with the normal public use of the water and shorelines.

(d) Recreation facilities shall provide adequate provisions to prevent the general public from trespassing and overflowing into adjacent, privately owned properties.

(e) Recreation facilities shall provide signage that prohibits tree cutting and collecting of marine life, driftwood and other natural materials.

(f) Jet skis and water craft with combustion engines are prohibited on Lake Burien.

(g) No person shall moor, anchor or dock a boat or other object overnight on or within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark at any city beachfront park without authorization from the city of Burien parks department.

(h) Shoreline recreational development is a priority and shall be primarily related to access to, enjoyment and use of the water and shorelines of the state. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.090 Recreational mooring buoys.

A recreational mooring buoy is a device used to tie up a boat and typically consists of a line from the boat attached to a float at the water’s surface with a cable or line fixed underwater to the submerged ground. The anchor line allows the boat to float and swing around the fixed buoy anchor.

(1) Policies.

(a) Recreational boat mooring buoys are the preferred method to provide moorage instead of constructing new residential docks, piers or floats on the marine waters in the city of Burien.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.020.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Mooring buoys shall be located as close to the shore as possible while avoiding beaching under all tidal situations and no farther waterward than existing authorized mooring buoys unless the drift of the boat dictates it.

(b) Mooring buoys shall be located away from critical saltwater habitat.

(c) Mooring buoys shall utilize a system design that minimizes damage to underwater lands and marine vegetation.

(d) Individuals owning residential property abutting aquatic lands may install a mooring buoy for recreational purposes after obtaining approval from the State of Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR), Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) and the Army Corps of Engineers as appropriate.

(e) Recreational mooring buoys shall be installed using a DNR or WDFW approved system.

(f) Buoys shall be visible under normal daylight conditions at a minimum of 100 yards during daylight hours and must have reflectors for nighttime visibility.

(g) Recreational mooring buoys are prohibited for commercial and transient uses or live-aboards.

(h) Boats must be 60 feet or less in length to tie up to a recreational mooring buoy.

(i) A community beach may have one mooring buoy for every 100 lineal feet of waterfront.

(j) Mooring buoys are prohibited on Lake Burien. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.095 Residential development.

Single-family residences are the most common form of shoreline development and are identified as a priority use when developed in a manner consistent with control of pollution and prevention of damage to the natural environment. “Residential development” shall mean the creation of new residential lots and the construction or exterior alteration of one or more buildings, structures or portions thereof which are designed for and used to provide a place of abode for human beings including one- and two-family detached dwellings, multifamily residences, townhouses and condominiums, together with appurtenances and accessory structures. For purposes of this master program, bed and breakfast establishments are considered an accessory use (see also BMC 20.30.001, Figure 4, Shoreline Permit Matrix, under Commercial Use and Development).

(1) Policy. Residential development should demonstrate that the development and its related activities will not be detrimental to the public interest and uses of the shoreline and its associated water bodies.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.025 through 20.20.035.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) General. Consistent with WAC 173-26-221(4)(d)(iv) (General master program provisions, Standards for height limits, setbacks, and view corridors), residential development shall protect existing shoreline and water views, promote public safety, avoid adverse impacts to marine bluffs and nearshore habitat, and not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(b) Dimensional Standards. Residential development in shoreline jurisdiction shall conform to the dimensional standards found in BMC 20.30.050.

(c) Common-Line Building Setback Standards. The shoreline administrator may approve new or expanded single-family primary residential structures in zone 2 of the shoreline buffer under the following conditions through the conditional use permit process and without a variance permit:

(i) Where there are existing legally constructed single-family primary residential structures that are located within the shoreline buffer zone 2 designated in BMC 20.30.050 and within 50 feet of either side of the proposed building site, a new or expanded home may be located in the shoreline buffer. As an alternative in such cases, the proposed new or expanded single-family primary residential structure may be set back from the OHWM common to the average of the OHWM setback of the existing adjacent residences (see Figure 8).

(ii) In those instances where only one existing single-family primary residence is within 50 feet of the proposed building site, the OHWM setback of the proposed structure may be reduced to the average of the OHWM setbacks for the existing adjacent residence and the applicable setback for the adjacent vacant parcel.

(iii) In no case shall the reduced setback allow development in zone 1 without a variance.

(iv) In cases where the common-line setback does not apply, expansion of existing single-family primary residential structures within the designated shoreline buffer zone 2 may be allowed through a conditional use permit.

(v) Any shoreline OHWM setback reduction beyond that allowed in this section shall require approval of a shoreline variance permit.

(vi) For the purposes of this section the optional method of demonstrating successful mitigation of unavoidable adverse impacts as set forth in BMC 20.30.055(2)(e) may not be used and the applicant shall submit an ecological impact report prepared by a qualified professional demonstrating that unavoidable impacts are mitigated to achieve no net loss.

(d) Lot Size Calculations. Lot size calculations shall not include portions of the lot that are waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

(e) Bluff Top Protection. New development located at the top of bluffs in shoreline jurisdiction must be set back to ensure that shoreline stabilization is unlikely to be necessary for the life of the structure as demonstrated by a geotechnical analysis.

(f) Vegetation Removal for Access. Private access from single-family detached residences to the shoreline shall avoid removal of trees and other woody vegetation when feasible.

(g) Accessory Structures and Appurtenances. New accessory structures and appurtenances must be proportional in size and purpose to the residence and compatible with on-site and adjacent structures, uses and natural features. New accessory structures and appurtenances are not permitted within the shoreline buffer zone 1 unless otherwise permitted by subsection (2)(c) of this section (Common-Line Building Setback Standards). New detached accessory structures are not allowed in buffer zone 2. The following may be allowed in the shoreline buffer:

(i) Fences less than six feet high;

(ii) Water-dependent features (buoys, docks and floats) used for recreational or personal use;

(iii) Stairs and trams pursuant to subsections (2)(i) and (j) of this section;

(iv) Utilities solely serving the subject single-family residence.

(h) Floating Homes or Houseboats. Floating homes or houseboats are prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction.

(i) Stairs and Trams. Construction of new stairs and trams to the beach is allowed within required shoreline buffer areas, except on feeder bluffs, provided the project proponent demonstrates that existing shared, public or community facilities are not adequate or available for use and the possibility of a multiple-owner or multiple-user facility has been thoroughly investigated and is not feasible. New facilities are encouraged to be shared with adjacent properties that do not already have such facilities, and shall include shared maintenance easements and agreements as necessary. Only one stair or tram system is allowed for each primary residential structure; duplicate facilities are not allowed.

(j) Beach Stairs and Trams Design. New beach stairs and trams shall be designed and located such that no fill or other modification waterward of the ordinary high water mark is necessary to construct or use the structure. Stairways, trams and landings shall be located upland of existing bulkheads.

(k) Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. New detached accessory dwelling units shall not be located in the shoreline buffers.

Figure 8: Common-Line Buffer and OHWM Building Setback Reduction Examples
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.100 Transportation facilities and parking.

Transportation facilities are those structures and developments that aid in land and water surface movement of people, animals, goods and services. They include streets, bridges, bikeways, trails and other related facilities.

(1) Policies.

(a) All new or expanded roadways should be designed and located to minimize impacts to shoreline ecological functions including riparian and nearshore areas, and the natural landscape.

(b) Parking is not a preferred use in shorelines and should only be allowed to support authorized uses where no feasible alternatives exist.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.025.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) New transportation and parking facilities shall be located outside of the shoreline jurisdiction or as far landward from the ordinary high water mark as feasible, unless they support public access or other authorized use.

(b) Transportation facilities shall be designed and maintained to minimize erosion, preserve natural drainage ways and utilize low-impact development techniques.

(c) Transportation and utility facilities shall share rights-of-way to minimize disturbance in shoreline areas.

(d) The city shall give preference to mechanical means rather than the use of herbicides for roadside brush control on city streets in shoreline areas.

(e) Construction debris, overburden and other waste materials shall not be allowed to enter into any water body by disposal or erosion from drainage, high water or other means.

(f) Transportation facilities shall provide public access appropriate to the location and extent of the facility.

(g) All shoreline areas disturbed by road construction and maintenance shall be replanted and stabilized. Such vegetation shall be maintained by the agency or developer constructing or maintaining the road until established.

(h) Landscaping shall be provided to minimize visual impacts for all new and expanded transportation facilities in shoreline areas. A landscape plan shall be provided in conjunction with review and issuance of a shoreline substantial development permit. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.30.105 Utilities.

Utilities are services and facilities that produce, convey, transmit, store, or process water, sewage, communications, electric power, fuel, natural gas, and the like.

(1) Policies.

(a) On-site utility features serving a primary use, such as water, sewer or gas lines to a residence, are considered a part of the primary use.

(b) Utilities production and processing facilities, such as sewage treatment plants, or parts of those facilities that are non-water-oriented should not be allowed in shoreline areas unless it can be demonstrated that no other feasible option is available.

(c) Utilities should be located and designed to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, preserve the natural landscape, and minimize conflicts with present and planned land and shoreline uses while meeting the needs of future populations in areas planned to accommodate growth.

(d) New development of pipelines and cables on tidelands, particularly those running roughly parallel to the shoreline, and development of facilities that may require periodic maintenance which would disrupt shoreline ecological functions should be discouraged except where no other feasible alternative exists.

(For additional policy guidance, please see BMC 20.20.020 and 20.20.030.)

(2) Regulations.

(a) Utilities shall be placed underground pursuant to Chapter 12.40 BMC (Utility Undergrounding Policy).

(b) New development of underwater pipelines and cables on tidelands is prohibited except for deepwater outfalls and facilities where no other feasible alternative exists.

(c) New cable crossings for telecommunications and power lines entering or leaving a body of water shall be bored or buried below the surface of the water body’s bed from the ordinary high water mark out to a minimum water depth of minus 10 feet below mean lower low water.

(d) Directional boring, instead of excavation or trenching, is required where feasible.

(e) New transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as power lines, cables, and pipelines, shall be located outside of the shoreline area where feasible and when necessarily located within the shoreline area shall assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. When allowed, utility and transportation facilities shall share rights-of-way to minimize disturbance in shoreline areas.

(f) New or altered aerial utility lines and vertical utility facilities shall make maximum use of topography to minimize visual impact on the surrounding area.

(g) Communication, radio towers and personal wireless service facilities shall not obstruct or destroy scenic views of the water. This may be accomplished by design, orientation and location of the tower, height, camouflage of the tower, or other features consistent with utility technology.

(h) Culverts shall be located and installed in accordance with city of Burien standards and specifications.

(i) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.

(j) Except for water lines, all underwater pipelines transporting substances hazardous to aquatic life or water quality are prohibited unless no other feasible alternative exists. Such facilities shall include an automatic shut off valve on both shorelines and have established maintenance procedures.

(k) Expansion or repair of existing, underground utilities within shoreline jurisdiction shall include reclamation of areas disturbed during construction including, where feasible, replanting and maintenance care until the newly planted vegetation is established. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


Chapter 20.35 ADMINISTRATION AND SHORELINE PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sections:

20.35.001    Purpose and applicability. 

20.35.005    Authority and rule of liberal construction. 

20.35.010    Shoreline permit types and review procedures. 

20.35.015    Shoreline substantial development permits.

20.35.020    Substantial development permits for limited utility extensions.

20.35.025    Exemptions from shoreline substantial development permits. 

20.35.030    Letter of exemption. 

20.35.033    Developments not required to obtain shoreline permits or local reviews. 

20.35.035    Shoreline conditional use permits.

20.35.040    Shoreline variance permits.

20.35.050    Appeals.

20.35.055    Effective date and duration of shoreline permits.

20.35.060    Compliance and enforcement.

20.35.065    Revisions to shoreline permits.

20.35.070    Rescission of shoreline permits and exemptions.


20.35.001 Purpose and applicability. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for the administration and enforcement of the permit system for shoreline management provided by the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 (Chapter 90.58 RCW). This chapter applies to all development within shorelines of the state within the city of Burien’s shoreline jurisdiction. The city’s shoreline administrative procedures are intended to be consistent with all provisions, criteria, application requirements, public notice requirements, and local or state review procedures set forth in Chapter 173-27 WAC, Shoreline Management Permit and Enforcement Procedures. In the event of any inconsistencies between this shoreline master program and Chapter 173-27 WAC, the WAC shall govern.

All development in designated shoreline areas shall comply with the policy, provisions, and intent of the city of Burien shoreline master program. Definitions contained in the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 (Chapter 90.58 RCW) and the Shoreline Master Program Guidelines (Chapter 173-26 WAC) shall apply to all terms and concepts used in this chapter; provided, that definitions contained in this title shall be applicable where not in conflict with the Shoreline Management Act and the Shoreline Master Program Guidelines. In addition, the city will establish minimum application requirements, checklists, handouts, forms and fees for shoreline permits and shoreline exemption determinations.

Amendments to the city of Burien shoreline master program will not become effective until approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology pursuant to RCW 90.58.090 (Approval of master program). [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.005 Authority and rule of liberal construction. 

This chapter is promulgated pursuant to the authority and mandate of RCW 90.58.140(3) (Development Permits). Compliance with this chapter shall constitute compliance with the Shoreline Management Act, the Shoreline Master Program Guidelines, and the city of Burien shoreline master program (SMP) for evaluating permits on shorelines of the state.

As provided under RCW 90.58.900 (Liberal construction), the Shoreline Management Act (SMA) is exempted from the rule of strict construction. The SMA and the city of Burien shoreline master program shall, therefore, be liberally construed to give full effect to the purposes, goals, policies, and standards for which the SMA and this master program were enacted. Exemptions from the Act or this master program are to be narrowly construed. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.010 Shoreline permit types and review procedures. 

(1) Nonexempt Development. Substantial development that is not otherwise exempt or uses that are identified as requiring conditional use permits within the city of Burien’s shoreline jurisdiction must obtain a shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline conditional use permit, or shoreline variance from the city.

(2) Exempt Development. Development within the city of Burien’s shoreline jurisdiction that is exempt from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit shall comply with BMC 20.35.025. An exempt development that requires a conditional use permit or variance shall also comply with applicable provisions related to those processes.

(3) Pre-Application Meeting. The owner of the subject property or the authorized agent of the owner is encouraged to have a pre-application meeting with the shoreline administrator to determine the appropriate type of shoreline permit needed for the proposed action.

(4) Permit Review. Shoreline permits shall be reviewed using the land use decision processes in Chapter 19.65 BMC (Procedures).

Shoreline permits are processed as a Type 1 land use decision pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC (Procedures). A Type 1 decision is a written administrative decision issued following public notice, consideration of written public comments and review of a written staff recommendation. For the purposes of this master program, the shoreline administrator is the decision maker on a shoreline permit using the Type 1 land use decision. The Type 1 land use decision can be appealed to the city’s hearing examiner.

If any shoreline use or development is subject to other approvals or permits under another permit authority, such as the zoning or subdivision codes, they shall be subject to a consolidated review and the decision maker designated for the nonshoreline approval or permit shall be the decision maker for the consolidated review.

Depending on the underlying land use permits, the shoreline permit may be processed as a Type 2 or 3 land use review involving the hearing examiner or the city council.

(5) Public Notice. Public notice of an application for a shoreline permit shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC (Procedures) unless otherwise specifically stated in this code. The minimum public notice period for shoreline permits shall be 30 days. If there are conflicting public notice time periods with state law or administrative codes, or local laws, the longer notice period shall be used.

(6) Department of Ecology Notification. The Washington Department of Ecology – SEA Division (Ecology) shall be notified of the permit decision consistent with the filing procedures in WAC 173-27-130.

(7) Compliance with Regulations. In the case of either a shoreline conditional use permit or a shoreline variance, the shoreline administrator shall determine the application’s compliance with the relevant review criteria and render a decision that is then forwarded to Ecology for review and approval. The city’s decision may include issuing the shoreline permit, issuing the shoreline permit with conditions, or denial of the requested shoreline permit.

(8) Shoreline Conditional Use Permit Required. A development activity or use that is listed as a conditional use pursuant to this master program or is an unlisted use must obtain a conditional use permit even if the development or use does not require a substantial development permit. The conditional use permit application shall be processed as indicated in subsection (4) of this section.

(9) Shoreline Variance Required. When a development or use is proposed that does not comply with the bulk, dimensional and performance standards of the master program, such development or use can only be authorized by approval of a shoreline variance, consistent with WAC 173-27-170 (Variances). The variance application shall be processed as set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

Figure 9 is a flow chart illustrating the shoreline permit review process for a Type 1 shoreline permit.

Figure 9: Shoreline Permit Review for Type 1 Process
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.015 Shoreline substantial development permits.

(1) Substantial Development Permit Required. Prior to any shoreline substantial development within a shoreline of the state, a shoreline substantial development permit shall be obtained. Development undertaken pursuant to the issuance of a permit shall be limited to that specifically delineated on the official site plan submitted by the applicant. The development shall be in compliance with any and all conditions imposed upon such permit at its issuance, including any impact mitigation measures identified in documents submitted in support of the application.

(2) Approval Criteria. A substantial development permit shall be granted by the shoreline administrator only when the development proposed is consistent with the following:

(a) City of Burien comprehensive plan, Burien Municipal Code, and Burien shoreline master program; and

(b) The proposed development or activity must also be found to be consistent with policies, guidelines, and regulations of the state Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapters 173-26 and 173-27 WAC).

(3) Authority to Condition. The shoreline administrator may attach conditions to the approval of permits and shoreline exemptions as necessary to assure this consistency. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.020 Substantial development permits for limited utility extensions.

(1) Procedures. An application for a substantial development permit for a limited utility extension shall be subject to the following procedures:

(a) The public comment period shall be 20 days. The public notice issued pursuant to BMC 19.65.040 (Notice of Application) shall explain how the public may obtain a copy of the city’s decision on the application no later than two days following its issuance consistent with BMC 19.65.055 (Notice of Decision). If there is an appeal of the decision to grant or deny the permit to the local government legislative authority, the appeal shall be finally determined by the legislative authority within 30 days.

(b) For purposes of this section, a limited utility extension means the extension of a utility service that:

(i) Is categorically exempt under Chapter 43.21C RCW (State Environmental Policy Act) for one or more of the following: natural gas, electricity, telephone, water or sewer;

(ii) Will serve an existing use in compliance with Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act); and

(iii) Will not extend more than 2,500 linear feet within the shorelines of the state. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.025 Exemptions from shoreline substantial development permits. 

(See WAC 173-27-040 (Developments exempt from substantial development permit requirement) for additional language and details.)

(1) Rule of Narrow Construction. There are several types of development activities that are exempt from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit. State law requires that such exemptions be construed narrowly and, if any part of the development is not eligible for exemption, then a substantial development permit is required for the entire proposed development. No pre-application meeting is required for a shoreline exemption, and the city usually makes a determination on the exemption within 30 days of application. The Department of Ecology does not review shoreline exemptions unless state or federal agency approvals are required for the project.

(2) Shoreline Exemption Process. Exemption from the shoreline substantial development permit process does not constitute exemption from compliance with the policies and use regulations of the SMA (Chapter 90.58 RCW), the provisions of this master program, or other applicable city, state or federal permit requirements. The shoreline administrator is authorized to grant or deny requests for exemptions from the shoreline substantial development permit requirement for uses and developments within shorelines that are specifically listed in the Shoreline Permit Matrix (Figure 4) of this master program (BMC 20.30.001).

Such requests shall be applied for on forms provided by the shoreline administrator. The request shall be in writing and shall indicate the specific exemption of this SMP that is being applied to the development. The shoreline administrator shall prepare an analysis of the consistency of the project with this SMP and the SMA. As appropriate, the shoreline administrator’s analysis and decision shall include statements of exemption, which may contain conditions and/or mitigating measures of approval to achieve consistency and compliance with the provisions of the SMA and SMP. A denial of an exemption shall be in writing and shall identify the reason(s) for the denial.

The shoreline administrator’s actions on the issuance of a statement of exemption or a denial are subject to appeal. The appeal shall be processed using the appeal procedures for the underlying land use approval pursuant to Chapter 19.65 BMC (Procedures). If there is no underlying land use approval, the appeal shall be processed pursuant to the Type 1 appeal procedures in BMC 19.65.065 (Type 1 Decisions).

(3) Agency Approvals Required. Even though a project is exempt from obtaining a substantial development permit, it may still need approvals from other agencies. For example, if the proposal involves construction within navigable water or if the project includes dredging or placement of fill, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 10 and/or 404 permit is required. In addition, if the project involves construction or other activity waterward of the ordinary high water mark or if the project includes an activity that will use, divert, obstruct, or change the natural flow or bed of any state waters, a hydraulic project approval from the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife is required.

(4) Exemptions. The developments listed in WAC 173-27-040(2) shall not require a local shoreline substantial development permit. Developments not meeting the provisions in WAC 173-27-040(2) must obtain a shoreline substantial development permit. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.030 Letter of exemption. 

(1) Letter of Exemption – General. Persons requesting an exemption must obtain a written letter of exemption verifying the proposed development as not subject to a shoreline substantial development permit. The letter of exemption must state how the proposed action is consistent with the policies and regulations of the city of Burien shoreline master program. For example, the approval of a building permit for a single-family residence and bulkhead can be conditioned on the basis of shoreline policy and use regulations. The building official or other permit authorizing official, through consultation with the shoreline administrator, shall attach shoreline management terms and conditions to a building permit or other permit approvals pursuant to RCW 90.58.140 (Development permits).

(2) State and Federal Agencies. Where shoreline development proposals are subject to review, approval, and permitting by a federal or state agency, the shoreline administrator shall prepare a letter and send to the Department of Ecology indicating the specific exemption provision from WAC 173-27-040 (Developments exempt from substantial development permit requirement) that is being applied to the development and provide a summary of the city’s analysis of the consistency of the project with the city of Burien shoreline master program and the state Shoreline Management Act. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.033 Developments not required to obtain shoreline permits or local reviews. 

(1) Requirements to obtain a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, letter of exemption, or other review to implement the Shoreline Management Act do not apply to the following:

(a) Remedial Actions. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.355, any person conducting a remedial action at a facility pursuant to a consent decree, order, or agreed order issued pursuant to Chapter 70.105D RCW, or to the Department of Ecology when it conducts a remedial action under Chapter 70.105D RCW.

(b) Boatyard Improvements to Meet NPDES Permit Requirements. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.355, any person installing site improvements for storm water treatment in an existing boatyard facility to meet requirements of a national pollutant discharge elimination system storm water general permit.

(c) WSDOT Facility Maintenance and Safety Improvements. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.356, Washington State Department of Transportation projects and activities meeting the conditions of RCW 90.58.356 are not required to obtain a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, letter of exemption, or other local review.

(d) Projects consistent with an environmental excellence program agreement pursuant to RCW 90.58.045.

(e) Projects authorized through the Energy Facility Site Evaluation Council process, pursuant to Chapter 80.50 RCW. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019]


20.35.035 Shoreline conditional use permits.

(See also WAC 173-27-160 (Conditional use permits).)

(1) Purpose. The purpose of a shoreline conditional use permit is to allow greater flexibility in administering the use regulations of the Burien shoreline master program in a manner consistent with the policies of the Shoreline Management Act. This allows for review of a proposed action which may have a potential for compatibility concerns with nearby uses of other impacts that could be resolved under special circumstances with appropriate mitigation measures or conditions of approval.

(2) Criteria. Shoreline conditional uses identified in the Burien shoreline master program Shoreline Permit Matrix (BMC 20.30.001), or those that are unlisted uses but not prohibited uses, may be allowed only when the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:

(a) The proposed use will be consistent with RCW 90.58.020 (Use preference) and the Shoreline Management Act and the Burien shoreline master program;

(b) The proposed use will not interfere with the normal public use of public shorelines;

(c) The proposed use and development of the site and design of the project will be compatible with other permitted and planned uses within the area;

(d) The shoreline proposal will not result in significant adverse impacts on the shoreline environment and that the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area will remain consistent with the policies of the Shoreline Management Act and the Burien shoreline master program;

(e) That the proposed use will not cause a substantial detrimental effect to the public interest. In authorizing a shoreline conditional use permit, special conditions may be attached to the permit to prevent undesirable effects of the proposed use, to ensure consistency with the Shoreline Management Act and the Burien shoreline master program, or to address cumulative impacts of all like actions. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.040 Shoreline variance permits.

(See also WAC 173-27-170 (Variances).)

(1) Applicability. A shoreline variance permit is strictly limited to granting relief from specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the Burien shoreline master program where there are extraordinary or unique circumstances relating to the physical character or configuration of property such that strict implementation of the policies, regulations or development standards would impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020 (Use preference) or the Burien shoreline master program. Shoreline variance permits should be granted in circumstances where denial of the permit would result in a thwarting of the policy enumerated in RCW 90.58.020 (Use preference). The applicant must demonstrate that extraordinary circumstances shall be shown and the public interest shall suffer no substantial detrimental effect. A variance permit cannot be granted for a use.

(2) Landward Variance Criteria. Variance permits for development and/or uses that will be located landward of the ordinary high water mark and/or landward of a wetland may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:

(a) The strict application of the bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the applicable master program precludes reasonable use of the property;

(b) The hardship described in subsection (2)(a) of this section is specifically related to the property, and is the result of unique conditions such as irregular lot shape, size, or natural features and the application of the master program, and not, for example, from deed restrictions or the applicant’s own actions;

(c) The design of the project is compatible with other authorized developments within the area and with uses planned for the area under the city’s comprehensive plan and shoreline master program and will not cause adverse impacts to the shoreline environment;

(d) The variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by the other properties in the area;

(e) The variance requested is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and

(f) The public interest will suffer no substantial detrimental effect.

(3) Waterward Variance Criteria. Variance permits for development and/or uses that will be located waterward of the ordinary high water mark or within a wetland may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:

(a) The strict application of the bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the Burien shoreline master program precludes all reasonable use of the property;

(b) The proposal is consistent with the criteria established in subsections (2)(b) through (f) of this section; and

(c) The public rights of navigation and use of the shorelines will not be adversely affected.

(4) Consideration of Cumulative Impacts. In the granting of all variance permits, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if variances were granted to other developments and/or uses in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the variances shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 (Use preference) and shall not cause substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.050 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by the granting, denying or rescinding of a shoreline substantial development permit pursuant to BMC 19.65.060 (Judicial Appeal) and RCW 90.58.140 (Development permits) may seek review from the state shorelines hearings board by filing a petition for review within 21 days of the date of filing as defined in RCW 90.58.140(6) (Development permits). [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.055 Effective date and duration of shoreline permits.

Construction authorized by an approved shoreline permit shall not begin until 21 days after the date of filing as defined by RCW 90.58.140 (Development permits). This restriction shall be stated on the permit. Construction shall be commenced or, where no construction is involved, the use or activity shall be commenced within two years and the construction related activity shall terminate within five years after the effective date of a shoreline permit or the final settlement date of any associated appeals or legal actions regarding the proposed action; provided, that the city may authorize a single extension for a period not to exceed one year based on reasonable factors, if a request for extension has been filed before the expiration date and notice of the proposed extension is given to parties of record and the Department of Ecology. The city shall notify the Department of Ecology in writing of any change to the effective date of a permit, as authorized by this section, with an explanation of the basis for approval of the change. Any change to the time limits of a permit other than those authorized by this section shall require a new permit application. See also WAC 173-27-090 for additional information regarding duration of permits. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.060 Compliance and enforcement.

(1) Choice of Action/Penalty – Conflict. The choice of enforcement action to be taken and the severity of any penalty to be imposed shall be guided by the nature of the violation, the damage or risk to the public or to public resources, and/or the existence or degree of bad faith of the person or persons subject to the enforcement action. The provisions of this section shall supersede and take precedence over any other enforcement provisions of the Burien Municipal Code in conflict herewith.

(2) Order to Cease and Desist – Notice of Correction. In the event any person is or has engaged in activity that violates any of the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act), or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city may issue and serve upon such person or persons a cease and desist order and/or an order to take corrective action.

(a) Content of Order. The order shall set forth and contain:

(i) A description of the specific nature, extent, and time of violation and the damage or potential damage; and

(ii) A notice that the act or acts causing a violation or a potential violation shall immediately cease and desist or, in appropriate cases, the specific corrective action to be taken within a specific and reasonable time, which corrective action may include, but is not limited to, restoration and/or mitigation of the site and other property damaged.

(b) Effective Date. An order issued under this section shall become effective immediately upon receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.

(c) Compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of an order issued pursuant to this subsection (2) shall be a violation of this chapter and can result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of a civil penalty.

(d) Other Action. In addition to the issuance of the cease and desist order and/or an order to take corrective action, the city may take other enforcement action available at law including issuance of a civil notice of violation and penalties pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, seeking injunctive or declaratory relief, imposition of criminal penalties, and permit rescission as set forth in RCW 90.58.140 (Development permits). The city may combine an order issued pursuant to this subsection (2) with a notice of violation.

(3) Civil Penalties – Procedures – Remission.

(a) Civil Violations. It shall be a civil violation of this chapter for any person to:

(i) Use, construct or demolish any structure, or to conduct clearing, earth-moving, construction or other development not authorized under a substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance permit, where such permit is required by this chapter;

(ii) Undertake or conduct any work which is not conducted in accordance with the plans, conditions, or other requirements in a permit approved pursuant to this chapter; provided, that the terms or conditions are stated in the permit or the approved plans;

(iii) Remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with this chapter;

(iv) Misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any shoreline use or development authorization;

(v) Fail to comply with the requirements of a substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance issued pursuant to this chapter;

(vi) Undertake a development or use on shorelines of the state without first obtaining a permit required pursuant to this chapter;

(vii) Fail to comply with an order issued under subsection (2) of this section.

(b) Amount of Penalty. The penalty for each civil violation shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation and shall not be less than $25.00. The amount of the penalty prescribed in the notice of violation shall be determined based upon the guidelines set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(c) Separate Violation. Each calendar day that a civil violation occurs or continues to occur shall constitute a separate civil violation.

(d) Notice of Civil Violation. A notice of civil violation and penalty shall be imposed by issuance and service of a notice of civil violation in writing.

(e) Contents of Notice of Violation. The notice of violation shall set forth and contain:

(i) A description of the specific nature, extent, and time of violation(s) and the damage or potential damage; and

(ii) A notice that the act or acts causing a violation or a potential violation shall immediately cease and desist or, in appropriate cases, the specific corrective action to be taken within a specific and reasonable time; and

(iii) A notice that any order included in the notice of violation shall become effective immediately upon receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.

(f) Service of Notice of Violation. The notice of violation shall be served upon the person or persons alleged to have committed the violation either by certified mail with return receipt requested, at such person’s or persons’ last known address of record, or by personal service.

(g) Application for Remission or Mitigation. Any person incurring a penalty may apply in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the penalty, to the director for remission or mitigation of such penalty. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall identify the specific violation or violations for which the applicant seeks remission or mitigation, set forth the specific facts establishing the extraordinary circumstances which the applicant desires the director to consider, include complete copies of any documents or records applicant wishes the director to consider, include the mailing address (not a post office box) at which the applicant will receive notice of the decision, and shall be signed by the applicant. Incomplete applications and applications filed with the city after the 30-day period specified herein shall not be considered by the director.

Upon receipt of a complete application for remission or mitigation, the director, or his/her designee, shall consider the application, together with any information the director, or his/her designee, determines is relevant, and may remit or mitigate the penalty only upon a finding that that applicant has demonstrated extraordinary circumstances, such as the presence of information or factors not considered in setting the original penalty. When a penalty is imposed jointly by the Department of Ecology and the city, the penalty may be remitted or mitigated only upon such terms as both the Department of Ecology and the city agree.

(h) Right of Appeal.

(i) Any person issued a notice of civil violation pursuant to this subsection (3) may appeal the same to the city council; provided, that, if the penalty is imposed jointly by the city and the Department of Ecology, an appeal shall be filed with the Shorelines Hearings Board in accordance with WAC 173-27-290 (Appeal of civil penalty).

(ii) Timing of Appeal. Except as provided below, any person appealing a notice of civil violation to the city council shall file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days of service of the notice of civil violation. In the event that a timely and completed application is filed with the city clerk for remission or mitigation, an appeal of a civil violation that is the subject of the application for remission or mitigation shall be filed within 30 days of applicant’s receipt of the city’s written decision regarding the remission or mitigation. The applicant shall be deemed to have received the written decision upon the earlier of the date of personal service of the written decision or three days after the written decision is deposited in the United States mail, in a postage prepaid, properly addressed envelope, using the applicant’s address as stated in the application.

(iii) Notice of Appeal. All appeals shall be in writing and contain the following:

(A) A heading in the words: “Before the Hearing Examiner”;

(B) A caption reading: “Appeal of ______” giving the name of all appellant(s);

(C) A brief statement in concise language of the violation or violations protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant, including a copy of the notice of civil violation(s) being appealed;

(D) A brief statement in concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested notice of violation(s) should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

(E) The signatures of appellant and appellant’s official mailing addresses;

(F) The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington) of the appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

(iv) Hearing. Within 10 days of receiving the written appeal, the city clerk shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed; provided, that the hearing examiner may reset or continue a hearing upon request of the city or the party appealing, upon good cause shown, or sua sponte. Written notice of the date of the hearing shall be provided to the appellant by mailing such notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant at the address shown on the notice of appeal. At the hearing the appellant shall be entitled to appear in person and be represented by counsel, and to offer evidence pertinent and material to those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the written notice of appeal.

(v) Evidence. Unless otherwise provided by law, evidence that is material and relevant to determination of the matter consistent with the applicable legal requirements and subject to administrative rules of proceedings before the hearing examiner shall be admitted into the record whether or not such evidence was considered by the official issuing the notice of civil violation.

(vi) Findings – Conclusions – Recommendation. The hearing examiner shall conduct adjudicative proceedings, receive and examine all evidence it finds relevant to the subject matter, and prepare a record thereof. When the hearing examiner renders a recommendation, the examiner shall make and enter written findings and conclusions which support such decision. The findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the manner in which the decision or recommendation is consistent with applicable laws, regulations and policies of the city of Burien. The hearing examiner may recommend that the notice of civil violation be affirmed, dismissed or modified consistent with his/her findings and conclusions. The decision or recommendation shall be rendered as soon as possible but in all events within 20 working days of the conclusion of the hearing.

(vii) City Council. When taking final action, the city council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record before the hearing examiner which support its action, may affirm, reverse, modify, or remand the decision of the hearing examiner, and may adopt all or portions of the examiner’s findings and conclusions. The decision of the city council shall be a final decision.

(i) Penalties Due.

(i) Penalties imposed under this subsection (3) shall become due and payable 30 days after receipt of notice of civil violation unless application for remission or mitigation is made or an appeal is filed. Whenever an application for remission or mitigation is made, penalties shall become due and payable 30 days after receipt of the city’s decision regarding the remission or mitigation. Whenever an appeal of a penalty is filed, the penalty shall become due and payable upon completion of all review proceedings and upon the issuance of a final decision confirming the penalty in whole or in part.

(ii) If the amount of a penalty owed the city is not paid within 30 days after it becomes due and payable, the city may take actions necessary to recover such penalty.

(j) Aiding or Abetting. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, procures, aids or abets in the civil violation shall be considered to have committed a civil violation for the purposes of the civil penalty.

(4) Criminal Penalties. In addition to incurring civil penalties under subsection (3) of this section, any person found to have willfully engaged in activities on shorelines of the state in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and shall be punished by:

(a) A fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $1,000;

(b) Imprisonment in the county/city jail for not more than 90 days; or

(c) Both such fine and imprisonment; provided, that the fine for the third and all subsequent violations in any five-year period shall not be less than $500.00 nor more than $10,000; provided further, that fines for violations of RCW 90.58.550 (Oil or natural gas exploration in marine waters), or any rule adopted thereunder, shall be determined under RCW 90.58.560 (Oil or natural gas exploration).

(5) Inspection Access. The director and his/her authorized representatives may, for the purpose of inspection for compliance with the provisions of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, enter all properties that are subject to such a permit. All persons applying for a permit under this chapter shall be deemed to have given their consent to entry upon the property upon issuance of the permit. No owner or occupant of any premises shall fail to provide prompt entry to the director or authorized representative for the purposes of inspection under this section. If such entry is refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including issuance of a notice of correction and issuance of a notice of civil violation.

Whenever entry is required for purposes of inspection pursuant to this section, if the premises are occupied, the persons conducting the inspection shall present proper credentials and request entry, and if the premises are unoccupied, reasonable effort shall first be made to locate the owner of the premises and request entry.

(6) Other Remedies.

(a) In addition to the civil and criminal penalties provided for herein, the city may, pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act), bring such injunctive, declaratory, or other actions as are necessary to ensure that no uses are made of the shorelines of the state located within the city of Burien in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act), this chapter, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or other regulations adopted pursuant to state law or city code, and to otherwise enforce the provisions of the city’s shoreline master program.

(b) Any person subject to the regulatory provisions of this program or the Act who violates any provision thereof, or permit, or permit condition issued pursuant thereto shall be liable for all damage to public or private property arising from such violation, including the cost of restoring the affected area to its condition prior to violation. The city attorney may bring suit for damages under this section on behalf of the city and on the behalf of all persons similarly situated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act).

(7) Abatement. Structures or development on shorelines considered by the director to present a hazard or other public nuisance to persons, properties or natural features may be abated by the city using all lawful means available. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.065 Revisions to shoreline permits.

(See also WAC 173-27-100 (Revisions to permits).)

(1) Revision Required. A permit revision is required whenever an applicant proposes substantive changes to the design, terms or conditions of a project from that which is approved in the shoreline permit. Changes are considered substantive if they materially alter the project in a manner that relates to its conformance to the terms and conditions of the permit, the Burien shoreline master program and/or the policies and provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act). Changes which are not substantive in effect do not require approval of a revision.

(2) Required Information. When an applicant seeks to revise a permit, the city will request from the applicant detailed plans and text describing the proposed changes. If the shoreline administrator determines that the proposed changes are within the scope and intent of the original permit, and are consistent with the Burien shoreline master program and the Shoreline Management Act, the city may approve a revision.

“Within the scope and intent of the original permit” means all of the following:

(a) No additional over-water construction is involved except that pier, dock, or float construction may be increased by 500 square feet or 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit, whichever is less;

(b) Ground area coverage and height may be increased a maximum of 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit;

(c) The revised permit does not authorize development to exceed height, lot coverage, setback, or any other requirements of the applicable master program except as authorized under a variance granted as the original permit or a part thereof;

(d) Additional or revised landscaping is consistent with any conditions attached to the original permit and with the applicable county master program;

(e) The use authorized pursuant to the original permit is not changed; and

(f) No adverse environmental impact will be caused by the project revision.

(3) New Permits Required. If the revision, or the sum of the revision and any previously approved revisions, will violate the criteria specified in subsections (2)(a) through (f) of this section, the city shall require that the applicant apply for a new shoreline permit. Revisions to permits may be authorized after original permit authorization has expired under WAC 173-27-080(2) (legally established structures). The purpose of such revisions shall be limited to authorization of changes which are consistent with this section and which would not require a permit for the development or change proposed under the terms of Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act), the Burien shoreline master program and this section. If the proposed change constitutes substantial development, then a new permit is required; provided, this subsection shall not be used to extend the time requirements or to authorize substantial development beyond the time limits of the original permit. The revision approval, including the revised site plans and text consistent with the provisions of WAC 173-27-180 (Application requirements) as necessary to clearly indicate the authorized changes and the final ruling on consistency with this section, shall be filed with the Washington State Department of Ecology. In addition, the city shall notify parties of record of the action.

(4) Revisions to Conditional Use or Variance Permits. If the revision to the original permit involves a conditional use or variance, the city shall submit the revision to the Department of Ecology for the required state’s approval, approval with conditions, or denial, and shall indicate that the revision is being submitted under the requirements of this subsection. The Department of Ecology shall render and transmit to the city and the applicant its final decision within 15 days of the date of their receipt of the submittal from the city. The city of Burien shall notify parties of record of the Department of Ecology’s final decision.

(5) Effective Date. The revised permit is effective immediately upon final decision by the city or, when appropriate, upon final action by the Department of Ecology.

(6) Appeals. Appeals shall be to the State Shorelines Hearings Board in accordance with RCW 90.58.180 (Appeals) and shall be filed within 21 days from the date of receipt of the city’s action by the Department of Ecology or the date the Department of Ecology’s final decision is transmitted to the city and the applicant.

(7) Construction Authorization. Construction undertaken pursuant to that portion of a revised permit not authorized under the original permit is at the applicant’s own risk until the expiration of the appeals deadline. If an appeal is successful in proving that a revision is not within the scope and intent of the original permit, the decision shall have no bearing on the original permit. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.35.070 Rescission of shoreline permits and exemptions.

(See also RCW 90.58.140(8) (Development permits).)

Whenever any development or use is in violation of a permit or shoreline exemption issued pursuant to this chapter, the city may, concurrent with or as an alternative to any other remedy provided by this title or other law or ordinance, initiate permit rescission proceedings by scheduling a public hearing before the hearing examiner and serving the applicant with written notice thereof. Notice shall be provided in accordance with BMC 19.65.045 (Notice of Open Record Predecision Hearing) and contain a general description of the alleged noncompliance and date, time, and place of public hearing. It shall be served by registered mail at least 15 calendar days prior to such hearing. The permit rescission request shall be processed as a Type 2 decision in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 19.65 BMC (Procedures). [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


Chapter 20.40 SHORELINE DEFINITIONS* 

Sections:

20.40.000    Alteration. 

20.40.005    Appurtenance. 

20.40.010    Aquaculture. 

20.40.015    Associated wetlands. 

20.40.020    Beach. 

20.40.025    Boat ramp. 

20.40.030    Bulkhead. 

20.40.035    Community beach. 

20.40.040    Community residential facility. 

20.40.042    Critical saltwater habitat. 

20.40.044    Development. 

20.40.045    Docks. 

20.40.050    Dredging. 

20.40.055    Feasible. 

20.40.060    Fill. 

20.40.065    Floating home. 

20.40.070    Floats (rafts). 

20.40.073    Government facility. 

20.40.074    Grading. 

20.40.075    Houseboat. 

20.40.080    In-water structure. 

20.40.085    Littoral drift. 

20.40.088    Mean higher high water. 

20.40.090    Mooring buoy. 

20.40.092    Net acre. 

20.40.095    Normal protective bulkhead.

20.40.097    Office.

20.40.100    Ordinary high water mark.

20.40.101    Partially functioning areas.

20.40.102    Personal wireless service facility (PWSF).

20.40.105    Piers.

20.40.110    Physical access.

20.40.115    Primary structure.

20.40.116    Public park and recreation facilities.

20.40.117    Retail.

20.40.119    School. 

20.40.120    Shorelands. 

20.40.125    Shoreline administrator. 

20.40.130    Shoreline conditional use. 

20.40.135    Shoreline modification. 

20.40.140    Shoreline permit. 

20.40.145    Shoreline substantial development. 

20.40.150    Shoreline variance. 

20.40.155    Shoreline environment designations. 

20.40.160    Shoreline jurisdiction.

20.40.165    Shoreline master program.

20.40.170    Shorelines.

20.40.175    Shorelines of statewide significance.

20.40.180    Shorelines of the state.

20.40.185    Tidal waters.

20.40.190    Tidelands.

20.40.195    Tram.

20.40.200    Upland.

20.40.205    Visual access.

20.40.210    Water dependent.

20.40.215    Water enjoyment.

20.40.220    Water oriented.

20.40.225    Water related.

20.40.230    Watershed restoration plan.

20.40.235    Wetlands.

*Definitions contained in the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 (Chapter 90.58 RCW) and the Shoreline Master Program Guidelines (Chapter 173-26 WAC) shall apply to all terms and concepts used in this shoreline master program; provided, that definitions contained in this title shall be applicable where not in conflict with the Shoreline Management Act and the Shoreline Master Program Guidelines and shoreline management procedural rules. Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the definitions provided in Chapter 19.10 BMC shall apply. If there is a conflict, the definitions in this section shall govern.


20.40.000 Alteration. 

“Alteration” means any human activity that results or is likely to result in a significant impact upon the existing condition of a critical area. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, dredging, draining, channelizing, applying herbicides or pesticides or any hazardous substance, discharging pollutants except storm water, grazing domestic animals, paving, constructing, applying gravel, modifying for surface water management purposes, cutting, pruning, topping, trimming, relocating or removing vegetation or any other human activity which results or is likely to result in a significant impact to existent vegetation, hydrology, wildlife or wildlife habitat. Alterations do not include walking, fishing or any other passive recreation or other similar activities. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.005 Appurtenance. 

“Appurtenance” means development necessarily connected to the use and enjoyment of a single-family residence and located landward of the perimeter of an associated wetland and landward of the ordinary high water mark. Normal appurtenances include a garage, deck, driveway, utilities solely servicing the subject single-family residence, fences, and grading which does not exceed 250 cubic yards. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.010 Aquaculture. 

“Aquaculture” means the culture, harvesting or farming of food fish, shellfish, or other aquatic plants and animals. Aquaculture does not include the harvest of wild geoduck associated with the state managed wildstock geoduck fishery. Activities include the hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, harvesting, and processing of aquatic plants and animals and the maintenance and construction of necessary equipment, buildings and growing areas. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.015 Associated wetlands. 

“Associated wetlands” means those wetlands that are in proximity to and either influence or are influenced by tidal waters or a lake or stream subject to the Shoreline Management Act. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.020 Beach. 

“Beach” means the zone of unconsolidated material that is moved by waves, wind, and tidal currents, extending landward to the coastline. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.025 Boat ramp. 

“Boat ramp” means graded slopes, slabs, pads, planks, or rails used for launching boats by means of a trailer, hand, or mechanical device. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.030 Bulkhead. 

“Bulkhead” means a solid or open pile wall erected generally parallel to and near the ordinary high water mark for the purposes of protecting adjacent uplands from waves or current action. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.035 Community beach. 

“Community beach” means a beach area jointly owned by a homeowners association for use of the neighborhood. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.040 Community residential facility. 

“Community residential facility” means living quarters meeting applicable federal and state standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification; if staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member for subclassifying community residential facilities as follows:

(1) Community residential facility-I: nine to 10 residents and staff.

(2) Community residential facility-II: 11 or more residents and staff. (BMC 19.10.065.) [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.042 Critical saltwater habitat. 

“Critical saltwater habitat” means all kelp beds, eelgrass beds, spawning and holding areas for forage fish, such as herring, smelt and sandlance; shellfish beds; mudflats, intertidal habitats with vascular plants, and areas with which priority species have a primary association. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.044 Development. 

“Development” means a use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to this chapter at any state of water level. “Development” does not include dismantling or removing structures if there is no other associated development or re-development. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.045 Docks. 

“Docks” are fixed structures floating upon the water. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.050 Dredging. 

“Dredging” means the removal of earth, sand, sludge or other materials from the bottom of a stream, river, lake, bay or other water body. However, the creation of temporary depressions or contour alterations on tidelands or bedlands through the use of aquaculture harvesting equipment approved by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife shall not be construed to be dredging. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.055 Feasible. 

“Feasible” means actions that meet all of the following conditions:

(1) The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;

(2) The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and

(3) The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use.

In cases where this SMP requires certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibililty is on the applicant.

In determining an action’s infeasibility, the reviewing agency may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.060 Fill. 

“Fill” means any material, such as earth, clay, sand, concrete, rubble, wood chips, bark or waste of any kind, which is placed, stored or dumped upon the surface of the ground resulting in an increase in the natural surface elevation. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.065 Floating home. 

“Floating home” means a single-family dwelling unit constructed on a float that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in waters, and is not a vessel, even though it may be capable of being towed. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.070 Floats (rafts). 

“Floats (rafts)” are floating structures that are moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the water that are not directly connected to the shoreline. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.073 Government facility. 

“Government facility” means services and facilities operated by any level of government, excluding those uses listed separately in this code. (BMC 19.10.210.) [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.074 Grading. 

“Grading” means the movement or redistribution of the soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.075 Houseboat. 

“Houseboat” means a vessel used for living quarters but licensed and designed substantially as a mobile structure by means of detachable utilities or facilities, anchoring, and the presence of adequate self-propulsion to operate as a vessel. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.080 In-water structure. 

“In-water structure” means a structure located waterward of the ordinary high water mark that either causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction, or modification of water flow. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.085 Littoral drift. 

“Littoral drift” means the mud, sand, or gravel materials moved parallel to the shoreline in the nearshore zone by waves and currents. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.088 Mean higher high water. 

“Mean higher high water” or “MHHW” means the tidal elevation obtained by averaging each day’s highest tide at a particular location over a period of 19 years. It is measured from the mean lower low water = 0.0 tidal elevation. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.090 Mooring buoy. 

“Mooring buoy” means a floating object anchored to the bottom of a water body that provides tie-up capabilities for vessels. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.092 Net acre. 

“Net acre” means a measure of horizontal area for calculating development potential. At the area-wide planning level, net acre refers to the gross acre less the estimated area to be transferred (e.g., sale, dedication or donation) to public ownership from individual parcels. Net acreage is typically 67 to 75 percent of gross acreage, and depends largely on the amount of road right-of-way. At the site development level, this is the total acreage of a parcel less the area transferred to public ownership. The remaining net acreage is the basis for determining development density and potential. Net acre typically includes easement areas. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.095 Normal protective bulkhead.

“Normal protective bulkhead” means a bulkhead, common to single-family residences, constructed at or near the ordinary high water mark to protect an existing single-family residence, the sole purpose of which is to protect land from erosion, not for the purpose of creating new land. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.097 Office.

“Office” means a place of employment providing professional, administrative, educational, business or governmental services other than production, distribution, sale or repair of goods or commodities. The following is a nonexclusive list of office uses: medical, dental or other health care; veterinary, accounting, architectural, engineering, consulting or other similar professional services; management, administrative, secretarial, marketing, advertising, personnel or other similar services; sales offices where no inventories or goods are available on the premises, real estate, insurance, travel agent, brokerage or other similar services. (BMC 19.10.385.) [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.100 Ordinary high water mark.

“Ordinary high water mark (OHWM)” means, on all lakes, streams, and tidal water, that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition existing on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the Department; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining salt water shall be the line of mean higher high tide and the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.101 Partially functioning areas.

“Partially functioning areas” means areas that provide one or more reduced ecological functions and consist of neither native vegetation nor impervious surface. Ecological functions may include sediment removal, erosion control, pollution removal, wildlife habitat, and infiltration. Partially functioning areas specifically include lawns, slat decks that allow infiltration, and nonnative landscaped areas. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.102 Personal wireless service facility (PWSF).

“Personal wireless service facility (PWSF)” means a site, building, and/or structure that contains facilities to provide personal wireless services. A personal wireless service facility includes at least one of the following: antenna, support structure, and/or equipment enclosure. (BMC 19.10.397.) [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.105 Piers.

“Piers” are fixed, pile-supported structures extending over the water. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.110 Physical access.

“Physical access” means the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on the waters of the state, and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.115 Primary structure.

“Primary structure” means any permanent building, road, bridge or utility requiring a permit or approval which is necessary to support the primary use of a site. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.116 Public park and recreation facilities.

“Public park and recreation facilities” means a natural or landscaped area, buildings or structures, provided by a unit of government, to meet the active or passive recreational needs of people. (BMC 19.10.420.) [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.117 Retail.

“Retail” means a commercial enterprise which provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer, and whose goods are available for immediate purchase and/or rental, and whose goods are available for immediate removal from the premises by the purchaser and/or whose services are traditionally not permitted within an office use. The sale and consumption of food are included if: (1) the seating and associated circulation area does not exceed 10 percent of the gross floor area of the use; and (2) it can be demonstrated to the city that the floor plan is designed to preclude the seating area from being expanded. Goods and services offered include, but are not limited to, convenience retail uses. (BMC 19.10.465.) [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.119 School. 

“School” means an institution of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the state of Washington. The following are categories of schools:

(1) Elementary and Middle/Junior High Schools. Grades kindergarten through nine, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities.

(2) Secondary or High Schools. Grades nine through 12, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.120 Shorelands. 

“Shorelands” means those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark, floodways and 100-year floodplains, and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters which are subject to the State of Washington Shoreline Management Act. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.125 Shoreline administrator. 

“Shoreline administrator” means the city manager or his or her designee in the community development department who is responsible for administering the city of Burien shoreline master program. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.130 Shoreline conditional use. 

“Shoreline conditional use” means a use or modification classified by the city of Burien shoreline master program as a conditional use or modification for certain shoreline environments or is an unlisted use/modification. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.135 Shoreline modification. 

“Shoreline modification” means an action that modifies the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, usually through the construction of a physical element such as a breakwater, dock, boat launch ramp, or other shoreline structures. A shoreline modification also can consist of other activities, such as dredging and filling. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.140 Shoreline permit. 

“Shoreline permit” means any substantial development, variance, conditional use, or revision thereto authorized under the provisions of the city of Burien shoreline master program subject to review by the Washington State Department of Ecology. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.145 Shoreline substantial development. 

“Shoreline substantial development” means any development of which the total cost, or fair market value, whichever is higher, exceeds the dollar amount prescribed by WAC 173-27-040(2)(a), so long as such development does not materially interfere with the normal public use of the water or shorelines of the state. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.150 Shoreline variance. 

“Shoreline variance” means a permit for the limited purposes of granting relief to specific bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the city of Burien shoreline master program. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.155 Shoreline environment designations. 

“Shoreline environment designations” means the categories of shorelines established by the city of Burien shoreline master program in order to provide a uniform basis for applying policies and use regulations within physically distinct shoreline areas. The city of Burien shoreline master program classifies shorelines into three shoreline environment designations: urban conservancy, aquatic and shoreline residential. [Ord. 706 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.160 Shoreline jurisdiction.

“Shoreline jurisdiction” means the proper term describing all of the geographic areas regulated by the city of Burien shoreline master program. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.165 Shoreline master program.

“Shoreline master program” means the general term for shoreline comprehensive plans and regulations prepared under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.170 Shorelines.

“Shorelines” means all of the water areas of the state, including reservoirs, and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them; except (1) shorelines of statewide significance; (2) shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is 20 cubic feet per second or less, and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and (3) shorelines on lakes less than 20 acres in size, and wetlands associated with such small lakes. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.175 Shorelines of statewide significance.

“Shorelines of statewide significance” means shorelines designated by the state of Washington that are major resources from which all people in the state derive benefit. Shoreline areas in the city of Burien that are designated as shorelines of statewide significance are portions of the Puget Sound adjacent to the city limits extending out to mid channel from extreme low tide. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.180 Shorelines of the state.

“Shorelines of the state” means the total of all “shorelines” and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the state. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.185 Tidal waters.

“Tidal waters” means marine and estuarine waters bounded by the ordinary high water mark. Where a stream enters the tidal waters, the tidal water is bounded by the extension of the elevation of the marine ordinary high water mark within the stream. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.190 Tidelands.

“Tidelands” means the land on the shore of marine water bodies between the line of ordinary high tide and the line of extreme low tide. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.195 Tram.

“Tram” means a conveyance that transports passengers or freight in carriers on rails or suspended from cables supported by a series of towers. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.200 Upland.

“Upland” means generally the area above and landward of the ordinary high water mark. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.205 Visual access.

“Visual access” means access with improvements that provide only a view of the shoreline or water, but do not allow physical access to the shoreline. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.210 Water dependent.

“Water dependent” means a use or a portion of a use which requires direct contact with the water and cannot exist at a nonwater location due to the intrinsic nature of its operations. Examples of water-dependent uses may include ship cargo terminal loading areas, ferry and passenger terminals, barge loading facilities, ship building and dry docking, marinas, aquaculture, float plane facilities, and sewer outfalls. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.215 Water enjoyment.

“Water enjoyment” means a recreational use, or other use facilitating public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general character of the use and which through the location, design and operation assures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline space of the project must be devoted to provisions that accommodate public shoreline enjoyment. Examples may include parks, piers, museums, restaurants, educational/scientific reserves, resorts, and mixed use projects. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.220 Water oriented.

“Water oriented” means any combination of water-dependent, water-related, and/or water enjoyment uses. “Nonwater oriented” serves to describe those uses which have little or no relationship to the shoreline. Examples of nonwater-oriented uses include professional office, automobile sales or repair shops, mini storage facilities, multifamily residential development, department stores, and gas stations. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.225 Water related.

“Water related” means a use or a portion of a use which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose operation cannot occur economically without a waterfront location. Examples of water-related uses may include warehousing of goods transported by water, seafood processing plants, hydroelectric generating plants, gravel storage when transported by barge, oil refineries where transport is by tanker, and log storage. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.230 Watershed restoration plan.

“Watershed restoration plan” means a plan, developed or sponsored by the Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Department of Ecology, the Department of Natural Resources, the Department of Transportation, a federally recognized Indian tribe acting within and pursuant to its authority, a city, a county, or a conservation district that provides a general program and implementation measures or actions for the preservation, restoration, re-creation, or enhancement of the natural resources, character, and ecology of a water body or reach, drainage area, or watershed for which agency and public review have been conducted pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW, the State Environmental Policy Act. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]


20.40.235 Wetlands.

“Wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. [Ord. 581 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013]



-----------------------------

The Burien Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 740, passed June 1, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Burien Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.burienwa.gov/ City Telephone: (206) 241-4647

Code Publishing Company