


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    Repealed

1.15    Repealed

1.20    City Seal, Logo, and Tagline

1.25    General Penalty

1.30    Civil Code Enforcement


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Code adopted.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Reference applies to amendments.

1.01.040    Codification authority.

1.01.050    Definitions – Construction.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Severability.


1.01.010 Code adopted.

The Covington Municipal Code, as compiled from the ordinances of the City of Covington, Washington, and edited and published by Code Publishing of Seattle, Washington, is hereby adopted as the official code of the City of Covington, Washington, on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

The code shall be known as “The Covington Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Covington Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the Covington Municipal Code. Further, reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the Covington Municipal Code and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section, or subsection as it appears in that code. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.030 Reference applies to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to the Covington Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Covington, Washington, that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.040 Codification authority.

This code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances codified pursuant to RCW 35A.21.130 and RCW 35.21.500 through RCW 35.21.570 inclusive. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.050 Definitions – Construction.

Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where used in the Municipal Code of the City of Covington, Washington, shall have the meanings and construction given in this section:

“Across” includes along, in or upon.

“City” means the City of Covington.

“City Council” or “Councilmembers” means the City Council of the City of Covington, Washington.

“Code” means the “Covington Municipal Code.”

“County” means the County of King.

“Ex officio” means by virtue of office.

Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

“Goods” includes wares and merchandise.

Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.

“Oath” includes affirmation.

“Operate” or “engage in” includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained.

“Owner” when pertaining to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them.

“Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.

Shall, May. “Shall” is mandatory, “may” is permissive.

“State” means the State of Washington.

“Street” includes all streets, highways, public roads, County roads, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or other public ways in Covington that have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State.

“Tenant or occupant,” when pertaining to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 

Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense.

Title of Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City of Covington. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not, in any manner, affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the City shall, in any manner, affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.090 Effective date.

The Covington Municipal Code shall become effective on the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


1.01.100 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The City declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 81-03 § 1, 12-16-03)


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS (Reserved)          


Chapter 1.10 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER

(Repealed by Ord. 03-08)


Chapter 1.15 ENFORCEMENT CODE

(Repealed by Ord. 10-07)


Chapter 1.20 CITY SEAL, LOGO, AND TAGLINE

Sections:

1.20.010    Findings.

1.20.020    Seal adopted.

1.20.023    Logo adopted.

1.20.026    Tagline adopted.

1.20.030    Purpose of seal, logo, and tagline.

1.20.040    Unauthorized use of the City seal, logo, and tagline.

1.20.050    Violation – Penalty.


1.20.010 Findings.

The City Council finds that the seal, logo, and tagline of the City adopted in this chapter are a symbol of the authority of the City and valuable assets of its population. The Council desires to ensure that only appropriate uses are made of the City seal, logo, and tagline. (Ord. 08-14 § 1; Ord. 40-97 § 1)


1.20.020 Seal adopted.

The City adopts the symbol depicted below as its official City seal:
[IMAGE]


The City seal depicts a vintage steam locomotive, No. 97, in the foreground against a stylized rendering of Mt. Rainier. The words “City of Covington” are integrated into the design. (Ord. 08-14 § 1; Ord. 40-97 § 2)


1.20.023 Logo adopted.

The City adopts the graphic depicted below as its common City logo:
[IMAGE]


The common City logo depicts three adjacent circles, each with three arrows inside pointing upward. The word “Covington” is prominently placed below the circles and the tagline “growing toward greatness” is integrated into the design. (Ord. 08-14 § 1)


1.20.026 Tagline adopted.

The City adopts the tagline “growing toward greatness” as its City tagline. (Ord. 08-14 § 1)


1.20.030 Purpose of seal, logo, and tagline.

The City seal, logo, and tagline shall be used for official purposes only and according to policies and branding guidelines developed by the City, or as authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 08-14 § 1; Ord. 40-97 § 3)


1.20.040 Unauthorized use of the City seal, logo, and tagline.

Except as authorized by the City Council, the City seal, logo, and tagline shall not be used on or in connection with any advertising or promotion for any product, business, organization, service or article, whether offered for sale, for profit, or offered without charge. No person shall use a symbol, graphic, or any other image that imitates the City seal and/or logo or that is deceptively similar in appearance to the City seal and/or logo. The City seal and/or logo may be used for illustrative purposes by the news media if the reproduction is incidental to a publication or broadcast and may be used in political cartoons. (Ord. 08-14 § 1; Ord. 40-97 § 4)


1.20.050 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who willfully violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as set forth in Chapter 1.25 CMC. The City’s right to prosecute under this section shall not affect its right to pursue civil or injunctive relief under Federal or State laws. (Ord. 08-14 § 1; Ord. 40-97 § 5)


Chapter 1.25 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.25.010    Violation – Penalty.


1.25.010 Violation – Penalty.

Any violation of provisions established in the ordinances of the City shall be a gross misdemeanor punishable by up to a fine of $5,000 and/or imprisonment of one year except as may be specifically provided as a part of any such City ordinance. (Ord. 52-97 § 1)


Chapter 1.30 CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.30.010    Purpose.

1.30.020    Definitions.

1.30.030    Declaration of public nuisance, misdemeanor.

1.30.040    Applicability.

1.30.050    Voluntary correction agreement.

1.30.060    Notice of civil infraction.

1.30.070    Notice of civil infraction – Response.

1.30.080    Infraction – Hearings.

1.30.090    Infraction – Penalties.

1.30.100    Infraction – Order, modification, restitution, fees.

1.30.110    Administrative notice and order to correct civil violation.

1.30.120    Administrative notice and order – Appeal.

1.30.130    Administrative notice and order – Appeal – Hearing.

1.30.140    Administrative notice and order – Appeal – Decision.

1.30.150    Stop work orders.

1.30.160    Emergency orders.

1.30.170    Abatement by the City.

1.30.180    Additional code enforcement procedures.

1.30.190    Interference.

1.30.200    Collection of monetary penalties.

1.30.210    Lien – Authorized.

1.30.220    Right of entry.

1.30.230    Conflicts.

1.30.240    Adoption of certain other laws.


1.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; to identify processes and methods to encourage compliance with City code, ordinances, and regulations; and, to provide opportunity for a prompt hearing, decision, and appeal as to alleged violations of the land use code and other ordinances and regulations described in this chapter. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.020 Definitions.

Except where specifically defined in this section, all words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meanings. The word “shall” is always mandatory, and the word “may” denotes a use of discretion in making a decision. The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, demolish, board-up, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a civil violation by such means, in such a manner, and to such extent as the City Building Official, City Manager, or his/her designee determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.

(2) “Code Enforcement Officer” means the City Code Enforcement Officer, the City Building Official, and all other City officials designated by ordinance or by the City Manager for purposes of enforcing the regulations subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(3) “Emergency” means a situation or civil violation which, in the opinion of the City Building Official, City Manager, or his or her designee, requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons or property.

(4) “Hearing Examiner” means the Covington Hearing Examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to the Covington Municipal Code.

(5) “Omission” means a failure to act.

(6) “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or by an agent or employee.

(7) “Person responsible for violation” means either the person who caused the violation and/or the owner, lessor, tenant, or other person entitled to control, use, and/or occupy property where a civil code violation occurs.

(8) “Nuisance” is an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:

(a) Unreasonably injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or

(b) Offends public decency; or

(c) Is offensive to the sense of reasonable persons; or

(d) In any way renders other persons insecure in life or use of property.

(9) “Regulation” means and includes all of the code provisions, ordinances, standards, regulations, procedures, terms and/or conditions specified under CMC 1.30.040.

(10) “Violation” means:

(a) An act or omission contrary to any City regulation that promotes or protects the public health, safety, or welfare or the use and development of land or water, whether or not the regulation is codified; and/or

(b) An act or omission contrary to the conditions of any permit, notice and order, or stop work or other order issued pursuant to any such regulation. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.030 Declaration of public nuisance, misdemeanor.

All civil code violations are determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and environment, and are declared to be public nuisances. All conditions determined to be civil code violations shall be subject to and enforced pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except where specifically excluded by law or regulation. Any person who willfully or knowingly causes, aids or abets a civil code violation pursuant to this title by any act of commission or omission is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.040 Applicability.

This chapter may be applied for the purposes of enforcing the following regulations:

(1) CMC Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations;

(2) CMC Title 6, Animals;

(3) CMC Title 8, Health and Safety;

(4) CMC Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks, and Bridges;

(5) CMC Title 13, Public Utilities;

(6) CMC Title 14, Planning and Development;

(7) CMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction;

(8) CMC Title 16, Environment;

(9) CMC Title 17, Subdivisions;

(10) CMC Title 18, Zoning; and

(11) Such other code provisions, ordinances, resolutions, or public rules that promote or protect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the use and development of land and water. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.050 Voluntary correction agreement.

(1) Content. When the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may enter into a voluntary correction agreement with the person responsible for the violation. The voluntary correction agreement is a written contract prepared by the City and the person responsible for the violation, under which such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:

(a) The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;

(b) The street address or other description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(c) A description of the violation(s) and a reference to the regulation(s) which has been violated;

(d) The necessary corrective action to be taken, and the date by which the correction must be completed;

(e) An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement;

(f) The amount of the civil penalty that will be imposed pursuant to this section if the voluntary compliance agreement is not satisfied; and

(g) An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that if the City determines that the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the City may impose any remedy authorized by this chapter, including:

(i) Assessment of civil penalties identified in the voluntary correction agreement;

(ii) Abatement of the violation;

(iii) Assessment of all costs and expenses incurred by the City to pursue code enforcement and to abate the violation, including legal and incidental expenses; and

(iv) Suspension, revocation, or limitation of a developmental permit.

(h) A statement that the person responsible for the violation waives the right to a hearing.

(2) Right to a Hearing Waived. In consideration of the City’s agreement to enter into a voluntary correction agreement, the person responsible for the violation shall have no right to an administrative or judicial hearing, under this chapter or otherwise, regarding the matter of the violation and/or the required corrective action.

(3) Extension and Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the City if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation, but unforeseen circumstances delay correction under the original conditions and the responsible person provides the request in writing clearly establishing the need for such an extension.

(4) Monetary Penalty. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each violation per day or portion thereof. Civil penalties, in whole or in part, may be waived by the Director or his/her designee if the code violations which formed the basis for the civil violation have been corrected, and the Director or his/her designee finds that compelling reasons justify waiver of all or part of the outstanding civil penalties. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.060 Notice of civil infraction.

(1) Issuance. When the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may issue a notice of infraction to the person responsible for the violation.

(2) Content. The notice of infraction shall include the following information:

(a) A statement describing the specific civil infraction for which the notice was issued, including the date and location, as well as the accompanying statutory citation, ordinance number, or regulation;

(b) A statement that the notice of civil infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed by the person named in the notice and that the determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter;

(c) A statement that a civil infraction is a noncriminal offense for which imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction;

(d) A statement of the monetary penalty established for the civil infraction;

(e) A statement of the options provided in this chapter for responding to the notice and the procedures necessary to exercise these options;

(f) A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination, the City has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the civil infraction was committed and that the person may subpoena witnesses including the Code Enforcement Officer who issued the notice;

(g) A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, the person will be deemed to have committed the civil infraction and may not subpoena witnesses;

(h) A statement that the person named in the notice must respond as provided in this chapter within 15 days of issuance;

(i) A statement that failure to respond to the notice or a failure to appear at a hearing requested for the purpose of contesting the determination or for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances will result in a default judgment against the person in the amount of the penalty and that this failure may be referred to the prosecuting attorney for criminal prosecution for failure to respond or appear; and

(j) A statement that failure to respond to a notice of civil infraction or to appear at a requested hearing is a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine or imprisonment in jail.

(3) Identification and Detention of Person Receiving Notice. A person who receives a notice of civil infraction under this chapter is required to identify himself or herself to the Code Enforcement Officer by giving his or her true name, address, and date of birth. Upon request of the Officer, the person shall produce reasonable identification, including a driver’s license or State identification card. The Code Enforcement Officer may cause to be detained any person who is unable or unwilling to reasonably identify himself or herself for purposes of issuing a civil infraction, for a time not longer than is reasonably necessary to identify the person.

(4) Service. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice of civil infraction upon the person responsible for the violation, either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice of civil infraction by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such person at his last known address. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be personally served within King County and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the notice of civil infraction conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person completing the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made and, if by posting, the facts showing the attempts to serve the person personally or by mail.

(5) Filing. A notice of civil infraction shall be filed with a court having jurisdiction within days of issuance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

(6) Determination Final Unless Contested. A notice of civil infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed. The determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter.

(7) Further Action Not Limited. Issuance or disposition of a notice of infraction shall not limit or preclude any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.070 Notice of civil infraction – Response.

(1) Response. A person who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such notice as provided in this section within 15 days of the date of the notice. If the response is mailed, it must be postmarked not later than midnight of the day the response is due.

(2) Uncontested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does not contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the notice of infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. A check or money order in the amount of the penalty prescribed for the civil infraction must be submitted with the response. The clerk of the court may accept cash in payment for a civil infraction. When a response that does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate order is entered into the court’s records.

(3) Contested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction wishes to contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it to the court, either by mail or in person. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not be earlier than 14 days nor more than 90 days from the date of notice of the hearing, except by agreement.

(4) Mitigating Circumstances. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does not contest the determination but wishes to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the infraction, the person shall respond by completing the portion of the notice of infraction requesting a mitigation hearing and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not be earlier than 14 days nor more than 90 days from the date of notice of hearing, except by agreement.

(5) Failure to Respond or Appear. The court shall enter a default judgment assessing the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil infraction if a person issued a notice of infraction fails to respond or appear as provided in this section. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.080 Infraction – Hearings.

(1) Rules of Procedure. Procedures for the conduct of all hearings provided in this chapter are those established by the Washington State Supreme Court in the IRLJ.

(2) Counsel. A person subject to proceedings under this chapter may be represented by counsel. The attorney representing the City may appear in any proceedings under this chapter, but need not appear, notwithstanding a statute or rule of court to the contrary.

(3) Contested Determination.

(a) A hearing held to contest the determination that an infraction has been committed shall be without a jury.

(b) The court may consider the notice of infraction and any sworn statements submitted by the authorized representative who issued and served the notice in lieu of his or her personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the notice may subpoena witnesses, including the authorized representative who has issued and served the notice, and has the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.

(c) The burden of proof is on the City to establish the commission of the infraction by a preponderance of evidence.

(d) After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall determine whether the infraction was committed. If it has not been established that the infraction was committed, an order dismissing the notice shall be entered in the court’s records. If it has been established that a civil infraction has been committed, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court’s records.

(e) An appeal from the court’s determination or order shall be to the superior court in the manner provided by the Rules for Appeal of Decisions of Courts of Limited Jurisdiction. The decision of the superior court is subject only to discretionary review pursuant to the Rules of Appellate Procedure.

(4) Explanation of Mitigating Circumstances.

(a) A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of an infraction shall be an informal proceeding. The person may not subpoena witnesses. The determination that a civil infraction has been committed may not be contested at a hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances.

(b) After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court’s records.

(c) There shall be no appeal from the court’s determination or order. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.090 Infraction – Penalties.

(1) Monetary Penalties Assessed. Unless otherwise specifically provided in connection with particular sections, chapters, or titles of the City code, violations of the City code shall be Class 1 civil violations and shall carry a maximum penalty of $250.00 per offense. Each and every calendar day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person shall constitute a separate offense.

(2) Monetary Penalties Payable Immediately. A monetary penalty imposed by the court under this chapter is immediately payable. If the person is unable to pay at that time the court may grant an extension of the period in which the penalty may be paid. If the penalty is not paid on or before the time established for payment, the court may proceed to collect the penalty in the same manner as other civil judgments and may notify the City Attorney of the failure to pay.

(3) Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to a notice of infraction does not relieve the person to whom the notice was issued of the duty to correct the violation.

(4) Restitution. The court may also order a person found to have committed a civil infraction to make restitution. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.100 Infraction – Order, modification, restitution, fees.

(1) An order entered after the receipt of a response that does not contest the determination, or after it has been established at a hearing that the civil infraction was committed, or after a hearing to explain mitigating circumstances is civil in nature.

(2) The court may waive, reduce, or suspend the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil infraction.

(3) If the court determines that a person has insufficient funds to pay the monetary penalty, the court may order performance of a number of hours of community service in lieu of a monetary penalty, at the rate of the current state minimum wage per hour, provided that service is offered by the City.

(4) Each party to a civil infraction case is responsible for costs incurred by that party, but the court may assess witness fees against the nonprevailing respondent. Attorney fees may be awarded to either party in a civil infraction case. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.110 Administrative notice and order to correct civil violation.

(1) Issuance. When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may issue an administrative notice and order to correct civil violation (“notice and order”) to the person responsible for the violation.

(2) Content. The notice and order shall include the following:

(a) The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;

(b) The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

(c) A brief description of the violation(s), including a citation of the applicable City regulation(s);

(d) The name of the citing officer;

(e) The required corrective action and a date by which the correction must be completed;

(f) A statement that the person to whom the notice and order is directed may appeal the notice and order pursuant to CMC 1.30.120;

(g) A statement that if the violation is not corrected and the notice and order is not appealed, the determination is final and a monetary penalty shall be assessed in an amount per day for each violation for each day the violation continues following the date set for correction;

(h) A statement advising that, if any of the work is not commenced or completed within the time specified in the notice and order, the City may proceed to abate the violation, cause work to be done, and assess the costs and expenses of abatement incurred by the City against the person responsible for the violation, and that the City may take any other legal action.

(3) Service. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice and order upon the person responsible for the violation, either personally or by mailing a copy by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such person at his or her last known address. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be personally served within King County and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the notice and order conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made and, if by posting, the facts showing the attempts to serve the person personally or by mail.

(4) Optional Recording Procedure. The City may, at its discretion, record a notice and order to correct civil violation against the subject property.

(5) Extension and Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the City if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation, but unforeseen circumstances delay correction under the original conditions and the responsible person provides the request in writing clearly establishing the need for such an extension.

(6) Monetary Penalty. The assessment of a $100.00 per day monetary penalty shall commence with initial issuance of the notice and order. The City may delay the commencement of the daily monetary penalty if corrective action is completed by the date specified in the notice and order. If corrective action is not completed by that date, the $100.00 per day penalty shall remain in effect. The daily monetary penalty shall increase to $250.00 per day if the responsible person fails to correct the violation by the second deadline established by the notice and order. The daily monetary penalty shall increase to $500.00 per day if the responsible person fails to correct the violation by the third deadline established by the notice and order. Civil penalties, in whole or in part, may be waived by the Director or his/her designee if the code violations which formed the basis for the civil violation have been corrected, and the Director or his/her designee finds that compelling reasons justify waiver of all or part of the outstanding civil penalties.

(7) Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this section does not relieve the person to whom the notice and order was issued of the duty to correct the violation.

(8) Declaration of Compliance. When the violation has been corrected and the penalty paid, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a declaration of compliance which shall so state, and shall also indicate the date upon which the violation was fully corrected, beyond which no further penalty shall accrue. If the City previously recorded the notice and order against the subject property, then it shall also record the declaration of compliance. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.120 Administrative notice and order – Appeal.

(1) How to Appeal. A person to whom a notice and order is issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the Hearing Examiner by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 calendar days from the date of service of the notice and order. The appeal must be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by the City’s fee resolution, which is refundable if the appellant prevails on the appeal.

(2) Effect of Appeal. The timely filing of an appeal pursuant to this section shall stay the requirement for action specified in the notice and order that is the subject of the appeal. The monetary penalty for a continuing violation does not continue to accrue during the pendency of the appeal; however, the Hearing Examiner may impose a daily monetary penalty from the date of service of the notice and order if he or she finds that the appeal is frivolous or intended solely to delay compliance.

(3) Effect of Failure to Appeal. The violation shall be deemed committed, the notice and order shall become the final administrative order, and the monetary penalties assessed shall be immediately due and subject to collection if (a) an appeal is not filed within 14 calendar days after the notice and order was issued, or (b) an appeal was timely filed, but the appellant or his or her representative failed to appear at the hearing. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.130 Administrative notice and order – Appeal – Hearing.

(1) Date of Hearing. Within 10 days of the Clerk’s receipt of the appeal, the Hearing Examiner shall set a public hearing for a date within 45 days of the Clerk’s receipt of the appeal, unless a longer period is agreed to between the parties.

(2) Notice of Hearing. The Clerk shall cause a notice of the appeal hearing to be posted on the property that is the subject of the notice and order, and mailed to the appellant and the complainant, if not anonymous, at least 10 calendar days before the hearing. The notice shall contain the following:

(a) The file number and a brief description of the matter being appealed;

(b) A statement of the scope of the appeal, including a summary of the errors alleged and the findings and/or legal conclusions disputed in the appeal;

(c) The date, time and place of the public hearing on the appeal;

(d) A statement of who may participate in the appeal; and

(e) A statement of how to participate in the appeal.

(3) Conduct of Hearing. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct the hearing on the appeal pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC and the rules of procedure of the Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 01-09 § 3; Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.140 Administrative notice and order – Appeal – Decision.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall determine whether the City has established by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the required correction is reasonable and shall affirm, vacate, or modify the City’s decisions regarding the alleged violation and/or the required corrective action, with or without written conditions.

(2) The Hearing Examiner shall issue an order to the person responsible for the violation which contains the following information:

(a) The decision regarding the alleged violation including findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in support of the decision;

(b) The required corrective action;

(c) The date by which the correction must be completed;

(d) The monetary penalties assessed based on the provisions of this chapter;

(e) The date after which the City may proceed with abatement of the unlawful condition if the required correction is not completed.

(3) Assessment of Monetary Penalty. Monetary penalties assessed by the Hearing Examiner shall be in accordance with the monetary penalty schedule in CMC 1.30.110(6).

(4) Abatement. Where action to abate the violation is required, the hearing examiner shall give substantial weight to the City’s determination regarding the nature of any such action required, and whether such action has been satisfactorily performed.

(5) Notice of Decision. The hearing examiner shall mail a copy of the decision, including findings of fact, conclusions, and order, to the applicable department director within 14 working days of the hearing. The City shall forward a copy of the decision to the appellant no later than two working days after its receipt of the decision.

(6) Judicial Review. Judicial review of a decision by the Hearing Examiner may be sought by any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision, pursuant to the provisions of the Land Use Petition Act, Chapter 36.70C RCW, if applicable, or other applicable authority, if any, if the petition or complaint seeking review is filed and served on all parties within 21 days of the date of the decision. For purposes of this section, “aggrieved or adversely affected” shall have the meaning set forth in RCW 36.70C.060(2).

(7) Effect of Decision. If judicial review is not obtained, the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall constitute the final decision of the City, and the failure to comply with the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or up to 90 days imprisonment, or both. In addition to criminal punishment pursuant to this subsection, the City may pursue collection and abatement as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.150 Stop work orders.

Whenever a continuing violation of this chapter will materially impair the Code Enforcement Officer’s ability to secure compliance with this chapter, or when the continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop work order specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. Any violation of a stop work order is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means as may be available. The costs, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees, for the injunction or abatement shall be recovered by the City from the owner, tenant, occupant, manager, agent, or other responsible person in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.160 Emergency orders.

Whenever any use or activity in violation of the Covington Municipal Code immediately threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be corrected. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not corrected within the time specified is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the City is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means as may be available. The cost of such injunction or abatement, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees, shall be recovered from the owner, tenant, occupant, manager, agent, or other person responsible in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.170 Abatement by the City.

(1) The City may abate a condition which was caused by or continues to be a civil violation or civil infraction when:

(a) The terms of the voluntary correction agreement pursuant to this chapter have not been met; or

(b) An administrative notice and order has been issued, the period for filing an appeal with the Hearing Examiner has expired, and the required correction has not been completed; or

(c) An administrative notice and order has been issued, a timely appeal was filed, the appellant failed to appear at the scheduled hearing or a hearing was held as provided in this chapter and the required correction has not been completed by the date specified by an order of the Hearing Examiner; or

(d) The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in this chapter or other provisions of City or State law.

(2) Summary Abatement. When a violation of a regulation causes a condition, the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment, the City may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.

(3) Authorized Action by the City. Using any lawful means, the City may enter upon the subject property and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The City may seek judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.

(4) Recovery of Costs and Expenses. All costs incurred by the City in correcting the violation shall be billed to the person responsible for the violation and/or the owner, lessor, tenant, or other person entitled to use and/or have control of the property, and shall become due and payable to the City within 10 calendar days. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, the following expenses:

(a) “Legal expenses,” which shall include, but are not limited to:

(i) Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney’s fees and all costs incurred by the City Attorney’s office or its designee to abate nuisances and code violations;

(ii) Actual and incidental expenses and costs incurred by the City in preparing notices, contracts, court pleadings, and all other necessary documents required to abate nuisances and code violations; and

(iii) All costs associated with retention and use of expert witnesses and consultants during the course of abatement.

(b) “Abatement expenses,” which shall include, but are not limited to:

(i) Costs incurred by the City for preparation of notices, contracts, and related documents necessary to abate nuisances and code violations;

(ii) All costs associated with inspection of the property and monitoring of said property consistent with correction orders issued by the City’s Hearing Examiner or a court of competent jurisdiction;

(iii) All costs incurred by the City for hauling, storage, disposal, or removal of vegetation, trash, debris, dangerous structures or structures unfit for human habitation, potential vermin habitat, potential fire hazards, junk vehicles, obstructions to public rights-of-way, and setback obstructions; and

(iv) All costs incurred by law enforcement or related enforcement agencies necessary to assist the City during abatement of nuisances or code violations. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.180 Additional code enforcement procedures.

The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to other code enforcement provisions authorized by the Covington Municipal Code or other applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.190 Interference.

Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the City or its agents, or with a person responsible for a violation, any of whom are engaged in performing duties imposed by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.200 Collection of monetary penalties.

The monetary penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom a notice of civil infraction or notice and order is directed. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid to the City within 10 calendar days from the date of mailing of the court’s decision, Hearing Examiner’s decision, or a notice from the City that penalties are due. Any such monetary penalty shall further constitute a lien against the affected real property. The City attorney is authorized to take all actions available to collect the monetary penalty. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.210 Lien – Authorized.

(1) The City of Covington shall have a lien for any monetary penalty imposed, the cost of any abatement proceedings under this chapter, and all related costs including attorney and expert witness fees, against the real property on which the monetary penalty was imposed or any of the abatement work was performed. The lien shall be subordinate to all previously existing special assessment liens imposed on the same property and shall be superior to all other liens, except for State and County taxes, with which it shall be on parity.

(2) The City shall cause a claim for lien to be filed for record within 90 days from the later of the date that the monetary penalty is due, or the date the work is completed or the violation abated.

(3) The claim of lien shall contain sufficient information regarding the civil violation, as determined by the City, a description of the property to be charged with the lien and the owner of record, and the total amount of the lien.

(4) Any such claim of lien shall be verified by the City, and may be amended from time to time to reflect changed conditions. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.220 Right of entry.

The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter upon property or premises at any reasonable time to determine whether a civil violation has occurred or is occurring, or to enforce any provision of the Covington Municipal Code or any City regulation, violation of which is a civil violation under this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer may make examinations, surveys, and studies as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duties. These may include the taking of photographs, digital images, videotapes, video images, audio recordings, samples, or other physical evidence. If the premises is occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first present credentials and request entry. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses, entry, the City may seek an administrative or criminal search warrant. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.230 Conflicts.

In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of the Covington Municipal Code or City ordinance providing for a civil penalty, the more specific provision shall apply. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


1.30.240 Adoption of certain other laws.

To the extent that any provision of the King County Code, or any other law, rule or regulation referenced in the enforcement code, is necessary or convenient to establish the validity, enforceability or interpretation of the enforcement code, then such provision of the King County Code, or other law, rule or regulation, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 11-07 § 2)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05    City Council Meetings

2.10    Officers’ Salaries

2.15    Planning Commission 

2.20    City Manager

2.23    Public Records Indexes and Records

2.25    Hearing Examiner

2.30    Repealed

2.35    Public Records Disclosure

2.40    Repealed

2.45    Repealed

2.50    Emergency Management – Proclamations of Civil Emergencies

2.55    Defense of Elective Officer

2.60    Repealed

2.70    Repealed

2.73    Landmarks and Heritage Commission

2.75    Administrative Rulemaking

2.80    City Hours of Business

2.90    Indigent Defense Standards

2.95    Code of Ethics

 


Chapter 2.05 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS*

Sections:

2.05.010    Regular meetings – Study sessions – When.

2.05.020    Repealed.

2.05.030    Location.

*Prior legislation: Ords. 3-97 and 44-97.


2.05.010 Regular meetings – Study sessions – When.

The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month. The Council will not hold meetings on any other day of the month unless otherwise noticed. All meetings will begin at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise noticed. If an executive session is scheduled, it will be held at the end of the agenda distributed unless otherwise noticed. Should any meeting occur on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour and place on the following business day. Should any meeting occur on a general or primary election day, or special election called within the City of Covington, the meeting shall be held at the same hour and place on the following business day. (Ord. 02-10 § 1; Ord. 02-06 § 1; Ord. 10-02 § 1)


2.05.020 Special fifth Tuesday meetings.*

Repealed by Ord. 15-02. (Ord. 10-02 § 2)

*Code reviser’s note: Section 1 of Ord. 15-02 provides (in part): 

A Special Meeting may be held by the City Council subject to the notice and call requirements set forth in RCW 42.30.080, as hereafter amended.


2.05.030 Location.

Regular City Council meetings, study sessions and special meetings shall be held at the designated City Council chambers, unless otherwise noticed. (Ord. 10-02 § 3)


Chapter 2.10 OFFICERS’ SALARIES

Sections:

2.10.010    Salaries of the Mayor and Council members.


2.10.010 Salaries of the Mayor and Council members.

City Council members shall each be paid compensation at the rate of $150.00 per month. The Mayor shall be paid compensation at the rate of $187.50 per month. Commencing January 1, 2000, City Council members shall each be paid monthly compensation at the rate of $450.00 and the Mayor shall be paid monthly compensation at rate of $500.00. Commencing January 1, 2014, the base rate of compensation for each and every Council member position shall be $600.00 per month and the appointed position of Mayor shall receive an additional stipend of $200.00 per month. Commencing January 1, 2020, the base rate of the compensation for each and every Council member position shall be $780.00 per month, and the appointed position of Mayor shall receive an additional stipend of $200.00 per month. The compensation schedule as provided hereinabove is in addition to other benefits provided the Council by ordinance or resolution, but not limited to, Social Security replacement and life insurance. (Ord. 19-19 § 1; Ord. 01-18 § 1; Ord. 13-13 § 1; Ord. 19-99 § 1; Ord. 8-97 § 1)


Chapter 2.15 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.15.010    Created – Purpose.

2.15.020    Membership.

2.15.030    Meetings – Rules.

2.15.040    Staff support.

2.15.050    Duties and responsibilities.

2.15.060    Superseded provisions.


2.15.010 Created – Purpose.

There is created the Planning Commission. The purpose of the Planning Commission is to provide guidance and direction for Covington’s future growth through continued review and improvement to the City’s comprehensive land use plan, zoning code, shoreline management, environmental protection and related land use documents. (Ord. 28-97 § 1)


2.15.020 Membership.

(1) Qualifications. Members of the Planning Commission shall be selected from individuals who have an interest in environmental affairs, planning, land use, and residential and commercial development as evidenced by training, experience, interest or actions. An intent of the selection process shall be to evenly represent the areas of interest as stated herein. Membership in the Planning Commission shall be limited to residents within the City; provided, however, at any given time the Commission may consist of a maximum of two members who reside outside the City, but within a three-mile radius of the City limits of Covington. 

(2) Number of Members – Terms. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. To allow the staggering of terms for the initial Commission, positions shall be numbers one through seven through a random drawing. The initial terms of positions one, two and three shall be for two years. The initial terms of positions four, five, six and seven shall be four years. Subsequent terms shall be for a term of four years. Terms shall commence on September 1st and end August 31st of the respective years. If a member is not appointed for a new term on September 1st, the incumbent member may continue to serve in that position until such later date when a member is appointed for a new term. The date a member is appointed to their term of office shall not affect the expiration date of that term. When a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the replacement member shall be appointed only for the remainder of the unexpired term.

(3) Appointment. Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. Members shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the City Council. Commissioners shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation.

(4) Removal. Commission members may be removed by the City Council at any time pursuant to the Covington City Council Rules of Procedure, as amended from time to time. Failure to qualify as to residency within a three-mile radius of the City limits of Covington shall constitute a forfeiture of office. The decision of the City Council regarding membership on the Planning Commission shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom. Members finding themselves unable to attend regular meetings are expected to tender their resignation.

(5) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as for appointments as provided in this chapter.

(6) Conflicts of Interest. Members of the Planning Commission shall fully comply with Chapter 42.23 RCW, Code of Ethics for Municipal Officers, Chapter 42.36 RCW, Appearance of Fairness, and such other rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the City Council regulating the conduct of any person holding appointive office within the City. (Ord. 09-14 § 1; Ord. 25-01 § 1; Ord. 28-97 § 2)


2.15.030 Meetings – Rules.

(1) The Planning Commission shall organize and elect from its members a chair, who shall preside at all meetings of the Commission, and a vice chair. A majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any proposition.

(2) The Commission shall determine a regular meeting schedule (time, place and frequency), as necessary, but no less frequent than once every two months. All meetings shall be open to the public.

(3) The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations are necessary for the conduct of its business and shall keep a taped record of its proceedings and such written notes as the Commission may from time to time direct. The taped record and any written notes shall be a public record. (Ord. 28-97 § 3)


2.15.040 Staff support.

Administrative staff support to the Planning Commission shall be provided by the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 28-97 § 4)


2.15.050 Duties and responsibilities.

(1) The Planning Commission shall direct the preparation of a comprehensive plan and development regulations in compliance with Chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW. This includes establishing procedures providing for early and continuous public participation in the development and amendment of the comprehensive land use plan for the City and the development regulations implementing the plan and make recommendations concerning these matters to the City Council.

(2) The Planning Commission shall review land use management, shoreline management and environmental protection ordinances and regulations of the City and make recommendations regarding them to the City Council.

(3) The Planning Commission shall review potential annexations to the City as requested by the City Council, and make recommendations concerning them.

(4) Where design review is required by land use ordinances of the City, the Planning Commission shall perform such design review unless that review is delegated to some other appointed body or staff.

(5) The Planning Commission shall recommend, establish priorities for, and review studies of geographic sub-areas in the City.

(6) The Planning Commission shall submit written periodic reports to the City Council setting forth its progress in completing its work program for the current fiscal year. The chairperson of the Planning Commission or designee is encouraged to regularly present updates to the City Council at the first regular City Council meeting or study session after each Planning Commission meeting.

(7) The Planning Commission may hold public hearings in the exercise of its duties and responsibilities as it deems necessary. (Ord. 23-02 § 1; Ord. 28-97 § 5)


2.15.060 Superseded provisions.

The ordinance codified in this chapter supersedes and replaces any reference to “Planning Commission” as defined in KCC Title 21A which was adopted by reference in City of Covington Ordinance No. 17-97, in KCC Title 20 which was adopted by reference in City of Covington Ordinance No. 18-97, or in other King County Codes adopted by reference. The term “Planning Commission” as referenced in those ordinances shall be uniformly construed and interpreted to mean the City of Covington Planning Commission created in this chapter. (Ord. 28-97 § 6)


Chapter 2.20 CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.20.010    Office established – Appointment.

2.20.020    Duties.

2.20.030    Creation of departments, offices and positions.

2.20.040    Auditing officer appointed.

2.20.050    Interfund loans – Authority.


2.20.010 Office established – Appointment.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.010 and 35A.13.090, there is hereby established for the City of Covington the office of City Manager. Such office shall be appointive and all appointments to such office shall be made by the City Council. (Ord. 38-97 § 1)


2.20.020 Duties.

The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the City government. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be eligible to attend all meetings of the City Council, regular and executive. The City Manager shall be the chief purchasing agent, and shall have purchasing and contracting authority as set forth in the City’s Purchasing Policies and Procedures as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager shall have all of the powers, and shall perform each and all of the duties, specified by Chapter 35A.13 RCW, together with any other duties or authority which may be conferred upon such office by the City Council, or by the laws of the State of Washington pertaining to city managers, or by the ordinances of the City as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 08-06 § 1; Ord. 38-97 § 2)


2.20.030 Creation of departments, offices and positions.

The City Manager is authorized to create, eliminate, consolidate and modify such departments, offices and positions as the manager may find necessary or advisable for the efficient operation of the City and to determine the powers and duties of each department, office and position. The City Manager may delegate to any officer or position any duties required or authorized to be performed by the City Manager. The City Manager shall designate an acting City Manager to be responsible during extended absences of the City Manager from the City. (Ord. 38-97 § 3)


2.20.040 Auditing officer appointed.

The City Council hereby appoints the City Manager or his or her designee as auditing officer. (Ord. 41-97 § 1)


2.20.050 Interfund loans – Authority.

The City Council does hereby grant the authority to the City Manager to make one or more interfund loans, subject to the following restrictions and conditions:

(1) The City Manager shall not authorize a loan for more than $1,000,000 from any fund without obtaining the City Council’s approval by resolution.

(2) Each loan shall have a repayment period of 12 months, but may be repaid in a shorter time at the discretion of the City Manager.

(3) When required by law, each loan shall carry interest at a rate no less than the monthly LGIP rate for each respective month or part thereof. In those instances where the imposition of interest is not required pursuant to the BARS Manual, each loan may carry interest at a rate no less than the monthly LGIP rate, at the discretion of the City Manager.

(4) Any following transaction shall be reported to all Council members within a reasonable time after reconciliation. (Ord. 32-02 § 1)


Chapter 2.23 PUBLIC RECORDS INDEXES AND RECORDS

Sections:

2.23.010    Findings.

2.23.020    Other regarding public records index.


2.23.010 Findings.

(1) The Revised Code of Washington (RCW) requires all cities and public agencies to maintain and make available a current index of all public records.

(2) The RCW also states that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, or interfere with agency operation, a City must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome.

(3) When such an order is made, all indexes maintained by that City must be made available to provide identifying information on those records, which are available for inspection and/or copying.

(4) The City of Covington is comprised of six departments, their divisions and subdivisions, which maintain separate databases and/or record-keeping systems for the indexing of records and information.

(5) Because the City has records which are diverse, complex and stored in multiple locations and in multiple computer systems and databases, it is unduly burdensome, if not physically impossible, to maintain a central index of records.

(6) The City will fully comply with the provisions of the RCW as they relate to the Public Disclosure Act, under Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 14-02 § 1)


2.23.020 Other regarding public records index.

Based on the findings set forth in CMC 2.23.010, and pursuant to RCW 42.17.260(4)(a), the City Council orders the following:

(1) The City of Covington is not required to maintain an all-inclusive index of public records, due to findings of the City Council that the requirement is unduly burdensome and such a list is nearly impossible to create and/or maintain.

(2) The City of Covington shall make available all public records and any indexes created for internal use upon request by any citizen. Said indexes shall be maintained and released in order to obtain those records which are public and not protected by the exemption portion of the statute, namely RCW 42.17.310. (Ord. 14-02 § 1)


Chapter 2.25 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

2.25.010    Purpose.

2.25.020    Office created.

2.25.030    Appointment.

2.25.035    Removal.

2.25.040    Qualifications.

2.25.050    Compensation.

2.25.052    Deputy Examiner.

2.25.054    Pro Tem Examiners.

2.25.056    Clerk.

2.25.060    Freedom from improper influence.

2.25.070    Conflict of interest.

2.25.080    Hearing Examiner rules.

2.25.090    Duties of the Examiner.

2.25.100    Expeditious processing.

2.25.105    Voluntary mediation.

2.25.110    Report to Planning Commission and City Council.

2.25.120    Citizen’s guide.


2.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of administrative hearings which will satisfy the need for a more prompt opportunity for a hearing and decision on certain administrative decisions, appeals, alleged violations of certain provisions of the Covington Municipal Code, and such other regulations as may be assigned to the Hearing Examiner, and to help assure procedural due process and appearance of fairness by holding such hearings before a neutral party, competent in applying the applicable provisions of the Covington Municipal Code and procedural requirements. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 1)


2.25.020 Office created.

Pursuant to Chapters 35A.63 and 58.17 RCW, the office of the Hearing Examiner is hereby created. The term “Examiner” shall include Deputy Examiner or Examiner Pro Tem. The Examiner shall act on behalf of the Council in considering and applying adopted City policies and regulations as provided herein. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 2)


2.25.030 Appointment.

The Examiner, Deputy Examiner, and any Pro Tem Examiners will be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the City Manager. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 3)


2.25.035 Removal.

The Examiner may be removed from office at any time pursuant to the terms of his or her contract with the City. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.040 Qualifications.

The Examiner shall be appointed solely with regard to his or her qualifications for the duties of the office as outlined in CMC 2.25.090. In addition, the Examiner shall have such training or experience as will qualify him or her to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge the other functions conferred upon him or her and shall hold no other appointive or elective public office or position in City of Covington government, except as provided herein. A clear, working knowledge of the State law is required. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 4)


2.25.050 Compensation.

The Examiner is a contract position. Compensation will be as negotiated between the City and Examiner. Compensation may be renegotiated as allowed by the Examiner’s contract with the City. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 5)


2.25.052 Deputy Examiner.

The Deputy shall assist the Examiner in the performance of the duties conferred upon the Examiner by ordinance and shall, in the event of the absence or the inability of the Examiner to act, have all the duties and powers of the Examiner. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.054 Pro Tem Examiners.

The City Manager may appoint qualified persons to serve as Examiners Pro Tem, as needed, to expeditiously hear pending applications and appeals. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.056 Clerk.

A clerk shall be present during hearings. It shall be the responsibility of the clerk to maintain the register of parties of record, to mark exhibits, to keep a list of exhibits and witnesses, and to perform such other ministerial duties as may be assigned by the Examiner. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.060 Freedom from improper influence.

No person shall attempt to influence an Examiner in any matter pending before him, except publicly at a public hearing duly called for such purpose, or to interfere with an Examiner in the performance of his duties in any other way; provided, that this section will not prohibit the City Attorney from rendering legal services to the Examiner. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 6)


2.25.070 Conflict of interest.

(1) No Examiner shall conduct or participate in any hearing, decision or recommendation in which the Examiner has a direct or indirect substantial financial or familiar interest, or concerning which the Examiner has had substantial prehearing contacts with proponents or opponents wherein the issues were discussed; nor, on appeal from or review of an Examiner decision, shall any member of the legislative body who has such an interest or has had such contacts participate in the consideration thereof. This is not intended to prohibit necessary or proper inquiries on matters such as scheduling, but any such contacts are to be entered into the official record of the hearing. Whenever possible, such inquiries and the responses to such inquiries shall be in writing.

(2) The office of the Examiner will be separate from and not a part of any department in the City. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 7)


2.25.080 Hearing Examiner rules.

The Council will approve and adopt rules for the scheduling and conduct of public hearings and other procedural matters related to the duties of the Examiner. The Examiner may review and comment on any proposed changes to the Hearing Examiner rules before they are brought before the Council for consideration. The Council will adopt the Hearing Examiner rules by resolution. Whenever the Council approves new Hearing Examiner rules, a notice that changes to the rules have occurred shall be published in the City’s official newspaper and the new rules shall be made available upon request to all interested parties. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 8)


2.25.090 Duties of the Examiner.

The Examiner shall have the duty to ensure a fair and impartial hearing, to take all necessary action to avoid undue delay in the disposition of proceedings, to receive and evaluate available information, to conduct public hearings and prepare a record thereof, to enter findings, decisions, or recommendations as provided in this chapter, and to maintain order. The Examiner shall have all the powers necessary to these ends, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:

(1) Administer oaths and affirmations, determine the order of presentation of evidence, issue subpoenas, examine witnesses, rule upon offers of proof, receive relevant evidence, and request additional exhibits;

(2) Rule on procedural matters, objections and motions, and regulate the course of the hearing in accord with this chapter and other applicable ordinances;

(3) Hold conferences for the settlement, simplification of the issues, or for any other proper purposes by consent of the parties;

(4) Take actions necessary to conduct a fair and orderly hearing;

(5) Take any other action authorized by ordinance.

The Examiner is hereby empowered to act in lieu of the Board of Adjustment, the Planning Commission, and such other official, boards or commissions as may be assigned, for issues listed throughout the CMC, and other issues authorized by the City Council. Wherever existing ordinances, codes or policies authorize or direct the Board of Adjustment, Planning Commission or other officials, boards or commissions to undertake certain activities which the Examiner has been assigned, such ordinances, codes or policies will be construed to refer to the Examiner. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 20-99 § 1; Ord. 39-97 § 9)


2.25.100 Expeditious processing.

(1) Hearings shall be scheduled by the Examiner to ensure that final decisions are issued within the time periods provided in Chapter 14.30 CMC. During periods of time when the volume of permit activity is high, the Examiner shall retain one or more Pro Tem Examiners to ensure that the 120-day time period for final decisions is met.

(2) Appeals shall be processed by the Examiner as expeditiously as possible, giving appropriate consideration to the procedural due process rights of the parties. Unless a longer period is agreed to by the parties, or the Examiner determines that the size and scope of the project is so compelling that a longer period is required, a prehearing conference or a public hearing shall occur within 45 days from the date the office of the Hearing Examiner is notified that a complete statement of appeal has been filed. In such cases where the Examiner has determined that the size and scope warrant such an extension, the reason for the deferral shall be stated in the Examiner’s recommendation or decision. The time period may be extended by the Examiner at the Examiner’s discretion for not more than 30 days. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.105 Voluntary mediation.

As to any application or appeal pursuant to this chapter which is or could become the subject of a public hearing, the responsible department, the Council or the Hearing Examiner may at their own discretion or at the request of the applicant or any person with standing to the application or appeal, at any state of the proceedings on the application or appeal, initiate a mediation process to resolve disputes as to such application or appeal. The mediation process shall be voluntarily agreed to by all participants to the hearing process and conducted by an independent impartial mediator who shall not be a City employee or any person who will have any role in making any recommendation or decision on the application or appeal. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


2.25.110 Report to Planning Commission and City Council.

The Examiner must report in writing to the Planning Commission and City Council at least annually for the purpose of reviewing the administration of the land use policies and regulatory ordinances, and any amendments to City ordinances or other policies or procedures which would improve the performance of the Examiner process. Such report must include a summary of the Examiner’s decisions since the last report. (Ord. 01-09 § 2; Ord. 39-97 § 11)


2.25.120 Citizen’s guide.

The Examiner shall issue a citizen’s guide on the office of Hearing Examiner including guidance on how to make an appeal or participate in a hearing. (Ord. 01-09 § 2)


Chapter 2.30 SMALL WORKS ROSTER

(Repealed by Ord. 06-08)    


Chapter 2.35 PUBLIC RECORDS DISCLOSURE

Sections:

2.35.010    Relationship to Public Records Disclosure Act.

2.35.020    Disclosure of public records.

2.35.030    Definitions of public record and writing.

2.35.040    Maintenance of records.

2.35.050    Exemptions.

2.35.060    Procedure for inspection or copying.

2.35.070    Reimbursement for copying costs.

2.35.080    Decision on public records requests – Procedure for review of decision.

2.35.090    Disclosure prohibited by other statute.

2.35.100    Administrative rules.


2.35.010 Relationship to Public Records Disclosure Act.

This chapter constitutes the City’s rules and regulations to carry out and implement the Public Records Disclosure Act, Chapter 42.17 RCW. Except as provided in this chapter, Chapter 42.17 RCW shall apply to all City public records. (Ord. 57-97 § 1)


2.35.020 Disclosure of public records.

Unless exempt from disclosure under this chapter, public records shall be available for inspection and copying in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 57-97 § 2)


2.35.030 Definitions of public record and writing.

(1) “Public record” means any writing, maps or drawings containing information relating to the conduct of government or the performance of any governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used, or retained by the City regardless of physical form or characteristics.

(2) “Writing” means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing, and every other means of recording any form of communication or representation, including, but not limited to, letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combination thereof and all papers, maps, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, motion picture, film and video recordings, magnetic or punched cards, discs, drums, diskettes, sound recordings, and other documents including existing data compilations from which information may be obtained or translated. (Ord. 57-97 § 3)


2.35.040 Maintenance of records.

(1) All substantive and procedural rules of general applicability, including but not limited to ordinances and resolutions of the City Council, minutes of the regular meetings of the City Council, and statements of general policy, and all public contracts, deeds, easements and leases shall be indexed and maintained in the office of the City Clerk for the use of the City and of the general public.

(2) All other records of the City relating to the specific function or responsibility of a particular City department shall be maintained for the use of the department and the general public in the office of the department. The department shall maintain and make available for public inspection and copying a current index providing identifying information as to the following records:

(a) Final opinions and orders made in the adjudication of cases;

(b) Statements of policy and interpretations of policy which have been adopted by the City;

(c) Administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff that affect a member of the public;

(d) Planning policies and goals, and interim and final planning decisions;

(e) Factual staff reports and studies, factual consultants reports and studies, scientific reports and studies and any other factual information derived from tests, studies, reports, or surveys, whether conducted by public employees or others; and

(f) Correspondence, and materials referred to therein, by and with the City relating to any regulatory, supervisory, or enforcement responsibilities of the City, whereby the City determines, opines upon, or is asked to determine or opine upon, the rights of the State, the public, a subdivision of State government, or of any private party. (Ord. 57-97 § 4)


2.35.050 Exemptions.

(1) The following shall be exempt from public inspection and copying:

(a) Personal information in files maintained for employees, appointees, or elected officials, to the extent that disclosure would violate their right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.17.255;

(b) Information required of any taxpayer in connection with the assessment or collection of any tax if the disclosure of the information to other persons would be prohibited to such persons by RCW 82.32.330 or violate the taxpayer’s right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.17.255, or result in unfair competitive disadvantage to the taxpayer;

(c) Specific intelligence information and specific investigative records compiled by investigative, law enforcement, and penology agencies, the nondisclosure of which is essential to effective law enforcement or for the protection of any person’s right to privacy, as defined in RCW 42.17.255;

(d) Information revealing the identity of persons who are witnesses to or victims of crime or who file complaints with investigative, law enforcement, or penology agencies, other than the public disclosure commission, if disclosure would endanger any person’s life, physical safety, or property; provided, that if at the time a complaint is filed the complainant, victim or witness indicates a desire for disclosure or nondisclosure, such desire shall govern;

(e) Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to administer a license, employment, or academic examination;

(f) Except as provided by Chapter 8.26 RCW, the contents of real estate appraisals, made for or by any agency including the City, relative to the acquisition or sale of property, until the project or prospective sale is abandoned or until such time as all of the property has been acquired or the property to which the sale appraisal relates is sold, but in no event shall disclosure be denied for more than three years after the appraisal;

(g) Valuable formulae, designs, drawings, and research data obtained by the City within five years of the request for disclosure when disclosure would produce private gain and public loss;

(h) Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, and intra-agency memorandums in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended except that a specific record shall not be exempt when publicly cited by the City in connection with any City action;

(i) Records which are relevant to a controversy to which the City is a party but which records would not be available to another party under the rules of pretrial discovery for causes pending in the superior courts;

(j) Records, maps, or other information identifying the location of archaeological sites in order to avoid the looting or depredation of such sites;

(k) Financial and commercial information and records supplied by businesses during application for loans or program services provided by Chapters 43.160, 43.163, 43.168, and 43.330 RCW;

(l) All applications for public employment, including the names of applicants, resumes, and other related materials submitted with respect to an applicant;

(m) The residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of employees or volunteers of the City which are held by the City in personnel records, employment or volunteer rosters, or mailing lists of employees or volunteers;

(n) The residential addresses and residential telephone numbers of the customers of a City utility contained in the records or lists held by the City utility of which they are customers;

(o) Client records maintained by the City under any domestic violence program as defined in RCW 70.123.020 or rape crisis center as defined in RCW 70.125.030;

(p) Information that identifies a person who, while a City employee: (i) seeks advice, under an informal process established by the City, in order to ascertain his or her rights in connection with a possible unfair practice under Chapter 49.60 RCW against the person; and (ii) requests his or her identity or any identifying information not be disclosed;

(q) License applications under RCW 9.41.070;

(r) Information revealing the identity of child victims of sexual assault who are under age 18. “Identifying information” means the child victim’s name, address, location, photograph, and in cases in which the child victim is a relative or stepchild of the alleged perpetrator, identification of the relationship between the child and the alleged perpetrator;

(s) A law enforcement authority may not request inspection or copying of records of any person, which belong to a City electrical utility, unless the authority provides the City electrical utility with a written statement in which the authority states that it suspects that the particular person to whom the records pertain has committed a crime and the authority has a reasonable belief that the records could determine or help determine whether the suspicion might be true;

(t) Any other record which is exempt from disclosure under any State law.

(2) The exemptions from public disclosure set forth in this section shall be inapplicable to the extent that information, the disclosure of which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, can be deleted from the specific records sought. No exemption shall be construed to permit the nondisclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person or persons.

(3) Inspection or copying of any specific records exempt under this section may be permitted if the King County Superior Court finds, after a hearing with notice thereof to every person interested and to the City, that the exemption of such records is clearly unnecessary to protect any individuals right of privacy or any vital governmental function.

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect a positive duty of the City to disclose or a positive duty to withhold information which duty to disclose or withhold is contained in any other law. (Ord. 57-97 § 5)


2.35.060 Procedure for inspection or copying.

(1) Persons wishing to inspect or copy City records shall first make such request to the City Clerk or the department head of the City department which maintains the requested records. If the requester does not know which department maintains the records, the request shall be made to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall direct the requester to the appropriate department. All assistance necessary to help the requester locate the particular record shall be provided promptly either by the City Clerk or by the particular department maintaining the records. The provision of such assistance shall not unreasonably disrupt the normal operations of the City Clerk, the department, or the assisting employee.

(2) The City Clerk or other City employee shall not distinguish among persons requesting records. Persons requesting records shall not be required to provide information as to the purpose for the request, except to establish whether the inspection or copying would violate RCW 42.17.260(5) or other statute or ordinance which exempts or prohibits disclosure of specific information or records to certain persons. (Ord. 57-97 § 6)


2.35.070 Reimbursement for copying costs.

(1) Copies of written records, maps, photographs including slides, audio tape recordings, video tape recordings and diskettes shall be made and provided by the City upon request and payment of the actual cost of reproducing the same, as set forth in Exhibit A*. 

(2) Labor and mailing costs shall be included in the cost of reproduction. The costs of reproduction provided for in Exhibit A* shall include, but not be limited to, the following records: street maps, zoning maps, zoning codes, ordinances, public meeting minutes, resolutions, verbatim transcripts, deeds, contracts, and other records of the character contemplated in CMC 2.35.010.

(3) Where the request is for a certified copy, there shall be an additional charge in the amount established by City Council resolution to cover the additional expense and time required for certification.

(4) The City Clerk or a department head may provide copies of City records at no charge to individuals or government agencies doing business with the City, if the City Clerk or department head determines such action is in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 57-97 § 7)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. 57-97, may be found on file in the City Clerk’s office.


2.35.080 Decision on public records requests – Procedure for review of decision.

(1) Upon receiving an oral or written request to inspect or copy a public record, the City Clerk or the department head shall grant the request unless the City Clerk or department head determines that the record requested is or may be exempt from disclosure in whole or in part, in which case the City Clerk or department head shall require that the requester complete a written request for public records form.

(2) A department head shall immediately deliver a completed written request for public records form to the City Clerk.

(3) Upon receiving a completed written request for records form, the City Clerk shall determine whether the requested record is exempt by law from inspection and copying in whole or in part. Within five business days of the date of receipt by the City of the written request for a record, the City Clerk shall:

(a) Provide the record; or

(b) Acknowledge that the City has received the request and provide a reasonable estimate of the time the City will require to respond to the request; or

(c) Deny the public record request.

Additional time to respond to a request may be based upon the need to clarify the intent of the request, to locate and assemble the information requested, to notify third persons or agencies affected by the request, or to determine whether any of the information requested is exempt. If a public records request is unclear, the City Clerk may ask the requester to clarify what information the requester is seeking. If the requester fails to clarify the request, the City need not respond to the request.

(4) If the City Clerk determines that the document is exempt in part but can be made available after deletion of exempt portions, or after deletion of portions which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, the request shall be granted; provided, that such exempt portions shall first be deleted. If the City Clerk determines to deny the request, in whole or in part, a written statement of the specific reasons for the denial shall be provided to the requester.

(5) A decision by the City Clerk denying inspection shall be reviewed by the City Attorney. Such review shall be deemed complete at the end of the second business day following the denial of inspection and shall constitute final City action for the purposes of judicial review. The requester shall be notified by mail of the decision to grant or deny the request. (Ord. 57-97 § 8)


2.35.090 Disclosure prohibited by other statute.

The City shall not be required by this chapter to permit public inspection and copying of any record to the extent public disclosure of the record is prohibited, restricted or limited by any State or Federal statute or regulation including, but not limited to, Chapter 10.97 RCW, the Washington State Criminal Records Privacy Act, Chapter 13.50 RCW, relating to release of records by juvenile justice or care agencies, or Chapter 46.52 RCW, relating to accident reports and abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 57-97 § 9)


2.35.100 Administrative rules.

The City Manager may issue rules for the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 57-97 § 10)


Chapter 2.40 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 10-20)


Chapter 2.45 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 11-20)


Chapter 2.50 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT – PROCLAMATIONS OF CIVIL EMERGENCIES

Sections:

2.50.010    Established.

2.50.020    Definitions.

2.50.030    Director – Appointment – Responsibility.

2.50.040    Functions.

2.50.050    Powers.

2.50.060    Purchases and expenditures.

2.50.070    Search and rescue operations.

2.50.080    Repealed.

2.50.090    Proclamation of civil emergency – Emergency defined.

2.50.100    Actions that may be taken.

2.50.110    Civil rights protected.

2.50.120    Delivery to news media.

2.50.130    Violation – Penalty.


2.50.010 Established.

Pursuant to Chapter 38.52 RCW, there is hereby created in the City the Department of Emergency Management for the purpose of performing local emergency management functions. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.020 Definitions.

When used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings. Words used in the plural shall include the singular, and words used in the singular shall include the plural. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine.

(1) “City” means the City of Covington, King County, Washington.

(2) “Director” means the director of the City’s Department of Emergency Management.

(3) “Emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage, resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological, or human caused, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress. “Emergency management” does not mean preparation for emergency evacuation or relocation of residents in anticipation of nuclear attack.

(4) “Emergency” or “civil emergency” or “disaster” means an event or set of circumstances which demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken community overtaken by such occurrences, which include, but are not limited to, a riot, unlawful assembly, insurrection, enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action; a natural or human-caused disaster, including fire, flood, storm, explosion, earthquake, volcanic disturbance, public health emergency, pandemic, or other natural cause.

(5) “Search and rescue” means the acts of searching for, rescuing, or recovering by means of ground, marine, or air activity any person who becomes lost, injured, or is killed while outdoors or as a result of a natural, technological, or human caused disaster, including instances involving searches for downed aircraft when ground personnel are used. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.030 Director – Appointment – Responsibility.

(1) The Director of the Department of Emergency Management shall be appointed by and directly responsible to the City Manager and shall serve until removed by the City Manager.

(2) The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the Department of Emergency Management, subject to the direction and control of the City Manager.

(3) In the event of the director’s absence, resignation, death or inability to serve, the City Manager shall appoint another person to serve as Director.

(4) The Director shall prepare and maintain a local emergency management plan and program in accordance with the State of Washington comprehensive emergency management plan and program. Before the local plan shall become effective, it shall be approved by the City Council and certified for consistency with the State plan by the State Adjutant General as directed in RCW 38.52.070(1). (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.040 Functions.

It shall be the duty of the Department of Emergency Management to perform all local emergency management functions, within the City and outside the territorial limits of the City as may be required by Chapter 38.52 RCW. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.050 Powers.

The Department of Emergency Management, the Director and the City Manager shall have all powers granted under Chapter 38.52 RCW, as now or hereafter amended and as may otherwise be provided by law. The City Manager shall have those further powers identified elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.060 Purchases and expenditures.

The City Council shall have the power to make appropriations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary expenses of the City for the payment of the Department of Emergency Management’s expenses. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.070 Search and rescue operations.

The Police Chief shall be responsible for local search and rescue activities. Operation of search and rescue operations shall be in accordance with State and local operations plans adopted by the City Council. The Director shall notify the State Military Department of all search and rescue missions. The Police Chief may restrict access to a specific search and rescue area to personnel authorized by him. Access shall be so restricted only for the period of time necessary to accomplish the search and rescue mission. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 85-98 § 1)


2.50.080 Regional disaster plan adopted.

Repealed by Ord. 01-15. (Ord. 07-02 §§ 1, 2)


2.50.090 Proclamation of civil emergency – Emergency defined.

When a civil emergency, or the imminent threat thereof, occurs in the City and results in or threatens to result in the death or injury of persons, or the destruction of or damage to property to such extent as to require, in the judgment of the City Manager, extraordinary measures to protect the public peace, safety and welfare, the City Manager shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of a civil emergency. In the absence of the City Manager, such a civil emergency may be declared by his or her designee. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.50.100 Actions that may be taken.

Upon the proclamation of a civil emergency as set forth in CMC 2.50.090 and/or Chapter 38.52 RCW, and during the existence of such emergency, the City Manager may make and proclaim any or all of the following orders:

(1) An order imposing a general curfew applicable to the City has a whole, or to such geographical area or areas of the City and during such hours as the City Manager deems necessary, and from time to time to modify the hours such curfew will be in effect and the area or areas to which it will apply;

(2) An order requiring any or all business establishments to close and remain closed until further order;

(3) An order closing to the public any or all public places, including streets, alleys, public ways, schools, parks, beaches, amusements areas, and public buildings; or

(4) Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life, public health, safety, property, and/or welfare.

Provided, however, that any such orders shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and confirmation, modification, or rejection at the City Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting at the latest. If the City Council modifies or rejects the order, said modification or rejection shall be prospective only, and shall not affect any actions taken prior to the modification or rejection of the order. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.50.110 Civil rights protected.

An order pursuant to CMC 2.50.100 shall contain the following:

(1) A statement of the facts upon which the order is based; and

(2) A statement that the City Manager believes it is in the best interest of public safety, health, welfare, rescue and recovery efforts, and/or the protection of property that the exercise of certain rights be temporarily limited. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.50.120 Delivery to news media.

The City Manager shall cause any proclamation issued by him or her pursuant to the authority of this chapter to be delivered to all news media within the City and shall utilize such other available means, including public address systems, as shall be necessary, in his or her judgment, to give notice of such proclamations to the public. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.50.130 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for anyone to fail or refuse to obey any such order proclaimed by the City Manager. Any person found to have knowingly failed or refused to obey any such order proclaimed by the City Manager is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 08-20 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.55 DEFENSE OF ELECTIVE OFFICER

Sections:

2.55.010    Procedure for indemnification of officials and employees created.

2.55.020    Definitions.

2.55.030    Legal representation.

2.55.040    Exclusions.

2.55.050    Determination of exclusion.

2.55.060    Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

2.55.070    Effect of compliance with conditions.

2.55.080    Failure to comply with conditions.

2.55.090    Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

2.55.100    Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

2.55.110    Pending claims.

2.55.120    Modification of chapter.

2.55.130    Bargaining unit contracts.

2.55.140    Punitive damages.


2.55.010 Procedure for indemnification of officials and employees created.

There is hereby created a procedure to provide for indemnification and defense of claims of liability arising from acts or omissions of officials and employees of the City, including volunteers, while performed or in good faith purported to have been performed in the scope of their official duties. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.020 Definitions.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meaning:

(1) “Employee” means any person who is or has been employed by the City, including volunteers and appointed members of advisory boards and commissions. “Employee” does not include independent contractors. 

(2) “Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected City official, and any person who is serving or who has served as an appointed officer of the City as defined by RCW 42.23.020(2), as written or hereafter amended. “Official” does not include independent contractors performing the duties of appointed positions. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.030 Legal representation.

(1) The City shall provide to an official or employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that such official or employee may have concluded service or employment with the City, such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit filed against such official or employee resulting from any conduct, act or omission of such official or employee performed or omitted on behalf of the City in his/her capacity as a City official or employee, which act or omission is within the scope of his/her service or employment with the City. The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to provide legal representation to defend a claim or lawsuit for any conduct, act, or omission resulting in the termination for cause of any official or employee. 

(2) The legal representation shall be provided by the office of the City Attorney and may include the City Attorney engaging the services of outside legal counsel. If any provision of an applicable policy of insurance provides legal counsel for the employee or official, the City Attorney will work with the policy holder for purposes of obtaining legal representation under the existing insurance policy. If a conflict of interest or ethical bar exists with respect to said representation by the City Attorney, then the services of outside legal counsel will be engaged for the benefit of the employee or official.

(3) In the event that outside counsel is retained under subsection (2) of this section, the City shall indemnify the employee or official from the reasonable costs of defense; provided, that in no event shall the official or employee be indemnified for attorney’s fees in excess of the hourly rates established by the City’s contract with an attorney selected by the City. The official or employee shall be liable for all hourly rates charged in excess of said rate.

(4) The determination whether the official or employee was acting in good faith within the scope of his or her official duties shall be made by the City Manager’s office in consultation with the City Attorney and/or outside legal counsel. This determination shall be based on an investigation of the acts and circumstances surrounding the incident and shall be made as early in the proceedings as is reasonably possible. Once the determination is made, the official or employee involved shall be notified by the City Manager in writing. If the employee or official involved is the City Manager, the determination shall be made by the City Council in consultation with the City Attorney and/or outside legal counsel based on an investigation of the acts and circumstances surrounding the incident and shall be made as early in the proceedings as is reasonably possible. Once the determination is made, the City Manager shall be notified by the City Attorney, in writing. In any claim involving an allegation of criminal conduct, no investigation by the City will occur prior to a determination of guilt, or prior to a dismissal of the criminal charge with prejudice, so as not to compromise the official’s or employee’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. Any determination made under this section shall not be subject to appeal. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.040 Exclusions.

(1) Except as otherwise determined pursuant to CMC 2.55.030, in no event shall protection be offered under this chapter by the City to:

(a) Any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, willful, intentional or malicious act or course of conduct of an official or an employee;

(b) Any act or course of conduct of an official or employee which is not performed on behalf of the City;

(c) Any act or course of conduct which is outside the scope of an official’s or employee’s service or employment with the City; 

(d) Any lawsuit brought against an official or employee by or on behalf of the City; and/or

(e) Any action or omission contrary to or not in furtherance of any adopted City policy.

(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to waive or impair the right of the City Council to institute suit or counterclaim against any official or employee nor to limit its ability to discipline or terminate a Council employee.

(3) The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the City or the official or employee is insured from whatever source against loss or damage; provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall apply in the event the loss or damages fall within the deductible or exclusion(s) of the City’s applicable insurance policy. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be secondary to any contract or policy of insurance whether owned by or otherwise applicable to any official or employee. The City shall have the right to require an employee to fully utilize any such policy protection prior to requesting the protection afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.050 Determination of exclusion.

The determination whether an official or employee shall be afforded a defense by the City under the terms of this chapter shall be made after a determination pursuant to CMC 2.55.030 as to whether the official or employee was acting within the scope of his or her duties. The City Manager and City Attorney shall prepare a recommendation to the Council. The decision of the City Council shall be final as a legislative determination and shall be based upon a finding that an official or employee meets or does not meet the criteria of this chapter. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from undertaking an official’s or employee’s defense under a reservation of rights. The determination as to whether a defense is to be furnished as provided under this chapter to a member or to members of the City Council shall be made without the vote of the Council member(s) named in the claim or lawsuit unless the inclusion of such member or members is required for a quorum; provided, that if a claim or lawsuit affects a quorum or greater number of the members of the City Council, all such affected members shall retain their voting privileges under this section. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.060 Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply only when all the following conditions are met:

(1) In the event of any incident or course of conduct potentially giving rise to a claim for damages, or for the commencement of a lawsuit, the official or employee involved shall, as soon as practicable, give the employee’s department director, if applicable, the City Attorney and the City Manager written notice thereof; identifying the official or employee involved, all information known to the official or employee involved with respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the potential claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses.

(2) Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall forthwith deliver any claim, demand, notice or summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the City Attorney and shall cooperate with the City Attorney or, if the City Attorney authorizes or designates another attorney to handle the matter, shall cooperate with that attorney, and, upon request, shall assist in making settlement of any suit and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the City because of any damage or claim of loss arising from said incident or course of conduct, including, but not limited to, rights of recovery for costs and attorney’s fees arising out of State or Federal statute upon a determination that the lawsuit brought was frivolous in nature. Failure to timely deliver any claim, demand, notice or summons to the City Attorney, and in which an adverse decision against the official, the employee or City results from such failure, shall operate to negate all indemnification and opportunity for defense under this chapter and the City shall have no obligation to offer a defense to the named official or employee.

(3) Such official or employee shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining assistance of witnesses all without any additional compensation to the official or employee, and, in the event that an employee has left the employ of the City, no fee or compensation shall be provided.

(4) Such official or employee shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense related to said claim or lawsuit, other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss or damage. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude any official or employee from retaining an attorney to represent his/her interests relating to such claim or lawsuit; however, all costs and expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the official or the employee.

(5) Nothing herein shall modify existing procedures or requirements of law for processing and payment of claims against the City. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.070 Effect of compliance with conditions.

If legal representation of an official or employee is undertaken by the City, whether by the City Attorney or by an attorney obtained by the City or through its insurance coverage, and all of the conditions of representation are met, and a judgment is entered against the official or employee or a settlement is made, the City shall pay such judgment or settlement according to the provisions herein; provided, that the City may at its discretion appeal as necessary any such judgment. In no event shall this section be interpreted to provide for payment of an award of punitive damages. The process for payment of punitive damages is discretionary under this chapter, and is set forth in CMC 2.55.140. The decision to appeal an award of damages will be made by the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager and the City Attorney and/or outside legal counsel. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.080 Failure to comply with conditions.

In the event that any official or employee fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions set forth in CMC 2.55.060, or elects to provide his/her own representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable and shall have no force or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.090 Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

(1) If the City’s investigation under CMC 2.55.030 determines that an official or employee does not come within the provisions of this chapter and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines that such claim does come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall pay any judgment, excepting punitive damages, rendered against the official or employee and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in defending against the claim if said judgment is not covered by the City’s insurance provisions or by the official’s or employee’s insurance. The City shall pay any costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the employee or official in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter; provided, that if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the official or employee shall pay the City’s costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) If the City determines that a claim against a City official or employee does come within the provisions of this chapter and a court of competent jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City Council shall have the option of requiring reimbursement by the official or employee for costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.100 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

The indemnification provisions of this chapter do not constitute a policy of insurance and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provisions of any policy of insurance where the City or any of its current or former officials or employees thereof is the named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee’s or official’s right to full coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter to provide the coverage detailed in this chapter only above and beyond insurance policies which may be in effect while not compromising the terms and conditions of such policies by any conflicting provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.110 Pending claims.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively to any pending claims or lawsuits against any official or employee at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and to any such claims or lawsuits hereinafter filed within an applicable statute of limitations, irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of such claim or lawsuit. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.120 Modification of chapter.

The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to amendment, modification and repeal, at the sole discretion of the City Council; provided, that unless explicitly set forth, any such amendment, modification or repeal shall apply prospectively only and shall have no effect on the obligation of the City to indemnify and/or defend against any claim which is based, in whole or in part, upon any action or omission of an employee or official occurring prior to the effective date of the amendment, modification or repeal. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.130 Bargaining unit contracts.

If a bargaining unit contract covers any of the provisions of this chapter, all employees under such contract shall be governed by the provisions thereof, rather than by the provisions of this chapter, and where any conflict exists between the provisions of any such contract and this chapter, such contract shall control. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


2.55.140 Punitive damages.

When an employee or official of the City has been represented in a claim and/or litigation by the City pursuant to this chapter and any judgment is rendered against such employee or official for punitive damages, the employee or official may make a request to the City Council that the City pay the award of punitive damages on behalf of the official or employee. Upon receiving a request made by or on behalf of a City employee or official to pay punitive damages, the City Council shall receive a report and recommendation from the City Manager and the City Attorney. If the official or employee is the City Manager or a City Council member, the City Council may request a report and recommendation from the City Attorney or may retain the services of another person or agency to provide a recommendation. Following receipt of the report and any recommendation, the City Council shall determine whether the best interests of the City and justice will be served by payment by the City of the award for punitive damages. There shall be no appeal from such determination. The City Manager shall communicate the Council’s determination with respect to the employee’s or official’s request for payment of punitive damages to said employee or official. Thereafter, the Finance Director shall prepare the payment of punitive damages if the Council authorized such payment. (Ord. 01-10 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.60 CITY HISTORIAN

(Repealed by Ord. 17-02)    


Chapter 2.70 ARTS COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 09-20)


Chapter 2.73 LANDMARKS AND HERITAGE COMMISSION

Sections:

2.73.010    Landmarks and Heritage Commission – Membership and organization.


2.73.010 Landmarks and Heritage Commission – Membership and organization.

(1) The King County Landmarks Commission (“Commission”), established pursuant to King County Code (K.C.C.), Chapter 20.62, as amended, and including the special member described below, is hereby designated and empowered to act as the Landmarks and Heritage Commission for the City of Covington pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.62 K.C.C. and Chapter 18.47 CMC.

(a) The special member of the Commission, provided for in Section 20.62.030 of the King County Code, shall be appointed by the Covington City Council at such time that an application to nominate an historic resource for designation as a landmark or community landmark within the City limits is received by the City of Covington. Such special member shall have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. Such appointment shall be made for a three-year term. Such special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special member may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two consecutive, three-year terms. Such special member shall be deemed to have served one full term if such special member resigns at any time after appointment or if such special member serves more than two years of an unexpired term. The special member of the Commission shall serve without compensation.

(b) The Commission shall file its rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter, with the City Clerk. (Ord. 14-17 § 2)


Chapter 2.75 ADMINISTRATIVE RULEMAKING

Sections:

2.75.010    Adoption of administrative rules.

2.75.020    Public rulemaking – Compliance with chapter and State law – Intent.

2.75.030    Definitions.

2.75.040    Rules to implement policy – Penalties and fees by ordinance or other law – Rules to be understandable.

2.75.050    Rules – Filing – Formatting – Required information.

2.75.060    Notice of rulemaking – Adoption procedures – Substantial compliance.

2.75.070    Emergency rules or amendments.

2.75.080    Effective dates of rules.

2.75.090    Adoption of certain other laws.

2.75.100    Reference to hearing bodies.


2.75.010 Adoption of administrative rules.

Reserved. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.010))


2.75.020 Public rulemaking – Compliance with chapter and State law – Intent.

In adopting rules, City Departments shall comply with this chapter and applicable State law. The intent of this chapter is to ensure City Departments afford the public fair notice about and reasonable access to rules and the rulemaking process. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.011))


2.75.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter:

(1) “Department” means City Manager’s Office, City Clerk’s Office, Finance Department, Community Development Department, Public Works Department, and Parks Department. However, “Department” does not include the Commission, contract agencies, or Hearing Examiner.

(2) “Penalty” means a punishment established by ordinance or other law imposed as a consequence of failing to abide by or comply with the law, ordinance or rule adopted under ordinance or other law.

(3) “Rule” means any Department order, directive or regulation of general applicability:

(a) The violation of which subjects a person outside City employment to a penalty;

(b) The violation of which subjects a person outside City employment to a payment of a fee;

(c) The violation of which establishes, alters or revokes any procedure, practice or requirement relating to a Department hearing; or

(d) The violation of which establishes, alters or revokes any qualifications or standards for the issuance, suspension or revocation of a license to pursue any commercial activity, trade or profession.

(4) “Rule” includes the amendment or repeal of a prior rule, but does not include:

(a) A statement concerning only the internal management of a Department and not affecting private rights or procedures available to the public;

(b) A declaratory ruling issued in accordance with an ordinance; or

(c) A traffic restriction for motor vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians established by the Public Works Director or designee if an official traffic control device gives notice of the restriction. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.012))


2.75.040 Rules to implement policy – Penalties and fees by ordinance or other law – Rules to be understandable.

(1) A Department may only adopt a rule under this chapter to implement an ordinance or other law. Any rule in conflict with an ordinance or other law is null and void to the extent of the conflict.

(2) Penalties shall be established only by ordinance or other law. Imposition of fees and the amount of fees shall be established as authorized by ordinance or other law.

(3) A Department should adopt rules that are clearly and simply stated so the rules are understandable. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.013))


2.75.050 Rules – Filing – Formatting – Required information.

(1) A Department that adopts rules shall make available to the public a description of the Department’s rule adoption procedures. The description shall include information on how to inquire about the Department’s proposed and adopted rules and public comment opportunities.

(2) A Department shall file proposed and adopted rules with the City Clerk’s Office for archives and records management functions. The City Clerk’s Office shall maintain a master list and create an index of the rules, in electronic format, for inspection review and copying by the public.

(a) The index shall include a list of public rules with reference to the rule number and the Department that adopted the rule. The list shall be searchable by either subject or key words, or both.

(b) The City Clerk’s Office shall provide a copy, in writing or by electronic format, of the adopted rules to the City’s web site.

(3) Rules adopted by a Department shall at a minimum comply with the following:

(a) Rules shall be reproduced on eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch white paper;

(b) Each page of a rule shall contain the name of the Department adopting the rule, the subject or title of the rule, and date the rule was adopted, the effective date of the rule and the page number and total number of pages of the rule;

(c) The text of the rule shall refer to the ordinance or other law upon which the rule based; and

(d) If amending or repealing an existing rule, the text of the rule shall cite the existing rule.

(4) An amendment to a rule shall follow the same format as used in preparing the initial rule. The Clerk’s Office shall ensure that amended rules are reflected in the index prepared under subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.014))


2.75.060 Notice of rulemaking – Adoption procedures – Substantial compliance.

(1)(a) Prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule, each Department shall give at least 45 days’ notice of its intended action by:

(i) Filing a notice with the City Clerk’s Office;

(ii) Providing, at least in writing or by electronic format, the notice to: all persons and other parties who have made timely request of the agency for advance notice of its rulemaking proceedings on a special topic; the Clerk; each member of the Council; 

(iii) Giving public notice by one publication in the official newspaper.

(b) The notice shall include:

(i) Reference to the authority under which the rule is proposed;

(ii) A statement of either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved; and

(iii) The time, place and manner, including at least in writing or by electronic format, in which interested persons may present their views on the rule. To the extent practicable, the Department should permit persons to present their views at a public meeting, according to rules established by the Department.

(2) The Department giving the notice required in this section shall consider all comments received by the prescribed time and shall make reasonable efforts to provide written responses to the comments before the rule is adopted.

(3) Adoption of a rule by a Department is accomplished by the Department’s Director or City Manager for his or her respective Department, signing the proposed rule. 

(4) A rule adopted under this section is not valid unless adopted in substantial compliance with this section. In any proceeding, a rule shall not be considered invalid on the ground of noncompliance with the procedural requirements of this section if two years or more have elapsed from the effective date of the rule. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.015))


2.75.070 Emergency rules or amendments.

(1) If the Department finds that immediate adoption or amendment of a rule is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety or general welfare, and that observance of the requirements of notice and opportunity to present views on the proposed rule would be contrary to the public interest, the Department may dispense with the notice, comment and public meeting requirements of this chapter and adopted the rule or amendment as an emergency rule or amendment.

(a) The Department’s finding and a brief statement of the reason for its finding shall be incorporated in the emergency rule or amendment as filed with the City Clerk’s Office.

(b) An emergency rule or amendment shall not remain in effect for longer than 180 days.

(c) This section does not relieve any Department from compliance with any ordinance or other law requiring that the Department’s rules be approved by designated persons or bodies before the rules take effect.

(2) An emergency rule adopted under this section is not valid unless adopted in substantial compliance with this section. In any proceeding, a rule shall not be considered invalid on the ground of noncompliance with the procedural requirements of this section if two years or more have elapsed from the effective date of the rule.

(3) The City Clerk’s Office shall provide copy, in writing or by electronic format, of an emergency rule to the Council within three business days after the rule is filed with the Clerk’s Office. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.016))


2.75.080 Effective dates of rules.

(1) Emergency rules adopted under CMC 2.75.070 take effect upon filing with the Clerk’s Office. All other rules adopted under this chapter take effect 30 days after the date of filing with the City Clerk’s Office, unless a later date is required by statute or specified in the rule.

(2) The City Clerk’s Office shall compile and index all rules adopted by each Department. Compilations shall be supplemented or revised as often as necessary and at least once every year. (Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.017))


2.75.090 Adoption of certain other laws.

Code compliance ordinance referenced within this title shall mean Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 10-07 § 2; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.020))


2.75.100 Reference to hearing bodies.

Hearing bodies or boards discussed within this title shall be as outlined in Chapters 2.25, 14.30, 14.35, 14.40 and 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 02-09 § 6; Ord. 01-09 § 4; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.10.030))


Chapter 2.80 CITY HOURS OF BUSINESS

Sections:

2.80.010    Hours of business.

2.80.020    Legal holidays.


2.80.010 Hours of business.

All offices and departments of the City shall be kept open for the transaction of business from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except for legal holidays and such days or hours as may, from time to time, be specified by motion or resolution of the City Council; and provided, that the City Manager may authorize any office or department to vary from these hours where it will promote the efficiency of the office or department and provide adequate service to the public. (Ord. 16-15 § 1)


2.80.020 Legal holidays.

The following days shall be recognized as legal holidays:

	New Year’s Day	January 1st

	Martin Luther King Jr. Day	Third Monday of January

	Presidents’ Day	Third Monday of February

	Memorial Day	Last Monday of May

	Independence Day	July 4th

	Labor Day	First Monday of September

	Veterans’ Day	November 11th

	Half day prior to Thanksgiving Day	Fourth Wednesday of November

	Thanksgiving Day	Fourth Thursday of November

	Day after Thanksgiving Day	Fourth Friday of November

	Christmas Eve*	December 24th

	Christmas Day	December 25th

	Half day New Year’s Eve* 	December 31st

	Floating holiday	Provided by administrative policy

Except for Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve, whenever any legal holiday set forth in this section falls upon a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be a legal holiday; when any legal holiday falls upon a Sunday, the following Monday shall be a legal holiday. 

*Christmas Eve and a half day on New Year’s Eve shall only be observed as legal holidays as set forth in this section when they fall on a regular work day in which no other legal holiday is observed. (Ord. 16-15 § 1)


Chapter 2.90 INDIGENT DEFENSE STANDARDS

Sections:

2.90.010    Adoption of public defense standards.


2.90.010 Adoption of public defense standards.

To the extent appropriate at the municipal court level, the Washington State Bar Association Standards for Indigent Defense Services, as currently approved on June 3, 2011, and hereafter amended, attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter and fully incorporated by this reference, shall constitute standards for the delivery of public defense services as that term is used in RCW 10.101.030 until such time as the City Council may by ordinance adjust those standards. (Ord. 04-16 § 1)


Chapter 2.95 CODE OF ETHICS

Sections:

2.95.010    Purpose.

2.95.020    Definitions.

2.95.030    Financial or beneficial interest in City transactions.

2.95.040    Disqualifications from acting on City business.

2.95.050    Gifts and favors.

2.95.060    Campaigning.

2.95.070    Prohibited conduct – Miscellaneous.

2.95.080    Ethical standards.

2.95.090    Ethics Officer.

2.95.100    Complaints, investigations, hearings, and enforcement.


2.95.010 Purpose.

(1) Purpose. The Covington City Council has adopted this code of ethics to be complied with by members of the City Council and the City of Covington’s Council-appointed boards and commissions to promote public confidence in the integrity of local government and its fair operation. This code of ethics will also provide the basis for the education and training of City officials, both elected and appointed, to ensure that the highest standards and best practices with regard to ethics will be followed.

(2) Intent. The citizens and businesses of Covington are entitled to have fair, ethical, and accountable local government that has earned the public’s full confidence. In keeping with the City of Covington’s commitment to excellence, the effective functioning of democratic government therefore requires that:

(a) Public officials, both elected and appointed, comply with the laws and policies affecting the operations of government;

(b) Public officials be independent, impartial and fair in their judgment and actions;

(c) Public office be used for the public good, not for personal gain; and

(d) Public deliberations and processes be conducted openly, unless legally confidential, in an atmosphere of respect and civility. 

(3) This code of ethics shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose and policy and to supplement existing laws that relate to the same subject.

(4) The conduct of all officials shall meet the applicable requirements of both this code of ethics and Chapter 42.23 RCW. When a higher standard of conduct is established by this code of ethics than by Chapter 42.23 RCW, the standards of this code of ethics shall control; provided, this code of ethics shall not be construed to permit any act or omission that is prohibited by Chapter 42.23 RCW.

(5) This code of ethics shall take effect August 1, 2016, by Ordinance No. 14-16. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Business entity” means any corporation, general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship (including a private consultant operation), joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, or other organization, whether or not organized for profit.

(2) “City agency” means every department, office, Ethics Officer, Hearing Examiner, commission, or committee of the City, or any subdivision thereof, but excludes public corporations and ad hoc advisory committees.

(3) “City officer or employee” means any person holding a position by election, appointment, or employment in the service of the City or City agency, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any ethics hearing officer, committee or commission.

(4) “Compensation” means anything of economic value, however designated, which is paid, loaned, advanced, granted, given or transferred for or in consideration of personal services to any person.

(5) “Beneficial interest” means any direct or indirect, pecuniary or material benefit, other than a remote interest, accruing to a City official as a result of a contract, transaction, zoning decision or other matter which is or may be the subject of an official act or act by or with the City, except for such contracts, transactions, zoning decisions or other matters which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. For purposes of this code, a City official shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:

(a) The official’s spouse or dependent children;

(b) Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship, whether oral or written, exists with the official;

(c) Any business entity in which the official is an officer, director, member, or employee;

(d) Any business entity in which the officer controls or owns, directly or indirectly, in excess of one percent of the total stock, or an interest totaling $5,000 or more in value; and

(e) Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship, whether oral or written, exists with the official; provided, however, that a contractual obligation of less than $500.00, or a commercially reasonable lien made in the ordinary course of business, or a contract for a commercial retail sale, shall not be deemed to create an interest in violation of this code.

(6) “Immediate family” means any person who is:

(a) A spouse or domestic partner;

(b) Any dependent parent, parent-in-law, child or son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or

(c) Any parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sibling, uncle, aunt, cousin, niece or nephew residing in the household of the City official.

(7) “Official” means a member of the City Council or a member of Council-appointed City boards and commissions and other Council-appointed task groups or committees, including youth members.

(8) “Official act or action” means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any City official or committee or commission thereof.

(9) “Person” means any individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity.

(10) “Remote interest” means:

(a) That of a nonsalaried officer of a nonprofit corporation;

(b) That of an employee or agent of a contracting party where the compensation of such employee or agent consists entirely of fixed wages or salary;

(c) That of a landlord or tenant of a contracting party;

(d) That of a holder of less than one percent of the shares of a corporation or cooperative which is a contracting party. 

(11) “Relative” means “immediate family” as defined herein. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.030 Financial or beneficial interest in City transactions.

No official, while holding such office or position, shall:

(1) Regardless of prior disclosure thereof, hold or acquire a beneficial interest, direct or indirect, personally or through a member of his or her immediate family, in any contract which, in whole or in part, is, or which may be, made by, through, or under the supervision of such official or which may be made for the benefit of his or her office/position, or accept, directly or indirectly, any compensation, gratuity, or reward in connection with such contract from any other person or entity beneficially interested therein, in violation of Chapter 42.23 RCW.

(2) Regardless of prior disclosure thereof, be beneficially interested, directly or indirectly, other than a remote interest, in any contract or transaction which may be made by, through, or under the supervision of such official, in whole or in part, or which may be made for the benefit of his or her office/position, or accept, directly or indirectly, any compensation, gratuity, or reward in connection with such contract or transaction from any other person beneficially interested therein, in violation of Chapter 42.23 RCW. This subsection shall not apply to the furnishing of utility services or other services of the City at the same rates and on the same terms as are available to the public generally, or to any other transaction specifically exempted by Chapter 42.23 RCW. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.040 Disqualifications from acting on City business.

(1) Generally. In order to ensure their independence and impartiality on behalf of the common good, officials shall abstain from participating in deliberations and decision-making where conflicts exist pursuant to this code.

(2) Prohibited Conduct. No City official, while holding such office or position, shall:

(a) Engage in any transaction or activity, which is, or would to a reasonable person appear to be, in conflict with or incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties, or which impairs, or would to a reasonable person appear to impair, the official’s independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties and fail to disqualify himself or herself from official action in those instances where the conflict occurs.

(b) Have a financial or other private interest, other than a remote interest as defined in this code, direct or indirect, personally or through a member of his or her immediate family, or business entity, in any matter upon which the official is required to act in the discharge of his or her official duties, and fail to disqualify himself or herself from acting or participating.

(c) Fail to disqualify himself or herself from acting on any transaction which involves the City and any person who is, or at any time within the preceding 12-month period has been, a private client of his or hers, or of his or her firm or partnership.

(d) Have a financial or other private interest, other than a remote interest as defined in this code, direct or indirect, personally or through a member of his or her immediate family, or business entity, in any contract or transaction to which the City or any City agency may be a party, and fail to disclose such interest to the appropriate City authority prior to the formation of the contract or the time the City or City agency enters into the transaction.

(3) Appearance of Conflict. If it could appear to a reasonable person, having knowledge of the relevant circumstances, that the official’s judgment is impaired because of either a personal or business relationship not covered under the foregoing subsections, or a transaction or activity engaged in by the official, the official shall make a public, written disclosure of the facts giving rise to the appearance of a conflict before participating in the matter.

(4) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 

(a) Decisions regarding taxes or fees; 

(b) If the financial interest is shared with more than 10 percent of the City’s population; or 

(c) If the financial interest exists solely because of the official’s ownership of less than one percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly traded corporation. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.050 Gifts and favors.

(1) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the given meaning:

(a) “Gift” means anything of economic value for which no consideration is given. “Gift” does not include:

(i) Items from relatives or friends where it is clear beyond a reasonable doubt that the gift was not made as part of any design to gain or maintain influence in the City or with the recipient in connection with City matters;

(ii) Items related to the outside business of the recipient that are customary and not related to the recipient’s performance of official duties;

(iii) Items exchanged among officials and employees or a social event hosted or sponsored by a City officer or City employee for co-workers;

(iv) Payments by a governmental or nongovernmental entity of reasonable expenses incurred in connection with a speech, presentation, appearance, or trade mission made in an official capacity. As used in this subsection, “reasonable expenses” are limited to travel, lodging, and subsistence expenses incurred the day before through the day after the event;

(v) Items an official or employee is authorized by law to accept;

(vi) Payment of enrollment and course fees and reasonable travel expenses attributable to attending seminars and educational programs sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit governmental or nonprofit professional, educational, trade, or charitable association or institution. As used in this subsection, “reasonable travel expenses” are limited to travel, lodging, and subsistence expenses incurred the day before through the day after the event;

(vii) Items returned by the recipient to the donor within 30 days of receipt or donated to a charitable organization within 30 days of receipt;

(viii) Campaign contributions reported under Chapter 42.17 RCW;

(ix) Discounts available to an individual as a member of an employee group, occupation, or similar broad-based group;

(x) Awards, prizes, scholarships, or other items provided in recognition of academic or scientific achievement.

(b) “Single gift” means any event, item, or group of items used in conjunction with each other or any trip including transportation, lodging, and attendant costs, not excluded from the definition of gift under this subsection.

(c) “Single source” means any person, corporation, or entity, whether acting directly or through any agent or other intermediary.

(2) Prohibited Gifts. Officials shall not take any special advantage of services or opportunities for personal gain, by virtue of their public office, which are not available to the public in general. They may not solicit or receive any thing of monetary value from any person or entity where the thing of monetary value has been solicited, received, or given or, to a reasonable person, would appear to have been solicited, received, or given with intent to give or obtain special consideration or influence as to any action by the official in his or her official capacity; provided, that nothing shall prohibit campaign contributions which are solicited or received and reported in accordance with applicable law. 

(3) Limitations on Gifts. Other than those specified in this section, no official may accept gifts beyond the following limitations:

(a) Single Gift. An official shall not accept a single gift with a value in excess of $50.00 in accordance with RCW 42.52.150(1).

(b) Single Source. An official shall not accept gifts from a single source with an aggregate value in excess of $50.00 in a calendar year. 

(c) The value of gifts given to an official’s family member or guest shall be attributed to the official or employee for the purpose of determining whether the limit has been exceeded, unless an independent business, family, or social relationship exists between the donor and the family member or guest.

(d) If the $50.00 limit in RCW 42.52.150(1) is amended, this section shall be deemed to reflect the amended amount. 

(4) Exemptions. The following items are presumed not to influence the vote, action, or judgment of the official, or be considered as part of a reward for action or inaction, and may be accepted without regard to the limitations established by subsection (3) of this section:

(a) Unsolicited flowers, plants, and floral arrangements;

(b) Unsolicited advertising or promotional items of nominal value, such as pens and note pads;

(c) Unsolicited tokens or awards of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento, or similar item;

(d) Unsolicited items received by an official for the purpose of evaluation or review, if the official has no personal beneficial interest in the eventual use or acquisition of the item;

(e) Informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the recipient’s performance of official duties;

(f) Food and beverages consumed at hosted receptions where attendance is related to the official’s official duties;

(g) Admission to, and the cost of food and beverages consumed at, events sponsored by or in conjunction with a civic, charitable, governmental, or community organization;

(h) Unsolicited gifts from dignitaries from another state or a foreign country which are intended to be personal in nature; and

(i) Food and beverages on infrequent occasions in the ordinary course of meals where attendance by the official is related to the performance of official duties.

(j) The presumptions of this subsection (4) are rebuttable and may be overcome based on the circumstances surrounding the giving and acceptance of the item. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.060 Campaigning.

(1) Generally. Officials may participate in the political process only on their own time, and only outside of City facilities, by working on campaigns for the elections of any person to any office, or for the promotion of or the opposition to any ballot proposition, and shall not use or authorize the use of the facilities of the City for such purposes except as may be authorized by law under the provisions of RCW 42.17.130. 

(2) Elected Officials’ Campaigns. 

(a) As required by RCW 42.17A.565, no official shall knowingly solicit or encourage, directly or indirectly, any political contribution from any City employee. 

(b) Except under limited circumstances described in RCW 42.17A.555, no official may use or authorize the use of the facilities of the City for the purpose of assisting a campaign for the election of any person to any office, or for the promotion of or opposition to any ballot proposition, in a manner not available to the general public on the same terms. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.070 Prohibited conduct – Miscellaneous.

(1) Violation of Other Laws. Officials shall comply with Federal, State, and local laws in the performance of their public duties. These laws include, but are not limited to: the United States and Washington Constitutions; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, election campaigns, financial disclosures, and open processes of government; and City ordinances and policies. 

(2) Quasi-Judicial Proceedings. 

(a) No City official while holding such office or position shall participate in or influence any pending quasi-judicial proceeding if the City official has a financial or personal interest in the matter.

(b) Ex Parte Communications. In quasi-judicial matters, officials shall publicly disclose substantive information that is relevant to a matter under consideration by the Council or boards and commissions, which they may have received from sources outside of the public decision-making process.

(3) Misuse of Public Position or Resources. Except for infrequent use at little or no cost to the City, officials shall not use public resources that are not available to the public in general, such as City staff time, equipment, supplies or facilities, for other than a City purpose.

(4) Representation of Third Parties. Except in the course of official duties, officials shall not appear on behalf of the financial interests of third parties before the bodies on which the officials serve or in interaction with assigned staff. However, the members of the City Council shall not appear on behalf of the financial interest of third parties before the Council or any commission, board, or proceeding of the City, or in interaction with staff.

(5) Incompatible Service. No elected official shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for any person or engage in any business or professional activity when such employment, service, or activity is incompatible with the proper and faithful discharge of his or her official duties as such elected official, or when it would require or induce him or her to disclose confidential information acquired by him or her by reason of his or her official position. 

(6) Solicitations of Charitable Contributions. No official may make direct personal solicitations for charitable contributions from City employees.

(7) Confidential Information. Officials shall not disclose or use any confidential information gained by reason of their official position for other than a City purpose. “Confidential information” means specific information, rather than generalized knowledge, that is not available to a person who files a public records request, and/or information made confidential by law.

(8) False Statements. No official shall make, or induce or direct any City official or City employee to make, any false statement or representation of any public record or document in a willful disregard of the truth of such statement or representation. 

(9) Nepotism. The City Council will not appoint relatives of City Council members to boards or commissions or other appointed positions. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.080 Ethical standards.

Officials are encouraged to comply with the following standards:

(1) Policy Role of Officials. Officials shall respect and adhere to the council-manager structure of Covington City government as outlined by Chapter 35A.13 RCW. In this structure, the City Council determines the policies of the City with the advice, information, and analysis provided by the public, boards and commissions, and City staff. Except as provided by State law, officials shall not interfere with the administrative functions of the City or the professional duties of City staff; nor shall they impair the ability of staff to implement Council policy decisions.

(2) Personal Integrity. 

(a) The professional and personal conduct of officials must be above reproach and avoid even the appearance of impropriety. Officials shall refrain from abusive conduct; threats of official action; and personal accusations or verbal attacks upon the character or motives of other members of Council, boards and commissions, the staff, or public. 

(b) Officials shall maintain truthfulness and honesty and not compromise themselves for advancement, honor, or personal gain. 

(c) Officials shall not directly or indirectly induce, encourage, or aid anyone to violate this code of ethics and it is incumbent upon officials to make a good faith effort to address apparent violations of this code of ethics.

(3) Working for the Common Good. Recognizing that stewardship of the public interest must be their primary concern, officials will work for the common good of the people of Covington and not for any private or personal interest, and they will ensure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims, and transactions coming before the City Council, boards, and commissions. Officials need to be mindful that making special requests of staff – even when the response does not benefit the official personally – puts staff in an awkward position.

(4) Respect for Process. Officials shall perform their duties in accordance with the processes and rules of order established by the City Council and board and commissions governing the deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful involvement of the public, and implementation of policy decisions of the City Council by City staff.

(5) Commitment to Transparency. Transparency, openness, and accountability are fundamental values of the City – and are also required by the laws of the State of Washington. The public has a right to inspect and copy public records unless exempt by law from disclosure. All materials relating to the conduct of City government that are prepared, possessed, used, or retained by any official, including email and other electronic records, are subject to requirements for retention, protection, and disclosure. Officials may assume that all copies of materials received from City staff have already been archived and do not need to be retained. Officials shall not discard, damage, or destroy the original copy of any public record unless directed by the City Public Records Officer (the City Clerk), who has responsibility to ensure that the City complies with the record retention schedules established under Chapter 40.14 RCW. Officials shall promptly provide any records requested by the Public Records Officer in response to a disclosure request under the Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. It is the responsibility of the Public Records Officer, together with the City Attorney, to decide which records meet the definition of “public record” and whether or not they are exempt from disclosure; officials must not take it upon themselves to decide whether a record meets the definition of a public record, that a record is exempt from disclosure, or to otherwise conceal a record.

(6) Conduct of Public Meetings. Officials shall prepare themselves for public issues; listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the body; and focus on the business at hand. They shall refrain from interrupting other speakers; making personal comments not germane to the business of the body; or otherwise interfering with the orderly conduct of meetings.

(7) Decisions Based on Merit. Officials shall base their decisions on the merits and substance of the matter at hand, rather than on unrelated considerations.

(8) Advocacy. 

(a) When acting in an official capacity as a City official representing the City, officials shall represent the official policies or positions of the City Council, board, or commission to the best of their ability when the City Council, board, or commission has taken a position or given an instruction. 

(b) When presenting their individual opinions and positions, officials shall explicitly state they do not represent their body or the City of Covington, nor will they allow the inference that they do. 

(c) Officials have the right to endorse candidates for all Council seats or other elected offices. It is inappropriate to make or display endorsements during Council meetings, board/commission meetings, or other official City meetings. However, this does not preclude officials from participating in ceremonial occasions, community events, or other events sponsored by civic groups. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.090 Ethics Officer.

(1) Ethics Officer. The City Council creates the position of Ethics Officer. The City Attorney shall serve as the Ethics Officer, unless the City Council chooses to appoint an independent third party, and in addition to any additional duties as assigned by the City Council, shall provide for the following:

(a) Annual review of the code of ethics, including recommend changes or additions to this code of ethics to the City Council, if deemed necessary; 

(b) Input into and review the training materials and program developed for this code of ethics;

(c) Advisory opinions concerning this code of ethics; and

(d) The prompt and fair enforcement of the provisions of this code of ethics when necessary.

(2) Advisory Opinions. 

(a) Upon request of any official, the Ethics Officer shall render written advisory opinions concerning the applicability of this code to hypothetical circumstances and/or situations solely related to the persons making the request. The Ethics Officer will not render opinions on matters that are the purview of other government agencies or officials, e.g., the Public Disclosure Commission, the City Public Records Officer, etc. 

(b) Upon request of any official, the Ethics Officer may also render written advisory opinions concerning the applicability of the code of ethics to hypothetical circumstances and/or situations related to a matter of City-wide interest or policy.

(c) The Ethics Officer will endeavor to respond to requests for advisory opinions within 30 days of submission of the request, or more rapidly if the requester expresses urgency in the request.

(d) A person’s conduct based in reasonable reliance on an advisory opinion rendered by the Ethics Officer shall not be found to violate this code of ethics, as long as all material facts have been fully, completely, and accurately presented in a written request for an advisory opinion, the Ethics Officer issues an advisory opinion that the described conduct would not violate the code of ethics, and the person’s conduct is consistent with the advisory opinion. 

(e) The Ethics Officer reserves the right to reconsider the questions and issues raised in an advisory opinion and, where the public interest requires, rescind, modify, or terminate the opinion, but a modified or terminated advisory opinion will not form the basis of a retroactive enforcement action against the original requester. Advisory opinions will contain severability clauses indicating that should portions of the opinion be found to be unenforceable or not within the Ethics Officer’s authority, the remainder of the opinion shall remain intact. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


2.95.100 Complaints, investigations, hearings, and enforcement.

The Ethics Officer shall resolve inadvertent and minor violations of this code of ethics informally and may resolve inadvertent or minor violations informally, unless the Ethics Officer determines that doing so would not serve the public interest. When a violation is neither inadvertent nor minor, the Ethics Officer may initiate an action in accordance with this section.

(1) Time Limitation. Any complaint or action taken under this code of ethics must be commenced within three years from the date of the alleged violation.

(2) Complaint Process.

(a) Complaint Requirements – Service. Any person may submit a written complaint to the Ethics Officer, through the City Clerk’s office, alleging one or more violations of this code of ethics by an official. The complaint must set forth specific facts with enough precision and detail for the Ethics Officer to make a determination of sufficiency. In addition, the complaint must set forth the specific sections and subsections of this code that the facts violate, and the reasons why. The complaint must be signed under penalty of perjury by the person(s) submitting it in a manner consistent with Chapter 9A.72 RCW. The fact that a complaint has been received, the contents of the complaint, and the identity of the person making the complaint shall remain confidential to the extent available under the law until such time as the Ethics Officer has made a determination of sufficiency.

(b) Finding of Sufficiency. The Ethics Officer shall make a determination of sufficiency within 30 days of receipt of the written complaint. A complaint shall be sufficient if the allegations, if established, would violate this code. The Ethics Officer’s determination is not reviewable. If the finding is one of sufficiency of the complaint, then the Ethics Officer may investigate the complaint as set forth below.

A finding by the Ethics Officer determining that a complaint is sufficient shall contain at the beginning the following specific language:

NOTICE: ANY PORTION OF THIS FINDING DETERMINING SUFFICIENCY OF ANY PORTION OF A COMPLAINT DOES NOT DETERMINE THE TRUTH OR FALSITY OF THE ALLEGATIONS CONTAINED IN THE COMPLAINT FILED WITH THE ETHICS OFFICER. THE ETHICS OFFICER HAS ONLY DETERMINED THAT IF CERTAIN FACTS CONTAINED IN THE COMPLAINT ARE FOUND TO BE TRUE DURING A LATER HEARING TO BE CONDUCTED BY THE HEARING EXAMINER, THEN VIOLATION(S) OF THE CODE OF ETHICS MAY BE FOUND TO HAVE OCCURRED.

(c) Dismissal. The Ethics Officer shall dismiss the complaint if the Ethics Officer determines that the violation was inadvertent and minor; or a violation occurred, but appropriate actions have been taken to fully address the allegedly unethical conduct.

(d) Protection Against Retaliation. Neither the City nor any official may take or threaten to take, directly or indirectly, official or personal action, including but not limited to discharge, discipline, personal attack, harassment, intimidation, or change in job, salary, or responsibilities, against any person because that person files a complaint with the Ethics Officer.

(e) False Complaint. Any person who shall file a complaint for violation of this code knowing such charge to be false or to have been recklessly made without any reasonable attempt to determine relevant facts and circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(3) Immediate Removal – Member of Board or Commission or Other Appointed Task Group or Committee. In the event the individual against whom the complaint was made is currently a member of a City board or commission or other task group or committee appointed by the City Council, at any time after the complaint is filed pursuant to this section, the City Council may, in addition to or in lieu of the public hearing process and other possible penalties as provided for in this section, and notwithstanding any other provision of the Covington Municipal Code, by a majority vote remove the individual from such board or commission effective immediately.

(4) Notice. Notice of action by the Ethics Officer shall be provided as follows:

(a) Notice of a finding of insufficiency or dismissal of a complaint by the Ethics Officer shall be sent to the person who made the complaint and the person complained against within seven days of the decision by the Ethics Officer. A finding of insufficiency or dismissal of a complaint by the Ethics Officer is final and binding, and no administrative or other legal appeal is available through the Ethics Officer.

(b) Within seven days of the Ethics Officer rendering a finding of sufficiency, the City Clerk shall send notice to the person who made the complaint and the person complained against, of the Ethics Officer’s determination. If, after investigation, the Ethics Officer has reason to believe that a material violation of this code has occurred, the City Clerk shall give notice of the public hearing which will be held to determine if a violation has occurred. Notice shall be provided at least 30 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The person complained against shall have the right to file a written answer to the charge and to appear at the hearing with or without legal counsel, submit testimony, be fully heard, and to examine and cross examine witnesses.

(5) Stipulations. At any time after a complaint has been filed with the Ethics Officer, the Ethics Officer may seek and make recommendations that the City Council enter into a stipulation with the person complained against. The recommended stipulation will include the nature of the complaint, relevant facts, the reasons the Ethics Officer thinks a stipulation is appropriate, an admission of the violation by the person complained against, a promise by the person complained against not to repeat the violation, and if appropriate, a recommended remedy or penalty. The recommended stipulation shall be sent to the person who made the complaint and the person complained against and forwarded to the City Council for action.

(6) Conduct of Hearings.

(a) All hearings on complaints found to be sufficient by the Ethics Officer shall be conducted by the City’s Hearing Examiner. The hearing shall be informal, meaning that the Hearing Examiner shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. The Hearing Examiner may call witnesses on his or her own motion and compel the production of books, records, papers, or other evidence as needed. To that end, the Hearing Examiner shall issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum. All testimony shall be under oath administered by the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner may adjourn the hearing from time to time to allow for the orderly presentation of evidence. The Hearing Examiner shall prepare an official record of the hearing, including all testimony, which shall be recorded by mechanical device, and exhibits; provided, that the Hearing Examiner shall not be required to transcribe such records unless presented with a request accompanied by payment of the cost of transcription.

(b) Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, make and fully record in his or her permanent records, findings of fact, conclusions of law, and his or her recommended disposition. A copy of the findings, conclusions, and recommended disposition shall be sent to the person who made the complaint and to the person complained against. Additional copies of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Ethics Officer and City Council.

(7) City Council Action. Final City Council action to decide upon stipulations and recommendations from the Ethics Officer and findings, conclusions, and recommendations from the Hearing Examiner shall be by majority vote in a public meeting. If the proceeding involves a member of the City Council, deliberations by the Council may be in executive session. The member of the Council against whom the complaint was made will not participate in any executive session and shall not vote on any matter involving him or herself. However, upon request of the member of the Council against whom the complaint was made, a public hearing or public meeting before the Council will be held on the issue of penalties.

(8) Disposition. In the event the Hearing Examiner finds that the person against whom the complaint was made has violated the code of ethics, then the City Council may take any of the following actions by a majority vote of the Council. The action of the City Council shall be final and not subject to further review or appeal except as may be otherwise provided by law or as provided in this section.

(a) Dismissal. Dismissal of the complaint without penalties.

(b) Referral. A complaint may be referred to another agency with jurisdiction over the violation, such as the Public Disclosure Commission. Final action on the complaint may be stayed pending resolution of the matter by the agency to which it was referred.

(c) Admonition. An admonition shall be an oral nonpublic statement made by the Mayor, or his/her designee, or if the complaint is against the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem or his/her designee, to the official.

(d) Reprimand. A reprimand shall be administered to the official by a resolution of reprimand by the City Council. The resolution shall be prepared by the City Council and shall be signed by the Mayor or, if the complaint is against the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem.

(e) Censure. A resolution of censure shall be a resolution read personally to the person in public. The resolution shall be prepared by the City Council and shall be signed by the Mayor, or if the complaint is against the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem. The person shall appear at a City Council meeting at a time and place directed by the City Council to receive the resolution of censure. Notice shall be given at least 20 calendar days before the scheduled appearance at which time a copy of the proposed resolution of censure shall be provided to the person. The resolution of censure shall be read publicly, and the person shall not make any statement in support of, or in opposition thereto, or in mitigation thereof. The resolution of censure shall be read at the time it is scheduled whether or not the official appears as required.

(f) Civil Penalties. The City Council may assess a civil penalty of up to $1,000 or three times the economic value of anything received in violation of this code of ethics or three times the economic value of any loss to the City, whichever is greater. Any monetary penalty assessed civilly shall be placed in the City’s general fund.

(g) Contract Void. As provided by RCW 42.23.050, any contract made in violation of Chapter 42.23 RCW, “Code of Ethics for Municipal Officers – Contract Interests,” is void.

(h) Other Penalties. The City Council may impose a restriction, loss of a committee assignment, or loss of appointment as a representative of the City for any regional or multijurisdictional body or membership on any board or commission which requires an appointment or confirmation of an appointment by the City Council.

(i) Review of Civil Penalties. If the City Council orders an official to pay a civil penalty, the official may seek a writ of review from the superior court pursuant to Chapter 7.16 RCW, within 30 days of the City Council’s order.

(9) Public Records. Records filed with the Ethics Officer and/or Hearing Examiner become public records that may be subject to inspection and copying by members of the public, unless an exemption in law exists. The City shall release copies of any written reports resulting from an investigation of a sustained complaint, any Hearing Examiner orders, and any written censures or reprimands issued by the City Council, in response to public records requests consistent with Chapter 42.56 RCW and any other applicable public disclosure laws. To the extent required to prevent an unreasonable invasion of personal privacy interests protected by RCW 42.56.230(2), identity information may be redacted when an unsubstantiated complaint is made available in response to a public records request; however, in each case, the justification for the redaction shall be explained fully in writing. (Ord. 14-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.01    Repealed

3.05    Petty Cash Fund

3.10    Sales and Use Tax

3.15    Real Estate Excise Tax

3.20    Gambling Tax

3.25    Payment of Claims or Obligations of the City

3.30    Unemployment Insurance Benefit Account

3.35    Accounting Funds

3.40    Unemployment Reserve Fund

3.45    Community Development Block Grant Fund

3.50    Admission Tax

3.55    Registration of Bonds and Obligations

3.60    City Credit Card Use

3.65    Local Improvement Districts

3.70    Utility Tax

3.75    Crime Reward Fund

3.80    Multifamily Property Tax Exemptions

3.85    Donations of Property to City


Chapter 3.01 BUDGET

(Repealed by Ord. 07-10)


Chapter 3.05 PETTY CASH FUND

Sections:

3.05.010    Established.

3.05.020    Appropriation of funds.


3.05.010 Established.

The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to establish a petty cash fund in such amount as the City Manager may from time to time, in writing, determine necessary for the efficient carrying out of the purposes for which said fund is established but not to exceed $600.00. This fund is established for the purpose of making minor authorized disbursements and the making of change. The fund shall be administered by the City Manager, or designee, in accordance with regulations providing for such lawful administration. (Ord. 08-08 § 1; Ord. 7-97 § 1)


3.05.020 Appropriation of funds.

The City Manager, or designee, is authorized, from time to time, to reimburse the petty cash fund for actual expenses incurred. The following petty cash accounts are hereby authorized in the amounts and with the custodians detailed below:

	Fund/Location	Custodian	Authorized Amount

	General Fund	 	 

	Petty Cash	As designated in writing by the Finance Director	$100

	Change Drawer	As designated in writing by the City Clerk/Executive Assistant	$100

	Change Drawer	As designated in writing by the Parks and Recreation Director	$250

	Development Services Fund	 	 

	Change Drawer	As designated in writing by the Community Development Director	$150

(Ord. 18-19 § 1; Ord. 20-10 § 1; Ord. 08-08 § 2; Ord. 7-97 § 2)


Chapter 3.10 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

Article I. Sales and Use Tax

3.10.010    Imposition of a sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

3.10.020    Administration – Collection.

3.10.030    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.10.040    Violation – Penalty.

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax

3.10.050    Imposition of an additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

3.10.060    Administration – Collection.

3.10.070    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.10.080    Violation – Penalty.

Article III. Sales and Use Tax for Affordable and Supportive Housing

3.10.090    Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable and supportive housing.

3.10.100    Purpose of tax.

3.10.110    Administration – Collection.

3.10.120    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.10.130    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. Sales and Use Tax


3.10.010 Imposition of a sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

(1) Imposition. There is imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the State sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection (1) of this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price of value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales and/or use tax imposed by King County pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), the rate imposed by this chapter shall be as provided in RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The rate as of the effective date of this chapter shall be 425/1000th of one percent. (Ord. 9-97 § 1)


3.10.020 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 9-97 § 2)


3.10.030 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 9-97 § 3)


3.10.040 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 9-97 § 4)

Article II. Additional Sales and Use Tax


3.10.050 Imposition of an additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

(1) Imposition. In addition to other taxes which may be imposed by the City, there is imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon the same taxable events and upon which the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) is levied, as the same exists or may hereafter by amended, and as specifically authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section, which shall be in addition to the rate of tax permitted to be imposed in City ordinance pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, that if King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030 (2), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, at a rate that is equal to or greater than the rate imposed under this chapter, then said County shall receive 15 percent of the City tax; provided further, that if King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030 (2), at a rate that is less than the rate imposed under this chapter, the County shall receive that amount of revenues from the City tax equal to 15 percent of the rate of tax imposed by the County. (Ord. 10-97 § 1)


3.10.060 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 10-97 § 2)


3.10.070 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 10-97 § 3)


3.10.080 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 10-97 § 5)

Article III. Sales and Use Tax for Affordable and Supportive Housing


3.10.090 Imposition of sales and use tax for affordable and supportive housing.

(1) Imposition. There is imposed a sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.540, upon every taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the State sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of the tax imposed by subsection (1) of this section shall be the maximum rate permitted to cities under RCW 82.14.540, and shall expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed.

(3) Calculation. The maximum amount to be received by the City from the tax each year shall be equal to the taxable retail sales within the City limits of Covington in State fiscal year 2019 multiplied by the tax rate. The tax imposed in subsection (1) of this section shall be deducted from the amount of tax otherwise required to be collected or paid to the Department of Revenue (DOR) under Chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. DOR shall collect and administer the tax on behalf of the City of Covington at no cost to the City. In the event that the amount of tax exceeds the maximum amount allowed to the City under RCW 82.14.540, any excess shall be remitted to the State Treasurer in accordance with RCW 82.14.540. (Ord. 14-19 § 1)


3.10.100 Purpose of tax.

The City may use the moneys collected by the tax imposed under CMC 3.10.090 or bonds issued only for the following purposes:

(1) Acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services under RCW 71.24.385; and

(2) Providing the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing; and

(3) Providing rental assistance to tenants.

The housing and services provided under this section may only be provided to persons whose income is at or below 60 percent of the median income of the City. (Ord. 14-19 § 1)


3.10.110 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.540. (Ord. 14-19 § 1)


3.10.120 Inspection of records – Agreement with the Department of Revenue.

The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 14-19 § 1)


3.10.130 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 14-19 § 1)


Chapter 3.15 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.15.010    One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.15.020    Additional one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.15.030    County to collect payment.

3.15.040    Tax is obligation of seller.

3.15.050    Tax lien on real property.

3.15.060    Duties of County Treasurer.

3.15.070    Payment due.

3.15.080    Refunds.

3.15.090    Real Estate Excise Tax First Quarter of One Percent Fund.

3.15.100    Real Estate Excise Tax Second Quarter of One Percent Fund.

3.15.110    Violation – Penalty.


3.15.010 One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property in the City constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate taxes as imposed by the State under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW, and Chapter 458-61 WAC, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed.

(3) Use of Proceeds. All revenues generated from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City Manager or authorized designee into the City’s Real Estate Excise Tax First Quarter of One Percent Fund and shall be used solely for financing capital projects, as defined in RCW 82.46.010(6), as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, specified in the Capital Facilities Plan element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan or for housing relocation assistance under RCW 59.18.440 and 59.18.450. (Ord. 21-10 § 1; Ord. 26-05 § 1; Ord. 11-97 § 1)


3.15.020 Additional one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.

(1) Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, and occurring within the corporate limits of the City. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW.

(2) Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section, pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Use of Proceeds. Revenues generated from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City Manager or authorized designee into the City’s Real Estate Excise Tax Second Quarter of One Percent Fund to be used solely for the financing of capital projects specified in the Capital Facilities Plan element of a Comprehensive Plan approved by the City Council. (Ord. 21-10 § 2; Ord. 26-05 § 2; Ord. 11-97 § 2)


3.15.030 County to collect payment.

The County Treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this chapter. The County Treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this chapter in the County’s current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this chapter shall be distributed to the City monthly. (Ord. 11-97 § 3)


3.15.040 Tax is obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages, without the necessity of an election of remedies. (Ord. 11-97 § 4)


3.15.050 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. 11-97 § 5)


3.15.060 Duties of County Treasurer.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the County Treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County Department of Records and Elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the County Treasurer. (Ord. 11-97 § 6)


3.15.070 Payment due.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. (Ord. 11-97 § 7)


3.15.080 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the County Treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon and a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the County Treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the State has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. (Ord. 11-97 § 8)


3.15.090 Real Estate Excise Tax First Quarter of One Percent Fund.

There is created a fund to be known as the “Real Estate Excise Tax First Quarter of One Percent Fund” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the one quarter of one percent excise tax on real estate sales imposed pursuant to RCW 82.46.010. (Ord. 21-10 § 3)


3.15.100 Real Estate Excise Tax Second Quarter of One Percent Fund.

There is created a fund to be known as the “Real Estate Excise Tax Second Quarter of One Percent Fund” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed by RCW 82.46.035, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 21-10 § 4)


3.15.110 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. (Ord. 11-97 § 11)


Chapter 3.20 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.20.010    Gambling tax imposed.

3.20.020    Exemptions.

3.20.030    Administration of tax.

3.20.040    Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

3.20.050    Tax due date – Delinquency.

3.20.060    Financial records.

3.20.070    Definitions.

3.20.080    Unlawful acts.

3.20.090    Violation – Penalty.


3.20.010 Gambling tax imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, there is levied upon all persons, associations or organizations a tax on all gambling activities occurring within the City as permitted by State law at the following rates:

(1) Bingo or raffles at a rate of five percent of the gross revenues received therefrom, less the amount paid as prizes;

(2) Amusement games at a rate of two percent of the sum of the gross revenues received therefrom, less the amount paid as prizes, and which rate will generate an amount sufficient to pay the actual costs of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 9.46 RCW;

(3) Punchboards or pull-tabs at a rate of five percent of gross receipts. (Ord. 27-99 § 1; Ord. 14-97 § 1)


3.20.020 Exemptions.

No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter on bingo or amusement games when such gambling activities, or any combination thereof, are conducted by bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.0209, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, which organization has no paid operating or management personnel for the gambling activities and has gross income from bingo or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding $5,000 per year, less the amount paid as prizes. No tax shall be imposed on the first $10,000 of net proceeds from raffles conducted by bona fide charitable organizations. (Ord. 14-97 § 2)


3.20.030 Administration of tax.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by CMC 3.20.010 shall be by the City Clerk and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission. The City clerk is instructed and authorized to adopt appropriate reporting requirements, to ensure the effective administration of license holders exempt from the payment of the tax and to make such further rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-97 § 3)


3.20.040 Charitable, nonprofit organization – Declaration of intent to conduct gambling activity.

For the purpose of identifying the persons, associations and organizations that shall be subject to the tax imposed by CMC 3.20.010, any bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation intending to conduct or operate any bingo game, raffle or amusement game which requires licensing as provided in and authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, shall, prior to commencement of any such activity, file with the City Clerk a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity, together with a copy of the license issued in accordance with Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, as amended. Thereafter, for any period covered by such State license or any renewal thereof, any such licensed bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, file the City Clerk a sworn statement, on a form to be provided and prescribed by the City Clerk, for the purpose of ascertaining the tax due for the preceding quarterly period. (Ord. 14-97 § 4)


3.20.050 Tax due date – Delinquency.

(1) The tax imposed by CMC 3.20.010 shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor shall accompany such return and be made on or before the thirtieth day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued.

(2) For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, there shall be added a penalty(ies) as follows:

(a) If paid on or before the fifteenth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $5.00;

(b) If paid prior to the thirtieth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

(c) Failure to make payment by the thirtieth day of the second month succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued shall result in a penalty of 20 percent with a minimum penalty of $15.00. (Ord. 14-97 § 5)


3.20.060 Financial records.

It shall be the responsibility of all officers, directors and managers of any corporation conducting any gambling activities subject to taxation under this chapter to make available at all reasonable times such financial records as the City Clerk may require to determine full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 14-97 § 6)


3.20.070 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall the same meanings as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may after be amended. (Ord. 14-97 § 7)


3.20.080 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person liable for the tax imposed by ordinance to fail to pay the tax when due or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in connection with the return. (Ord. 14-97 § 8)


3.20.090 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 14-97 § 9)


Chapter 3.25 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS OR OBLIGATIONS OF THE CITY

Sections:

Article I. Procedure for the Payment of Claims Made Against City Prior to Council Approval 

3.25.010    Established – Payment of claims.

3.25.020    Official bonds required.

3.25.030    Internal control.

3.25.040    Approval by Council.

3.25.050    Disapproval by Council.

Article II. Payment of Obligations – Authority

3.25.060    Payments made by check – Authorized signatories.

3.25.070    Audit committee established – Duties.

Article I. Procedure for the Payment  of Claims Made Against City Prior  to Council Approval


3.25.010 Established – Payment of claims.

The City’s finance manager may issue checks in payment of claims before the City Council has acted to approve such claims, providing that the conditions of this chapter and RCW 42.24.180 have been met. (Ord. 34-97 § 1)


3.25.020 Official bonds required.

The auditing officer and the officer designated to sign the checks must, prior to being able to issue checks without Council approval, each have furnished an official bond for the faithful discharge of their duties in an amount not less than $50,000. (Ord. 34-97 § 2)


3.25.030 Internal control.

Before any checks may be issued prior to Council approval, the Council shall adopt contracting, hiring and disbursing policies that implement effective internal control over the issuance of any checks. (Ord. 34-97 § 3)


3.25.040 Approval by Council.

The City Council shall review the documentation supporting any claim paid pursuant to this chapter, and shall approve all checks issued in payment of such claims at a regularly scheduled public meeting within one month of the date of issuance of the check. (Ord. 34-97 § 4)


3.25.050 Disapproval by Council.

If, upon review, the City Council shall disapprove any claim paid, the officers of the City who are designated by statute to sign the checks shall jointly cause the disapproved claims to be recognized as receivables of the City of Covington and shall pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the City Council is satisfied and approves the claims. (Ord. 34-97 § 5)

Article II. Payment of Obligations – Authority


3.25.060 Payments made by check – Authorized signatories.

As authorized by RCW 35A.40.020, payment of claims or obligations of the City shall be by check. All City checks shall be drawn at the US Bank, Covington Branch, a qualified public depository. The City Manager, Finance Director and Council members authorized by resolution may sign City checks. Each City check shall be executed by two authorized signatories, with at least one of the signatories being either the City Manager or the Finance Director. (Ord. 11-11 § 4)


3.25.070 Audit committee established – Duties.

The City Council hereby creates a permanent audit committee of the City Council that shall consist of three Council members who shall be appointed by Council motion. It shall be the duty of the audit committee to review all of the finances and accounting of the City in cooperation with the City’s Finance Director. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)


Chapter 3.30 UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFIT ACCOUNT

Sections:

3.30.010    Unemployment insurance benefit account – Created – Purpose – Deposits.


3.30.010 Unemployment insurance benefit account – Created – Purpose – Deposits.

There is created a new account entitled unemployment insurance benefit account which shall be utilized for the reimbursement of unemployment benefits paid by the Employment Security Department of the State and chargeable to the City. Deposits shall be made to such account from City operating funds on a monthly basis or other intervals as determined by the City Council.

(1) Expenditures. Expenditures from such account shall be made from time to time as required by law to reimburse the Employment Security Department of the State for unemployment benefits paid by it and chargeable to the City.

(2) Administration. The City Manager or designee is authorized and directed to establish and administer such account and to make such temporary investments of account proceeds in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 35-97 § 1)


Chapter 3.35 ACCOUNTING FUNDS

Sections:

3.35.010    Creation of a General Fund.

3.35.020    Creation of a Street Fund.

3.35.030    Creation of a Capital Investment Fund.

3.35.040    Creation of a Surface Water Management Fund.

3.35.050    Creation of an Equipment Rental Fund.

3.35.060    Creation of a Contingency Fund.

3.35.070    Repealed.

3.35.080    Creation of a Development Services Fund.

3.35.090    Creation of a Cumulative Reserve Fund.

3.35.100    Creation of a Custodial Fund.


3.35.010 Creation of a General Fund.

There is created a fund to be known as the General Fund, to be used to pay current expenses and liabilities of the City. (Ord. 37-97 § 1)


3.35.020 Creation of a Street Fund.

There is created a fund to be known as the Street Fund, to account for maintenance and improvement of the City’s street and traffic systems as outlined in Chapter 35.76 RCW. (Ord. 37-97 § 2)


3.35.030 Creation of a Capital Investment Fund.

There is created a fund to be known as the Capital Investment Fund, to be used to fund City capital improvement projects and other capital projects within the City. (Ord. 28-05 § 1; Ord. 33-01 § 3; Ord. 37-97 § 3)


3.35.040 Creation of a Surface Water Management Fund.

There is created a Surface Water Management Fund, to account for revenue and expense incurred for management control and accountability. (Ord. 37-97 § 4)


3.35.050 Creation of an Equipment Rental Fund.

There is created an Equipment Rental Fund to account for the purchase, repair, rental and replacement of equipment as required by RCW 35.21.088. (Ord. 37-97 § 7)


3.35.060 Creation of a Contingency Fund.

There is created a Contingency Fund, to account for provision of monies with which to meet any municipal expense as authorized by RCW 35A.33.145. (Ord. 37-97 § 13)


3.35.070 Creation of the Parks, Recreation and Community Services Fund.

Repealed by Ord. 24-16. (Ord. 27-05 § 1)


3.35.080 Creation of a Development Services Fund.

There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Development Services Fund, to be used to fund the operations of the City’s Development Services Department. (Ord. 27-05 § 2)


3.35.090 Creation of a Cumulative Reserve Fund.

There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Cumulative Reserve Fund, to be used for the purposes of creating a revenue stabilization fund for future operations. (Ord. 19-10 § 1)


3.35.100 Creation of a Custodial Fund.

There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Custodial Fund, to be used for the purposes of accounting for assets held in a custodial capacity. (Ord. 08-19 § 1)


Chapter 3.40 UNEMPLOYMENT RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.40.010    Established.

3.40.020    Source of funds.

3.40.030    Purpose.


3.40.010 Established.

There is hereby established and created an Unemployment Reserve Fund which shall be fund No. 501. (Ord. 58-97 § 1)


3.40.020 Source of funds.

The money to be deposited into the Unemployment Reserve Fund shall be the City’s contribution made to fund the City’s self-insured unemployment compensation reserve. (Ord. 58-97 § 1)


3.40.030 Purpose.

Monies from the Unemployment Reserve Fund shall be used for the payment of unemployment claims filed by City employees, as required by State law. (Ord. 58-97 § 1)


Chapter 3.45 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUND

Sections:

3.45.010    Established.

3.45.020    Source of funds.

3.45.030    Purpose.


3.45.010 Established.

There is hereby established and created a community development block grant fund which shall be fund No. 103. (Ord. 58-97 § 3)


3.45.020 Source of funds.

The money to be deposited into the community development block grant fund shall be grant monies received from the Federal government which are designated as community development block grant funds. (Ord. 58-97 § 3)


3.45.030 Purpose.

Monies from the community development block grant fund shall be used for the purposes stated in and consistent with the terms and conditions of the grant described in CMC 3.45.020. (Ord. 58-97 § 3)


Chapter 3.50 ADMISSION TAX

Sections:

3.50.010    Tax levied.

3.50.020    Definitions.

3.50.030    Certificate of registration.

3.50.040    Exemptions.

3.50.050    Printing of admission charges.

3.50.060    Collection and remittance of taxes.

3.50.070    Transient business – Remittance.

3.50.080    Inspection of records.

3.50.090    Violators/violations.

3.50.100    Violation – Penalty.


3.50.010 Tax levied.

Except as provided in CMC 3.50.040, there is hereby levied and imposed a tax upon every admission charge in any place within the City. The amount of said tax shall be $0.01 on $0.40 or fraction thereof paid for the admission charge. (Ord. 5-99 § 1; Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.020 Definitions.

As used within this chapter, the following words and terms have the following definitions:

(1) “Admission charge” means, in addition to the usual and ordinary meaning, a monetary charge for an event open to the public, including, but not limited to the following:

(a) A charge made for season tickets or subscriptions;

(b) A cover charge, or a charge made for use of seats and tables reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations;

(c) A charge made for food and refreshment in any place where free entertainment, recreation, or amusement is provided;

(d) A charge made for rental or use of equipment or facilities for purposes of recreation or amusement; if the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge;

(e) A charge made for admission to any theater, movie theater, cabaret, tavern, dance hall, circus, amphitheater, private club, auditorium, observation tower, stadium, athletic pavilion or field, baseball or athletic park, golf course, or any similar place, and includes equipment to which persons are admitted for purposes of recreation such as merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, roller coaster, go-carts, and other amusement rides, whether such rides are restricted to tracks or not;

(f) Automobile parking charge if the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in the automobile;

(g) A sum of money referred to as a “donation” or similar payment which must be paid before entrance is allowed;

(h) The amount of an increase in the price of refreshments, service or merchandise in a place if no fixed admission charge or cover charge is imposed, but the price charged for refreshments, service or merchandise is higher during the time entertainment or dancing is provided than at other times.

(2) “Movie theater” means any building or structure used to provide entertainment through projection of motion pictures.

(3) “Nonprofit organization” means any organization registered under Chapter 24.03 RCW.

(4) “Nonprofit tax-exempt organization” means any organization, corporation or association exempt from Federal taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(5) “Person” means any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock association, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit whether mutual, cooperative or fraternal.

(6) “Place” includes, but is not limited to, any theaters, cabaret, tavern, dance hall, amphitheater, private club, auditorium, observation tower, stadium, athletic pavilion or field, baseball or athletic park, golf course, or any similar place, and includes equipment to which persons are admitted for purposes of recreation such as merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, roller coasters, go carts, amusement rides and observation towers within the City limits.

(7) “Secondary or elementary school” means any public or private primary, middle school, junior high school, high school. 

(8) “Special events activity” is any activity conducted within the City for which a special events permit is required.

(9) “Subscription” means in addition to its usual and ordinary meaning, annual membership dues or fees in an organization whose principal purpose is to present theatrical or musical performance for its members.

(10) “Successor” means any person who shall directly or indirectly purchase or succeed to a business in any manner whatsoever; any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person or persons is surety and guarantor.

(11) “Transient” means temporary, short-lived, nonpermanent or nonlasting. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.030 Certificate of registration.

Every person, firm, association or corporation, prior to conducting or operating any event, or place for entrance, to which an admission charge is made shall complete a certificate of registration which shall continue valid until December 31st of the same year in which it was issued. The application for certificate of registration, or duplicate copy of it, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the ticket office or box office where tickets of admission are sold. Whenever registration is made for the purpose of operating or conducting a temporary or transitory event by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the building, lots or place where the activity is to be conducted, both the person conducting the event and the owner, lessee or custodian of the location of the event shall register for this event. Such owner, lessee or custodian, shall be held jointly liable for collection and remittance of the said tax. The owner, lessee and/or custodian shall be responsible for the remittance of the entire admission tax unless the tax is paid by the conductor of the event. (Ord. 5-99 § 2; Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.040 Exemptions.

The activities of elementary and secondary schools, churches, religious organizations and nonprofit organizations activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. City of Covington sponsored and co-sponsored events shall also be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. For-profit organizations participating as part of an activity sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization, shall not be exempt from this chapter, unless the nonprofit organization retains 10 percent of the gross proceeds from the for-profit operations and the event at which admission charges are collected does not exceed seven days in any one calendar year. (Ord. 5-99 § 3; Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.050 Printing of admission charges.

(1) The established price of admission, any nonCity tax, City tax, and the total price at which each admission ticket or card is sold, shall be conspicuously and indelibly printed or written on the face or back of that part of the ticket which is to be retained by the management of the place to which the admission is gained. This requirement may be waived in regard to temporary or transient events, which due to time make it impossible to print up admission tickets. This waiver must be reviewed and authorized by the City Clerk’s office prior to authorizing the event.

(2) Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to sell an admission ticket or card without having the admission price and tax levied printed on the ticket. Penalties include, but are not limited to, suspension or loss of certificate of registration. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.060 Collection and remittance of taxes.

Any person, including any municipal or quasi-municipal corporation, who receives any payment for any admission charge on which a tax is levied under this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax from the person making the admission payment and shall remit the same to the City as provided in this section. The tax required to be collected under this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted to the clerk as herein provided.

(1) Liability for Tax Not Collected. Any person required to collect the tax imposed under this chapter who fails to collect same, or who collects the same but fails to remit the same to the clerk in the manner prescribed by this chapter, shall be liable to the City for the amount of such tax and shall, unless remittance is made as herein required, be guilty of a violation of this chapter whether such failure is the result of his own act or the result of the acts or conditions beyond the person’s control.

(2) Remittance to the City. The tax imposed under this chapter shall be collected at the time the admission charge is paid and shall be reported and remitted by the person receiving the tax to the City in monthly returns as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Return Required. Any person receiving any payment for such admission shall make out a return upon such form and setting forth such information as the City may require, showing the amount of the tax upon admission for which he is liable for the preceding month, and shall sign and transmit the same to the City with remittance for the amount; provided, that the City may in its discretion require verified annual returns from any person receiving admission payments setting forth such additional information as he may deem necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable. Returns are due by the fifteenth day following the end of the preceding month. Returns filed more than 10 days late are subject to a 10 percent late penalty and interest at 12 percent per annum. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.070 Transient business – Remittance.

Whenever any theater, circus, show, exhibition, entertainment, amusement or special events activity makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax herein levied, and the charge is of a temporary or transitory nature, the City may require the return and remittance of the admission tax immediately upon its collection, at the conclusion of the series of performances or exhibitions or at such other times as the City shall determine. Temporary or transient events shall be required to post a deposit for admission tax of $500.00 for every day the event or activity is scheduled, unless waived by the City Manager. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.080 Inspection of records.

The books, records, and accounts of any person, pertaining to the amount of any admission charges, admission tax, interest or penalty payable shall be at all reasonable times subject to examination and audit by the City Clerk, Finance Director, and/or State Auditor in accordance with and to the extent authorized by applicable law. All such records shall be retained and be available for such inspection for a period of at least six years. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.090 Violators/violations.

Any person who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of this chapter including reporting and posting requirements or aids or abets the same, whether present or absent, and every person who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such violation is, and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter, subject to penalty, and may be proceeded against as such. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


3.50.100 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Violation a Misdemeanor. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and is a misdemeanor.

(2) Collection of Tax by Civil Action. Any fee or tax due and unpaid and delinquent under the provisions of this chapter and all penalties thereon, may be collected by civil action, which remedies shall be in addition to any and all other existing remedies. (Ord. 80-98 § 1)


Chapter 3.55 REGISTRATION OF BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.55.010    Definitions.

3.55.020    Findings.

3.55.030    Adoption of registration system.

3.55.040    Statement of transfer restrictions.


3.55.010 Definitions.

The following words have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

(1) “Bond” or “bonds” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(1), as the same may be amended from time to time.

(2) “City” means the City of Covington, Washington.

(3) “Fiscal agencies” means the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the State of Washington serving as such at any given time.

(4) “Obligation” or “obligations” has the meaning defined in RCW 39.46.020(3), as the same from time to time may be amended.

(5) “Registrar” means the person, persons or entity designated by the City to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter or under an ordinance of the City authorizing the issuance of such bonds or obligations.

(6) “Treasurer” means the treasurer of the City. (Ord. 25-99 § 1)


3.55.020 Findings.

The City Council of the City finds that it is in the City’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the City’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. 25-99 § 2)


3.55.030 Adoption of registration system.

The City adopts the following system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations.

(1) All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year, on which the interest is intended to be excluded from gross income for Federal income tax purposes, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter.

(2) Method of Registration. The registration of all City bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:

(a) A book-entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the registrar, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or

(b) Recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the re-issuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond or obligation to the new owner.

No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, are recorded on the books of the registrar.

(3) Denominations. Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and re-issued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on re-issuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are re-issued.

(4) Appointment of Registrar. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the treasurer shall be the registrar for all registered interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading without a fixed maturity date or maturing one year or less after issuance and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other City bonds and obligations with a fixed maturity date or maturing more than one year after issuance.

(5) Duties of Registrar. The registrar shall serve as the City’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.

The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the City and the registrar, except that (i) when the fiscal agencies serve as registrar, the City adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee of the State of Washington and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, obligations and compensation of the registrar and (ii) when the treasurer serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required.

In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agencies and the bonds and obligations are assignable, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds and obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:

(a) Making payments of principal and interest;

(b) Printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;

(c) Specifying record and payment dates;

(d) Determining denominations;

(e) Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations;

(f) Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction;

(g) Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and

(h) Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the City may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 25-99 § 3)


3.55.040 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the City subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 25-99 § 4)


Chapter 3.60 CITY CREDIT CARD USE

Sections:

3.60.010    City-authorized credit cards.

3.60.020    Definitions.

3.60.030    Issuance, use and control of credit cards.


3.60.010 City-authorized credit cards.

City of Covington credit card usage is intended to provide an efficient method for the purchase of goods and services when the use of the City’s purchasing system is not possible or practical. The City Manager or designee shall implement the system set forth in this chapter for the distribution, authorization and control, credit limits, and payment of bills related to the use of credit cards by City officials and employees. (Ord. 03-06 § 1; Ord. 21-00 § 1)


3.60.020 Definitions.

As used in the chapter, “credit card” means a card or device issued under an arrangement pursuant to which the issuer gives to a cardholder the privilege of obtaining credit from the issuer. (Ord. 21-00 § 2)


3.60.030 Issuance, use and control of credit cards.

The City Council hereby adopts the following policies for the issuance, use, and control of credit cards by City officials and employees:

(1) The Finance Director shall develop and implement procedures for the distribution, authorization and control, credit limits and payment of bills related to the use of credit cards by City officials and employees which should include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) Distribution. Credit cards may be issued to those City officials and employees who, in the opinion of the City Manager or designee, have job responsibilities which would benefit or otherwise be more effectively facilitated by the use of a credit card.

In addition, credit cards may be checked out to those employees when, in the opinion of the Finance Director, the use of the credit card meets the criteria of the credit card policy and would benefit the City and said employee has not been issued an individual credit card.

(b) Credit Limits. The credit limit on each card issued shall not exceed $2,500.

(c) Approved Uses for Credit Card Purchases. Credit cards may be used for the following purchases:

(i) Fuel, supplies and equipment only if a purchase order cannot be issued or an open charge account is not available. Fuel purchase is limited to City-owned vehicles when on travel status.

(ii) Registrations.

(iii) Travel and/or training expenses.

(iv) Expenses related to recreational programs when in a travel status or when normal purchasing procedures are not practical.

(v) Other items specifically authorized by the City Manager or designee.

(d) Purchasing Restrictions. Credit cards may not be used for cash advances of any kind, for the payment of invoices or statements, for personal use or for any expense not otherwise allowed under law and City policies.

(e) Reporting Credit Card Charges. Credit card charges, including all receipts and supporting documents and a properly coded and executed claims request, will be reported to the Finance Department at the earliest convenience of the official or employee responsible for the purchase (the “cardholder”).

(f) Unauthorized Use of Credit Cards. Any charge against the credit card not allowed following a post audit shall be paid by the cardholder by check, U.S. currency or salary deduction. Finance charges resulting from a cardholder’s failure to submit all necessary receipts and supporting documents within the time allowed will be considered disallowed charges and will be charged to the cardholder. If for any reason disallowed charges are not repaid before the charge card billing is due and payable, the City shall have a prior lien against and a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the cardholder up to an amount of the disallowed charges and interest at the same rate as charged by the issuing credit card company. The City shall have unlimited authority to revoke use of any charge card issued for failure to repay a disallowed charge or failure to adhere to the City’s credit card policies and procedures. The responsible cardholder shall also be subject to disciplinary action. (Ord. 03-06 § 2; Ord. 21-00 § 3)


Chapter 3.65 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

3.65.010    Administration of LID.

3.65.020    LID petitions to be filed with City Clerk.

3.65.030    Officer designated to make preliminary estimates.

3.65.040    Penalty for delinquent assessments and installments.

3.65.050    Commencement of foreclosure proceedings.

3.65.060    Acceleration of installments.

3.65.070    Maintenance and operation of the guaranty fund.

3.65.080    Minimum balance prescribed for the guaranty fund.

3.65.090    Use of guaranty fund to pay local improvement district obligations.

3.65.100    Taxation for the guaranty fund.

3.65.110    Use of guaranty fund to pay arbitrage rebate.

3.65.120    Ratification.


3.65.010 Administration of LID.

The City shall administer and prosecute all actions and proceedings related to its local improvement districts in substantial compliance with the laws of the State of Washington, including Chapters 35.43 through 35.54 RCW, as the same may be amended from time to time. No City action taken in substantial compliance with then-applicable State statutes ever shall be invalidated for failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 64-03 § 1)


3.65.020 LID petitions to be filed with City Clerk.

Any petitions required by Chapter 35.43 RCW (or any successor statutes) to be filed with the City to initiate the formation of a local improvement district shall be filed with the City Clerk (or such City officer who may hereafter assume the duties of the City Clerk). (Ord. 64-03 § 2)


3.65.030 Officer designated to make preliminary estimates.

The City Manager is designated as the City’s officer responsible for taking, or causing to be taken, such actions as are required to be taken by RCW 35.43.130, as such statute may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 64-03 § 3)


3.65.040 Penalty for delinquent assessments and installments.

Each assessment or installment thereof that is collected by the City pursuant to Chapter 35.49 RCW shall be subject, at the time of delinquency, to a charge of 12 percent penalty levied on both principal and interest due upon that installment. (Ord. 64-03 § 4)


3.65.050 Commencement of foreclosure proceedings.

All assessment lien foreclosure proceedings initiated by the City under Chapter 35.50 RCW shall be commenced for purposes of RCW 35.50.030 on or before October 1st of each year; provided, any delay in commencing an assessment lien foreclosure proceeding beyond October 1st in any given year shall not preclude the City from commencing such proceeding on any date thereafter, and for purposes of RCW 35.50.030, such later date shall be deemed to be the other date fixed by general ordinance pursuant to RCW 35.50.030. (Ord. 64-03 § 5)


3.65.060 Acceleration of installments.

Upon the failure to pay the City any installment of a local improvement district assessment, when due, the entire assessment shall be due and payable as of the date of such delinquency, and the collection thereof, including interest and penalties as applicable, shall be enforced by foreclosure pursuant to Chapter 35.50 RCW. (Ord. 64-03 § 6)


3.65.070 Maintenance and operation of the guaranty fund.

The City shall maintain and operate its guaranty fund in accordance with the laws contained in Chapter 35.54 RCW and such other laws that specifically or generally apply to the guaranty fund or obligations secured thereby, as the same may be amended from time to time. Obligations guaranteed by the guaranty fund shall include, in addition to those obligations referred to in Chapter 35.54 RCW, obligations issued under Chapter 39.50 RCW in anticipation of the issuance of local improvement district bonds. (Ord. 64-03 § 7)


3.65.080 Minimum balance prescribed for the guaranty fund.

The City shall maintain a balance in the guaranty fund during each calendar year that is at least equal to the interest scheduled to come due on all outstanding obligations guaranteed by the guaranty fund during the following calendar year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may, with respect to the obligations issued on account of any local improvement district, require by ordinance that the minimum balance in the guaranty fund on account of such obligations be greater than is otherwise required by the preceding sentence. (Ord. 64-03 § 8)


3.65.090 Use of guaranty fund to pay local improvement district obligations.

If, prior to an interest payment date of obligations secured by the guaranty fund, the City Finance Director (or other City official then responsible for overseeing the City’s funds and accounts) determines that there is insufficient money in the local improvement fund or other fund or account established to pay debt service on those obligations to pay the interest or principal and interest scheduled to come due on that interest payment date, then the City Finance Director (or other City official then responsible for overseeing the City’s funds and accounts) shall withdraw from the guaranty fund and apply an amount sufficient to pay that deficiency on that interest payment date. To the extent the amount available in the guaranty fund on such interest payment date is not sufficient to cure the deficiency, the City Finance Director (or other City official then responsible for overseeing the City’s funds and accounts) shall issue interest bearing warrants drawn on the guaranty fund as prescribed by statute. This section is intended to supplement Chapter 35.54 RCW and to prevent defaults in the payment of obligations secured by the guaranty fund. (Ord. 64-03 § 9)


3.65.100 Taxation for the guaranty fund.

Whenever warrants drawing interest are issued by the City against the guaranty fund to meet any proper liability of such fund, at the time of making its next annual budget and tax levy, the City shall provide for the levying of a sum sufficient, with other resources of that fund, to pay warrants so issued during the preceding fiscal year and to establish an appropriate balance therein. This section is intended to implement Chapter 35.54 RCW and assure that a balance considered appropriate by the City Council is maintained in the guaranty fund. (Ord. 64-03 § 10)


3.65.110 Use of guaranty fund to pay arbitrage rebate.

To the extent that the City is required by Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any successor Federal law, to make arbitrage rebate payments to the U.S. Treasury on account of the investment of the guaranty fund, such payments may be made from amounts on deposit in the guaranty fund. The City may establish subaccounts within the guaranty fund from time to time, if necessary or desirable for purposes of accounting for the investment of money therein. (Ord. 64-03 § 11)


3.65.120 Ratification.

All acts heretofore taken by the City in connection with the formation of local improvement districts, the levying, collection and enforcement of special assessments therein, and the operation and maintenance of the guaranty fund, are ratified and approved. (Ord. 64-03 § 12)


Chapter 3.70 UTILITY TAX

Sections:

3.70.010    Utility tax.

3.70.020    Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

3.70.030    Definitions.

3.70.040    Occupations subject to tax – Amount.

3.70.050    Tax year.

3.70.060    Exceptions and deductions.

3.70.070    Monthly installments.

3.70.080    Taxpayer’s records.

3.70.090    Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full.

3.70.100    Penalty for delinquent payment.

3.70.110    Overpayment of tax.

3.70.120    Noncompliance – Penalty.

3.70.130    Appeal.

3.70.140    Finance Director to make rules.

3.70.150    Tax rebate.


3.70.010 Utility tax.

The tax provided for in this chapter shall be known as the “utility tax,” and is levied upon the privilege of conducting an electric energy, natural or manufactured gas, solid waste, surface water management, telephone, or cable television business within the City of Covington effective February 1, 2008. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.020 Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

All revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the specific funds as referenced herein, and shall be used for the funding of City services or capital requirements as the Council shall direct through its annual budget process and as are authorized by the respective funds. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this section shall have the indicated meanings.

(1) “Cable television services” means the transmission of video programming and associated non-video signals to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with video programming.

(2) “Cellular telephone service” means any two-way voice and data telephone or similar communications system based in whole or in substantial part on wireless radio communications, including cellular mobile service, and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services including specialized mobile radio, personal communications services, and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology that accomplishes a purpose substantially similar to cellular mobile service. Cellular telephone service is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter.

(3) “Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, directory advertising and lease of telephone street directories, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which may be provided by persons not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80, and for which a separate charge is made. Transmission of communication through cellular telephones is classified as “telephone business” rather than “competitive telephone service.”

(4) “Finance Director” means the Finance Director of the City of Covington, Washington, or his or her designee.

(5) “Gas distribution business” means the business of operating a plant or system of the production or distribution for hire or sale and/or for the wheeling of gas, whether manufactured or natural.

(6) “Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the performance of the particular business involved, including gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, and receipts (including all sums earned or charged, whether received or not) by reason of investment in the business engaged in (excluding rentals, receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of real property or any interest therein, and proceeds from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidences of indebtedness, or stocks and the like), all without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, interest or discount paid, delivery costs or any expenses whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses.

(7) “Light and power business” means the business of operating a plant or system for the generation, production or distribution of electrical energy for hire or sale and/or for the wheeling of electricity for others.

(8) “Pager service” means service provided by means of an electronic device which has the ability to send or receive voice or digital messages transmitted through the local telephone network, via satellite or any other form of voice or data transmission. “Pager service” is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter.

(9) “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity of any type engaged in a business subject to taxation under this chapter.

(10) “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, sewage sludge, demolition and construction waste, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and recyclable materials.

(11) “Solid waste collection business” means every person who receives solid waste or recyclable materials for transfer, storage, or disposal, including, but not limited to, all collection services, public or private solid waste disposal sites, transfer stations, and similar operations.

(12) “Surface water management service” means those services provided by the City of Covington or any business that includes, but is not limited to, basin planning, facilities maintenance, surface water run-off regulation, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and storm water quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, and surface water facility design and construction.

(13) “Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data, pager or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. The term includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Telephone business” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service or cable television service, or other providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.040 Occupations subject to tax – Amount. 

(1) Light and Power (Electricity). There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged or carrying on the sale, delivery, or distribution of a light and power business in the City of Covington a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due.

(2) Telephone. There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in or carrying on a telephone business in the City of Covington a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due.

(3) Gas. There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in or carrying on a gas distribution business in the City of Covington a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due.

(4) Solid Waste. There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in or carrying on a solid waste collection service in the City of Covington a tax equal to eight percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due.

(5) Cable Television. There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in or carrying on a cable television service in the City of Covington a tax equal to eight percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due.

(6) Surface Water Management. There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in or carrying on a surface water management service in the City of Covington a tax equal to eight percent of the total gross income derived from the operation of such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due. (Ord. 13-15 § 1; Ord. 08-12 § 1; Ord. 14-11 § 1; Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.050 Tax year.

The tax year for purposes of this utility tax shall commence February 1, 2008, and end December 31, 2008, and thereafter shall commence on January 1st and end on December 31st each year. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.060 Exceptions and deductions.

There is excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed:

(1) That part of the total gross income derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or laws of the United States and the constitution or laws of the State of Washington.

(2) Income derived from that portion of network telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065, which represents charges to another telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services; or for access to, or charges for, interstate services; or charges for network telephone service that is purchased for the purpose of resale.

(3) Adjustments made to a billing or customer account in order to reverse a billing or charge that was not properly a debt of the customer.

(4) Cash discounts allowed and actually granted to customers of the taxpayer during the tax year.

(5) Uncollectible debts written off the taxpayer’s books during the tax year. If subsequently collected, the income shall be reported for the period in which collected. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.070 Monthly installments. 

The tax imposed by CMC 3.70.040 shall be due and payable in monthly installments, and remittance therefor shall be made on or before the last day of the month following the end of the monthly period in which the tax is accrued. Quarterly returns may be allowed upon agreement of a quarterly payment schedule and written approval from the Finance Director. Annual returns for smaller entities may be allowed upon written approval from the Finance Director. On or before said due date, the taxpayer shall file with the Finance Director a written return upon such form and setting forth such information as the Finance Director shall reasonably require relating to the accurate computation and collection of this tax, together with the payment of the amount. (Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.080 Taxpayer’s records. 

Each taxpayer shall keep records reflecting the amount of the taxpayer’s gross income on sales and services within the City, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times for the inspection of the Finance Director to verify information provided on any utility tax return, or to determine whether such return is required to be filed. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.090 Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full. 

If a taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make his return as and when required by this chapter, the Finance Director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax payable under provisions of CMC 3.70.040, and to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be the tax and be immediately due and payable, together with penalty and interest. Delinquent taxes, including any penalties, are subject to an interest charge of 12 percent per year on the unpaid balance from the date any such taxes became due as provided in CMC 3.70.070. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.100 Penalty for delinquent payment.

If a person subject to this tax fails to pay any tax required by this chapter within 15 days after the due date thereof, there shall be added to such tax a late charge of 10 percent of the amount of such tax. Any tax due under this chapter that is unpaid and all penalties thereon shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.110 Overpayment of tax. 

Money paid to the City through error, or otherwise not in payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, or in excess of such tax, shall, upon discovery, be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder; provided, however, that overpayments extending beyond one year prior to notification of the City shall not be refunded. If such taxpayer has ceased doing business in the City, any such overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.120 Noncompliance – Penalty.

(1) No person subject to this chapter shall fail or refuse to file tax returns or to pay tax when due, nor shall any person make a false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such tax return, or otherwise violate or refuse to comply with this chapter or with any rule promulgated pursuant to CMC 3.70.140. 

(2) In addition to the interest and late charges set forth in CMC 3.70.100, a willful violation of or failure to comply with this chapter is a civil infraction, subject to a fine of up to $250.00 for each day that a violation continues. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.130 Appeal. 

A taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the tax, penalties, interest, or civil infraction fine determined to be due by the Finance Director, under the provisions of this chapter, may appeal such determination to the City of Covington City Manager or his or her designee. Such an appeal must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 20 days of the decision made by the Finance Director. The City Manager or his or her designee will issue a decision in writing within 30 days of receiving a written appeal. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the process outlined in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 01-09 § 5; Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.140 Finance Director to make rules. 

The Finance Director shall have the power to adopt and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with the law for the purposes of carrying out the provisions thereof. (Ord. 16-07 § 1)


3.70.150 Tax rebate. 

There is hereby granted to persons who meet the qualifications and requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section relief from the City utility tax as follows: 

For all utility bills billed to and paid by the person directly during a calendar year for utility service charges from any utility company who is subject to the utility tax of the City, the City shall pay to such person a reimbursement in an amount equal to the utility tax which was applied to such bills.

(1) To qualify for the relief set forth above, a person must be requesting reimbursement for the amount of City utility taxes imposed during the previous calendar year and must:

(a) Be 65 years of age or older at all times during any period for which reimbursement is requested, and meet the criteria of subsection (1)(c) of this section; or 

(b) Be disabled and unable to work, as defined under RCW 84.36.381 and WAC 458-16A-130 as they currently exist or are hereafter amended; and

(c) Have a combined income during the calendar year, or part thereof, for which a reimbursement is requested from all sources whatsoever, not exceeding the low income guidelines for the King County area as published by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. As used in this subsection, “income” means:

(i) “Combined disposable income,” as that term is defined in RCW 84.36.383, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time; and

(ii) The aggregate value of gifts and receipts received from all sources during the calendar year for which a reimbursement is requested; and

(d) Have been a resident of the dwelling unit within the City at all times during any period for which a reimbursement is requested, and have made the payment of City utility taxes from his or her income or resources.

(2) Claim Filing Procedures.

(a) All claims for relief under this section must be made annually and filed by April 30th of the calendar year following the calendar year, or portion thereof, for which a “reimbursement” is requested; and

(b) All bills for which claim is made under this section shall be submitted to the Director as part of the claim for relief; and

(c) All claims for relief shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the Director and certified by the claimant that, under the penalty of perjury, all information provided in the claim is true and correct; and

(d) The Director may require documents deemed necessary to establish proper proof of income level and/or disability status of the claimant, including, but not limited to, the two most recent months’ bank statements, two most recent years’ income tax statements, and a current physician’s statement or supplemental security income award letter. (Ord. 07-08 § 1; Ord. 16-07 § 1)


Chapter 3.75 CRIME REWARD FUND

Sections:

3.75.010    Established.

3.75.020    Source of funds.

3.75.030    Purpose.

3.75.040    Creation of specific rewards by resolution.

3.75.050    Payment of rewards.

3.75.060    Conflicting claims.

3.75.070    Reward offered.


3.75.010 Established.

There is hereby established and created a Crime Reward Fund in the City of Covington. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.020 Source of funds.

The revenue for deposit into the Crime Reward Fund shall be all contributions specifically transferred, donated, devised, or bequeathed to this fund. Unless otherwise indicated, these monies shall be deposited into a specific account maintained by the City. Monies that are donated, devised, or bequeathed to a specific reward already established from the Crime Reward Fund by resolution of the City Council, pursuant to CMC 3.75.040, may be added to that specific reward by a subsequent resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.030 Purpose.

Monies in the Crime Reward Fund shall be used for the payment of rewards under this chapter. The Crime Reward Fund shall be maintained as a general ledger account within the General Fund. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.040 Creation of specific rewards by resolution.

The City Council may, whenever in its opinion the public good requires it, pass a resolution that offers and pays a specific reward out of the Crime Reward Fund to any person or persons for information leading to:

(1) The arrest of a specified person or persons convicted of or charged with any criminal offense; or

(2) The arrest and conviction of a person or persons committing a specific criminal offense.

The City Council shall have the ultimate authority to determine which crimes are allocated a specific reward from the general Crime Reward Fund. The Council may consider requests for specific rewards from citizens, property owners, staff members or the Chief of Police. The City Council may establish the terms and conditions of eligibility for the reward established. The City Council shall at all times retain the final and exclusive right to determine who may be eligible for any reward, whether a reward should be split amongst more than one person, and whether the potential claimants are otherwise qualified to receive a reward. Elected City officials and/or City staff members and their families are not eligible to receive any rewards under this chapter. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.050 Payment of rewards.

Whenever a specific reward has been offered by the City pursuant to CMC 3.75.040, the person or persons providing the information leading to the arrest and/or conviction shall be entitled to the reward, unless payment would be contrary to public policy. Any person or persons claiming a reward under this chapter shall file a written claim therefor with the City Clerk at any time prior to the date which is 10 days after the conviction or other final disposition of the accused, unless the City Council finds good cause for extending the time period to file the claim. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.060 Conflicting claims.

When more than one claimant applies for the payment of any reward offered by the City, the City Council shall determine to whom the same shall be paid, and if to more than one person, in what proportion to each; and the City Council’s determination shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


3.75.070 Reward offered.

A reward is offered by the City for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons who shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any real or personal property belonging to the City. Said reward shall be paid from available monies in the Crime Reward Fund. Recommendations for payment of such rewards, including recommendations as to the amounts to be paid and the person or persons to whom payment should be made, shall be made by the Police Chief to the City Council, and when approved by the City Council, shall be paid from the Crime Reward Fund. (Ord. 05-05 § 1)


Chapter 3.80 MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION

Sections:

3.80.010    Purpose.

3.80.020    Definitions.

3.80.030    Residential target areas – Criteria – Designation.

3.80.040    Tax exemption – Eligibility requirements.

3.80.050    Application procedure.

3.80.060    Application review and issuance of conditional certificate – Denial – Appeal.

3.80.070    Extension of conditional certificate.

3.80.080    Application for final certificate.

3.80.090    Issuance of final certificate.

3.80.100    Annual certification and report.

3.80.110    Cancellation of tax exemption.


3.80.010 Purpose.

As provided for in Chapter 84.14 RCW, the purpose of this chapter is to provide limited eight- or 12-year exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for qualified multifamily housing located in residential target areas to:

(1) Encourage multifamily housing opportunities within the City;

(2) Stimulate new construction for multifamily housing in specified zoning districts to increase and improve housing opportunities; and

(3) Accomplish the planning goals required under the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW, as implemented by the City’s comprehensive plan.

Any one or a combination of these purposes may be furthered by the designation of a residential targeted area under this chapter. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.020 Definitions.

When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1) “Affordable housing” means the definition provided for in RCW 84.14.010.

(2) “Director” means the Director of the City of Covington Department of Community Development, or his or her designee.

(3) “Household” means the definition provided for in RCW 84.14.010.

(4) “Low-income household” means the definition provided for in RCW 84.14.010.

(5) “Mixed-use” means the definition provided for in Chapter 18.20 CMC.

(6) “Moderate-income household” means the definition provided for in RCW 84.14.010.

(7) “Multifamily housing” means one or more new multistory buildings designed for permanent residential occupancy, each with four or more dwelling units.

(8) “Owner” means the property owner of record.

(9) “Permanent residential occupancy” means the definition provided for in RCW 84.14.010.

(10) “Residential targeted area” means an area within a mixed-use center that has been so designated by the City as lacking sufficient, available, desirable, and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.030 Residential target areas – Criteria – Designation.

(1) Following notice and public hearing as prescribed in RCW 84.14.040, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, designate one or more residential targeted areas. Each residential target area must meet the following criteria, as determined by the City Council:

(a) The residential targeted area is within a designated mixed-use center;

(b) The residential targeted area lacks sufficient available, desirable, and convenient residential housing, including affordable housing, to meet the needs of the public who would be likely to live in the mixed-use center if affordable, desirable, attractive, and livable residences were available; and

(c) Providing additional housing opportunities, including affordable housing, in the residential targeted area will assist in achieving one or more of the following purposes:

(i) Encourage increased residential opportunities within the target area; or

(ii) Stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing; or

(iii) Encourage the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing.

(2) In designating a residential targeted area, the City Council may also consider other factors, including but not limited to:

(a) Additional housing, including affordable housing units, in the residential targeted area will attract and maintain an increase in the number of permanent residents;

(b) An increased permanent residential population in the residential targeted area will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under Chapter 36.70A RCW, as implemented through the City’s current and future comprehensive plans;

(c) Encouraging additional housing in the residential targeted area is consistent with public transportation plans; or

(d) Additional housing may contribute to revitalization of a distressed neighborhood or area within the City.

(3) At any time the City Council may, by ordinance, and in its sole discretion, amend or rescind the designation of a residential targeted area pursuant to the same procedural requirements as set forth in this chapter for original designation.

(4) The following areas are designated as residential targeted areas under this chapter:

(a) Town center district (TC) as defined in CMC 18.15.080(1).

(b) Mixed housing/office district (MHO) as defined in CMC 18.15.080(4).

(c) R-18 (multifamily residential) zone as defined in CMC 18.15.050(1)(b).

(5) If a part of any legal lot is within a designated residential targeted area then the entire lot shall be deemed to lie within such residential targeted area. Property located outside of, but adjacent to, the described areas is not designated as residential targeted areas. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.040 Tax exemption – Eligibility requirements.

(1) Eight-Year Exemption Project Eligibility. A project must meet all of the following requirements for consideration for an eight-successive-year ad valorem property tax exemption on the value of the improvements qualifying under this chapter beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption:

(a) Location. The project must be located within one of the residential target areas as designated in CMC 3.80.030.

(b) Size. The project must be multifamily housing consisting of at least four dwelling units within a multistory residential structure or mixed-use development. For new construction, a minimum of four new units must be constructed. For projects converting or rehabilitating existing multifamily housing, at least four additional multifamily units must be added to existing occupied multifamily housing. Existing multifamily housing that has been vacant for 12 months or more does not have to provide additional units so long as the project provides at least four units of new, converted, or rehabilitated multifamily housing.

(c) Permanent Residential Occupancy Requirement. At least 50 percent of the space in new, converted, or rehabilitated multifamily housing must be for permanent residential occupancy.

(d) Town Center District Diversity of Multifamily Unit Types. In addition to the other requirements in this subsection, projects located in the town center (TC) district shall be located in a multistory, mixed-use structure, as described in CMC 18.31.080, and shall provide a mix of apartment types and sizes for a variety of household types according to the following standards:

(i) A minimum of 50 percent of the total units shall vary in size from other units by at least 250 square feet; or no more than 50 percent of the total planned units shall have the same number of bedrooms.

(ii) In multifamily developments with 18 units or more, no more than 60 percent of the units may be studios or one-bedroom units.

(e) Completion Deadline. New construction of multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements must be scheduled to be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application, or within an extension of this time limit as authorized by the Director.

(f) Compliance with Guidelines and Standards. The project must comply with the City’s comprehensive plan, zoning, environment, and building codes and any other applicable regulations in effect at the time the application is approved.

(g) Vacancy Requirement. Existing dwelling units proposed for rehabilitation must have been unoccupied for a minimum of 12 months prior to submission of application and shall fail to comply with one or more requirements of the building code as set forth in Title 15. Applications for new construction cannot be submitted for vacant property upon which an occupied residential rental structure previously stood, unless a minimum of 12 months has elapsed from the time of the most recent occupancy.

(2) Twelve-Year Exemption Project Eligibility. A proposed project must meet all of the following requirements for consideration for a 12-successive-year ad valorem property tax exemption on the value of the improvements qualifying under this chapter beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption:

(a) All requirements set forth in subsection (1) of this section; and

(b) The applicant must commit to designating at least 20 percent of the multifamily housing units as affordable housing units to low- and moderate-income households and the property must satisfy that commitment and any additional affordability and income eligibility conditions adopted by the City under this chapter. Projects intended exclusively for owner occupancy may meet this standard through housing affordable to moderate-income households.

(i) If calculations for the minimum 20 percent of the multifamily housing units required under this subsection result in a fraction, then the minimum number of multifamily housing units for affordable housing shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

(ii) In projects granted 12-year exemptions, housing units identified for households with low, affordable, or moderate annual income shall continue to be made available to low, affordable, or moderate households for the length of the exemption period.

(c) The mix and configuration of housing units (e.g., studio, one-bedroom, two-bedroom) used to meet the requirement for affordable units under this subsection shall be substantially proportional to the mix and configuration of the total housing units in the project.

(d) When a project includes more than one building with multifamily housing units, all of the affordable housing units required in this subsection must not be located in the same building.

(3) Limits on Exemption. The exemption does not apply to the value of land or to the value of improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor does the exemption apply to increases in assessed valuation of land and nonqualifying improvements. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemption does not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter.

(4) Conclusion of Exemption. At the conclusion of the exemption period, any new housing costs shall be considered as new construction for the purposes of Chapter 84.55 RCW. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.050 Application procedure. 

A property owner who proposes a project for a tax exemption under this chapter shall complete the following procedures:

(1) A complete application, on a form established by the Director, shall be filed with the City prior to issuance of a building permit for the project. The application shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution.

(2) The application shall contain such information as deemed necessary by the Director, including:

(a) A brief written description of the project including timing and construction schedule setting forth the grounds for the exemption.

(b) Floor and site plans of the proposed project, which may be revised by the owner, provided such revisions are made and presented to the Director prior to the City’s final action on the exemption application.

(c) If applying for a 12-year exemption, it shall include information describing how the applicant will comply with the affordability requirements set forth in CMC 3.80.040(2).

(d) A statement from the owner acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible for exemption under this chapter.

(e) An affidavit signed by the owner stating the occupancy record of the property for a period of 12 months prior to filing the application.

(f) Verification of the correctness of the information submitted by the owner’s signature and affirmation made under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of Washington. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.060 Application review and issuance of conditional certificate – Denial – Appeal.

(1) Director’s Decision. The Director may certify as eligible an application that is determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete application.

(2) Contract Required.

(a) If an application is approved, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the City, subject to approval by the City Council in the form of a resolution, regarding the terms and conditions of the project and eligibility for exemption under this chapter. This contract shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs, and successors of the applicant.

(b) For any development project including owner-occupied units, the contract with the City shall also require that an owners association organized under RCW 64.34.300 be formed for all owner-occupied units within the development for the length of the exemption period granted to assume the responsibility for collecting the necessary information and documents from all individual unit owners to complete the annual reporting requirements and for filing the required annual report with the City for each of the individual homeowners pursuant to CMC 3.80.100.

(3) Issuance of Conditional Certificate. Upon City Council approval of the contract, the Director shall issue a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The conditional certificate shall expire three years from the date of City Council approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.

(4) Application Denial. If an application is denied, the Director shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address within 10 calendar days of issuance of the denial.

(5) Application Appeal. Per RCW 84.14.070, an applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council within 30 calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and appeal fee, as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution, with the City Clerk. The appeal before the City Council shall be based on the record made before the Director. The Director’s decision shall be upheld unless the applicant can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the Director’s decision. The City Council’s decision on appeal is final.

(6) Amendment of Contract. Within three years of the date from the City Council’s approval of the contract, an owner may request an amendment(s) to the contract by submitting a request in writing to the Director. The fee for an amendment is as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution. The Director shall have authority to approve minor changes to the contract that are reasonably within the scope and intent of the contract approved by the City Council. Amendments that are not reasonably within the scope and intent of the approved contract, as determined by the Director, shall be submitted to the City Council for review. The date for expiration of the conditional certificate shall not be extended by contract amendment unless all the conditions for extension set forth in CMC 3.80.070 are met. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.070 Extension of conditional certificate.

(1) The Director may approve an extension to the conditional certificate and time of completion of the project for a period not to exceed a total of 24 consecutive months. To obtain an extension, the applicant must submit a written request stating the justification for the extension together with a processing fee as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution. An extension may be granted if the Director determines that:

(a) The anticipated failure to complete construction within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;

(b) The owner has shown good faith progress and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and

(c) All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project.

(2) If an extension is denied, the Director shall state in writing the reason for denial and shall send notice to the applicant’s last known address within 10 calendar days of issuance of the denial. An applicant may appeal the denial of an extension to the Hearing Examiner within 14 calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and Hearing Examiner appeal fee with the City Clerk. The appeal before the Hearing Examiner shall be as provided in Chapter 14.45 CMC. No appeal to the City Council is provided from the Hearing Examiner’s decision. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.080 Application for final certificate. 

Upon completion of the improvements or new construction agreed upon in the contract between the applicant and the City, and upon issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy, the applicant may request a final certificate of tax exemption by filing with the Director such information as the Director may deem necessary or useful to evaluate the eligibility for the final certificate. The application shall include the fee as set forth on the City’s current fee resolution and the following:

(1) A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;

(2) A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption;

(3) The total monthly rent or total sale amount of each multifamily housing unit rented or sold to date;

(4) Any additional information requested by the City pursuant to meeting any reporting requirements under Chapter 84.14 RCW;

(5) A statement that the work was completed within the required three-year period or any authorized extension; and

(6) If a 12-year exemption, information on the applicant’s compliance with the affordability requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.090 Issuance of final certificate. 

(1) Director’s Decision. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the Director shall determine whether the work completed and the affordability of the units, if applicable, satisfy the requirements of the application and the conditional contract approved by the City and is qualified for a limited tax exemption under Chapter 84.14 RCW. The City shall also determine which specific improvements completed meet the intent of this chapter and the required findings of RCW 84.14.060.

(2) Granting of Final Certificate. If the Director determines that the project has been completed in accordance with this chapter and the contract between the applicant and the City and has been completed within the authorized time period the City shall, within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the 30-day review period above, file a final certificate of tax exemption with the King County Assessor.

(3) Recording. The Director is authorized to cause to be recorded, at the owner’s expense, in the real property records of the King County Department of Records and Elections, the contract with the City, as amended if applicable, and such other document(s) as will identify such terms and conditions of eligibility for exemption under this chapter as the Director deems appropriate for recording, including requirements under this chapter relating to affordability of units.

(4) Denial. The Director shall notify the applicant in writing that a final certificate will not be filed if the Director determines that:

(a) The improvements were not completed within the authorized time period; or

(b) The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City; or

(c) The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter.

(5) Appeal. An applicant may appeal a denial of a final certificate to the Hearing Examiner within 14 calendar days of issuance of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and Hearing Examiner appeal fee with the City Clerk. The appeal before the Hearing Examiner shall be as provided in Chapter 14.45 CMC. No appeal to the City Council is provided from the Hearing Examiner’s decision. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.100 Annual certification and report. 

A property that receives a tax exemption under this chapter shall continue to comply with the approved contract and the requirements of this chapter in order to retain its property tax exemption. Within 30 calendar days after the first anniversary of the date the City issued the final certificate of tax exemption and each year thereafter for the duration of the tax exemption period, the property owner shall file a notarized declaration and annual report with the Director indicating the following:

(1) A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multifamily units during the previous 12 months;

(2) A certification that the property has not changed use and continues to be in compliance with the contract with the City and this chapter;

(3) A description of any subsequent improvements or changes to the property made after the City issued the final certificate of tax exemption;

(4) The total monthly rent of each multifamily housing unit rented or the total sale amount of each unit sold during the 12 months ending with the anniversary date;

(5) A breakdown of the number, type, and specific multifamily housing units rented or sold during the 12 months ending with the anniversary date;

(6) If granted a 12-year exemption, information demonstrating the owner’s compliance with the affordability requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the income of each renter household at the time of initial occupancy or the income of each purchaser of owner-occupied units at the time of purchase;

(7) The value of the tax exemption for the project; and

(8) Any additional information requested by the City pursuant to meeting any reporting requirements under Chapter 84.14 RCW.

City staff may also conduct on-site verification of the declaration and reporting. Failure to submit the annual declaration and report may result in cancellation of the tax exemption and shall result in a review of the exemption per RCW 84.14.110. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


3.80.110 Cancellation of tax exemption. 

(1) Cancellation of the tax exemption may result if the Director determines that:

(a) The owner is not complying with the terms of the contract or this chapter;

(b) The use of the property is changed or will be changed to a use that is other than residential;

(c) The project violates applicable zoning requirements, land use regulations, building or fire code requirements; or

(d) The owner fails to submit the annual declaration and report specified in CMC 3.80.100.

(2) If the property no longer qualifies for the tax exemption, the tax exemption shall be canceled and the King County Assessor shall comply with applicable State law to impose additional taxes, interest, and penalties on the property, and a priority lien may be placed on the land pursuant to State law.

(3) Cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any such time noncompliance has been determined.

(4) If the owner intends to convert the multifamily housing to another use, the owner shall notify the Director and the King County Assessor in writing within 60 calendar days of the change in use. Upon such change in use, the tax exemption shall be canceled and additional taxes, interest, and penalties shall be imposed pursuant to State law.

(5) Notice and Appeal. Upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the Director shall notify the owner by mail, return receipt requested. The owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of Hearing Examiner appeal and appeal fee with the City Clerk within 30 calendar days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner will conduct a hearing pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 13-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 05-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 3.85 DONATIONS OF PROPERTY TO CITY

Sections:

3.85.010    Administration.

3.85.020    Acceptance.

3.85.030    Use.


3.85.010 Administration.

The City Manager or designee shall have the responsibility for the administration of all donations to the City and may issue policies and procedures to implement this chapter. (Ord. 19-15 § 1)


3.85.020 Acceptance.

All monetary and nonmonetary donations shall be reviewed and either accepted or denied consistent with the policies and procedures created to implement this chapter. (Ord. 19-15 § 1)


3.85.030 Use.

In the event a donor has indicated the donation is for a specific intended use by the City, such donation shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be used consistent with the donor’s desired use. If a donor has not specified a particular desired use, the donation may be used for any municipal purpose. (Ord. 19-15 § 1)


Title 4 (Reserved) 


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Repealed

5.10    Business License Acquisition

5.15    Peddlers

5.20    Adult Entertainment

5.25    Social Card Games

5.30    Mobile Food Units


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 04-06)


Chapter 5.10 BUSINESS LICENSE ACQUISITION

Sections:

5.10.010    Purpose.

5.10.020    Definitions.

5.10.030    Business license required.

5.10.040    Exemptions.

5.10.050    Issuance of licenses – Procedure and fees.

5.10.060    Posting of license.

5.10.070    Change of place of business.

5.10.080    Ownership change – License not transferable.

5.10.090    Fraudulent use of business license.

5.10.100    Revocation of business license.

5.10.110    License renewal.

5.10.120    Compliance with codes required.

5.10.130    Notice of noncompliance – Revocation – Final action.

5.10.140    Appeal to Hearing Examiner.

5.10.150    Enforcement.


5.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a means for obtaining public information and compiling statistical information on existing and new businesses in the City, to regulate and ensure the legal conduct of business, and to assist in the effective administration of health, fire, building, zoning, and other codes of the City. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section:

(1) “Business” includes all activities, occupations, pursuits or professions located and/or engaged in within the City, with the object of gain, benefit or advantage to the person engaging in the same, or to any other person or class, directly or indirectly. It also includes general contractors, home occupations, and businesses temporarily conducted within the City including but not limited to traveling salespersons and fruit vendors. It does not include, however, persons conducting garage sales upon their residential real property or wholesale distributors selling products to businesses within the City unless the distributor has an office, warehouse, or other business establishment located within the City.

(2) “City” means the City of Covington.

(3) Engaging in Business.

(a) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(b) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in this subsection. If an activity is not listed, the determination of whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(c) Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker, or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

(i) Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

(ii) Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

(iii) Soliciting sales.

(iv) Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(v) Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(vi) Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

(vii) Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

(viii) Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(ix) Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(x) Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(xi) Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

(xii) Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

(xiii) Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(xiv) Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(xv) In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(xvi) Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(d) If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

(i) Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(ii) Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(iii) Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any member or attendee of a board of directors engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

(iv) Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

(v) Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(vi) Conducting advertising through the mail.

(vii) Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

(e) A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (3)(d) of this section. The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.

(4) “License” or “licensee,” as used generally in this chapter, means and includes respectively the words “permit” or “permittee” or the holder for any use for a period of time of any similar privilege, whether relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance.

(5) “Person” includes the singular and the plural and also means and includes any person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, limited liability company, individual receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, joint venture, company, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, and includes the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

(6) “Premises” means and includes all lands, structures and places, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with, any business conducted on the premises.

(7) “City Manager” means the Covington City Manager or his or her appointed designee. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.030 Business license required.

Unless exempted in this chapter, no person shall engage in any business within the City without first having obtained from the City a valid and current business license to carry on that business. This license shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits required by any other section of this code or by State or Federal laws. Business licenses are not transferrable and a separate business license shall be obtained for each location at which a business operates. Licenses shall be displayed at each business location so as to be viewable by the public. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.040 Exemptions.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(a) Minors doing business or operating a business concern where no other person is employed by the minor;

(b) The United States or any instrumentality thereof and the State of Washington or any municipal subdivision thereof.

(2) Fee-Free License/Registration-Only Requirement.

(a) Fraternal benefit associations or societies as defined in RCW 48.36A.010;

(b) Nonprofit religious organizations;

(c) Nonprofit associations, clubs, or corporations maintained for the purpose of organized sports, charity, public school-related activities or municipal corporation-related activities, including police and fire department reserve organizations;

(d) Farmers, for the sale of agricultural, horticultural, or farm products they have actually grown, harvested or produced;

(e) Non-farmer vendors of a farmers’ or public market; provided, that sales do not occur more than two days per week; and

(f) Any person or busness whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the City. The threshold does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.

(3) Special Event Business Licenses. The organizers of a permitted special event may apply for a special event business license that will eliminate the need for individual business licenses for all vendors operating at the special event under the authority of the special event license. A list of the participating vendors shall be supplied with a special event business license application. The vendor list should contain the name of the vendor, address, UBI number, and phone number. The administrative cost for a special event business license shall be as set forth in the current fee resolution. Special event business licenses shall be valid only on the days authorized for the special event and shall not be valid for a period in excess of three days; provided, however, no business subject to the City’s admissions tax pursuant to Chapter 3.50 CMC may use the special event license and shall obtain a City of Covington business license endorsement from the Department of Revenue, Business Licensing Service. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.050 Issuance of licenses – Procedure and fees.

(1) Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for a business license prior to commencing business in the City. Application for a business license shall be accomplished by submitting a business license application for a City of Covington endorsement to the Washington State Department of Revenue, Business Licensing Service in coordination with the City of Covington Community Development Department (“Permit Services”). The applicant shall be required to provide all information requested on said form and failure to do so shall be grounds for refusing to issue the business license. It is the business license holder’s responsibility to inform the Business Licensing Service of any update of business information that was given on the original license application. Failure to supply said update as requested shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of the business license.

(2) Persons applying for a business license must pay an application fee as established by the City Council as set forth in the current fee resolution unless exempted by CMC 5.10.040(2). The Business Licensing Service processing fee is determined by the Department of Revenue. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.060 Posting of license.

Each person required to obtain a business license under this chapter shall post the business license at all times in the place of business for which it is issued. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.070 Change of place of business.

When the place of business is changed, the person shall inform the Department of Revenue, Business Licensing Service of the change, in coordination with Permit Services. A change of place of business may require the filing of a new business license application and City license. Upon approval by the City of the new place of business, a new license shall be issued for the person’s new place of business. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.080 Ownership change – License not transferable.

When a licensed business changes ownership, the license of the previous owner may not be transferred to the new owner. The new owner shall apply for a business license for that place of business by filing a business license application and City license with the Business Licensing Service, in coordination with Permit Services. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.090 Fraudulent use of business license.

No person holding a City business license shall suffer or allow any other person for whom a separate license is required to operate under or display such person’s license, and no person may maintain a business license obtained through a false or fraudulent application or return of any false statement or representation in or in connection with any such application or return for such business license. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.100 Revocation of business license.

Permit Services may revoke the license issued to any person required to obtain a business license who is in default in any payment of any license fee or who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Notice of such revocation shall be mailed to the person by Permit Services, and on and after the date thereof any such person who continues to engage in business shall be deemed to be operating without a license and shall be subject to any or all penalties provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.110 License renewal. 

Persons continuing to engage in business within the City shall renew their business license(s) each year. Unless exempt, businesses must pay the annual renewal fee, as well as the Business Licensing Service processing fee. The annual business license renewal fee shall be as set forth in the current fee resolution. The annual fee may be prorated in order to conform the license expiration date with the expiration date established by the Business Licensing Service. Persons not renewing their business license by the expiration date may be subject to a late renewal penalty charged by the Business Licensing Service. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.120 Compliance with codes required.

Notwithstanding any contrary provision thereof, a business license issued under this chapter may not be issued to any person using or occupying any real property in violation of the provisions of the City zoning, building and fire codes and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.130 Notice of noncompliance – Revocation – Final action.

A pending application for renewal under this chapter shall be deemed in compliance with this chapter unless the applicant is notified by Permit Services in writing that said application may not be granted because of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event such notice is given, the applicant shall have 90 days from the date of such notice to comply with any section violated under this chapter prior to final action upon said application for renewal unless an extension for compliance is granted by the Council. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.140 Appeal to Hearing Examiner.

Any person aggrieved under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


5.10.150 Enforcement.

(1) It is unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to conduct any business for which a license or permit is required by any regulation or ordinance of the City without a license or permit being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by this chapter or other regulation or ordinance of the City. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement under Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(a) Violation – Penalty.

(i) Each day any person allows a violation of this chapter to continue shall be considered a separate violation.

(ii) Whenever the City has determined that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring, the City shall remedy the violation by issuing a civil infraction, punishable by a monetary penalty in accordance with Chapter 1.30 CMC. 

(2) The City may revoke the license issued to any licensee who fails to comply with any ordinance or regulation of the City. Notice of such revocation shall be mailed to the licensee by the City Manager and on and after the date any such licensee who continues to engage in business shall be deemed to be operating without a license and shall be subject to any and all penalties herein provided.

(3) The City shall revoke the business license issued to any licensee who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of the municipal code requiring such licensee to procure and maintain any other regulatory or revenue license, and to pay taxes to the City, whether sales tax, use tax, gambling tax or other tax imposed by the City or the State upon such licensee. (Ord. 07-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 5.15 PEDDLERS*

Sections:

5.15.010    Definition of peddler.

5.15.020    Permit required – Exemptions.

5.15.030    Permit – Application.

5.15.040    Investigation of applicant – Issuance and denial of permit.

5.15.050    Permit – Exhibit.

5.15.060    Permit – Expiration.

5.15.070    Permit – Revocation.

5.15.080    Right of appeal.

5.15.090    Use of streets.

5.15.100    Hours and notice.

5.15.110    Records.

5.15.120    Violation – Penalty.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 72-98.


5.15.010 Definition of peddler.

Unless otherwise exempt under the provisions of this chapter, a “peddler” is defined as follows:

(1) All persons, both principals and agents, as well as employers and employees, who shall sell, offer for or expose for sale, or who shall trade, deal or traffic in any personal property or services in the City by going from house to house or from place to place or by indiscriminately approaching individuals.

(2) Sales by sample or for future delivery, and executory contracts of sale by solicitors or peddlers are embraced within the proceeding subsection; provided, however, that this chapter is not applicable to any sales person or canvasser who solicits trade from wholesale or retail dealers within the City.

(3) Any person, both principals and agents, as well as employers and employees, who, while selling or offering for sale, any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, stands in a doorway or any unenclosed vacant lot, parcel of land or in any other place not used by such person as a permanent place of business. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.020 Permit required – Exemptions.

(1) In addition to the business license required by CMC 5.10.020, no person, corporation, partnership or other organization shall engage in the business of a peddler within the City limits without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. If any individual is acting as an agent for or employed by an individual, corporation, partnership or other organization, both the individual and the employer or principal for whom the individual is peddling must obtain a permit as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that said employer or principal for whom the individual is peddling need not obtain a permit if written proof is submitted to the City Manager establishing that said employer and/or principal has transacted business within the State of Washington for a continuous period of at least three years immediately prior to the application’s filing with the City Manager; provided further, that if the City does not require a license of the employer pursuant to the above exemption, the City may still investigate the employer to see if the employer has in any manner violated any provision of CMC 5.15.040(2) and may deny a permit to any individual employee if violations are found to exist. 

(2) The following persons are exempt from the permit requirements and fee provisions of this chapter:

(a) Farmers who peddle agricultural, horticultural, or farm products they have actually grown, harvested or produced;

(b) Any person who is specifically requested to call upon others for the purpose of displaying goods, literature or giving information about any article, service or product;

(c) Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations which have received tax exempt status under 26 USC 501(c)(3) or other similar civic, charitable or nonprofit organizations;

(d) Newspaper carriers;

(e) Peddlers operating at any City-sponsored or authorized civic event for a time period not to exceed five consecutive days, so long as each peddler’s name, address and telephone number is submitted to the City, in advance of the civic event, to be maintained in the City records; and

(f) Vendors operating at a farmers’ or public market or other City-sponsored or approved activity under the provisions of a temporary use permit; provided, that the name, address and telephone number of each vendor is provided in advance to the City of Covington to be maintained in the City records. (Ord. 09-09 § 2; Ord. 22-05 § 3; Ord. 66-03 § 1; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.030 Permit – Application.

(1) Applicants for a permit under this chapter must file with the City Manager a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City.

(2) All applications shall provide the following information on the application, with sufficient proof of identification:

(a) Name, date of birth and description of the applicant;

(b) Address and telephone number;

(c) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or services to be sold;

(d) If employed or acting as an agent, the name and address of the employer or principal, together with the description of the exact relationship with the principal or employer;

(e) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, including the license number;

(f) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

(g) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime within the last 10 years, including misdemeanors, gross misdemeanors, or violations of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and

(h) All sales to occur on a parcel of land must be upon property zoned CB or RB and the following must accompany the application:

(i) Signature of the property owner authorizing use of parcel;

(ii) A site plan showing the location of the sales area the nearest driveway and the nearest fire hydrant.

The peddling must comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 21A.32 KCC adopted by the City;

(i) Such other information as may be required by the City.

(3) Unless otherwise exempt under CMC 5.15.020, any individual, corporation, partnership or other organization which acts as the principal or employer for individual peddlers shall obtain a permit as provided herein and shall provide the following information on the application in addition to any information required as set forth above:

(a) The applicant’s name, address and telephone number and the names and addresses of all individuals who are employed by or acting as an agent for the applicant;

(b) If a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the corporation’s board of directors, principal officers and registered agent; provided, however, that the City Manager may waive any portion of this requirement when disclosure would be unduly burdensome;

(c) If a partnership, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the partners;

(d) A list of any criminal convictions during the past 10 years for the applicant, any owners of the business, and if a corporation, the board of directors and officers;

(e) Name, address and telephone numbers (business and home) of the individual, if applicable, acting as the manager for the applicants;

(f) A list of all other cities, towns and counties where the applicant has obtained a peddler’s permit or similar permit within the past five years; and

(g) Such other information as may be required by the City.

(4) At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the current fee resolution to cover the City’s cost of investigation and the issuance of a permit, including each peddler, principal and/or employer. (Ord. 22-05 § 4; Ord. 66-03 § 2; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.040 Investigation of applicant – Issuance and denial of permit.

(1) The City Manager shall refer the application to the Police Department which shall determine the accuracy of the information contained in the application and conduct a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. Upon completion, the Police Department shall forward the results of the investigation, together with a recommendation for approval or denial, to the City Manager.

(2) If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the City Manager shall issue the permit to the applicant. The City Manager shall deny the applicant the permit if the applicant has:

(a) Committed any act consisting of fraud or misrepresentation;

(b) Committed any act which, if committed by a permit holder, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit;

(c) Within the previous 10 years, been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating to the occupation of peddler, including, but not limited to, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or misrepresentation;

(d) Been refused a permit under the provisions of this chapter; providing, however, that any applicant denied a permit under the provisions of this chapter may reapply if and when the reasons for denial no longer exist; or

(e) Made any false or misleading statement in the application.

(3) The denial of a permit to an individual, corporation, partnership or other organization which serves as the employer or principal for individual peddlers shall be a sufficient basis to deny a permit to the individual applicants who are employed by or acting as an agent for the applicant. (Ord. 66-03 § 3; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.050 Permit – Exhibit.

Peddlers are required to exhibit their permit displayed on their person and fully visible while conducting any peddling activities. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.060 Permit – Expiration.

All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and should be valid for the calendar year in which issued. License fees shall not be prorated for any portion of the year. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.070 Permit – Revocation.

(1) Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the City Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:

(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permits;

(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of carrying on the business as a peddler;

(c) Any other violation of this chapter;

(d) Conviction after submission of the application for a peddler’s permit of a felony or misdemeanor directly relating to the occupation of peddler, including, but not limited, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or misrepresentation;

(e) Conducting the business of peddling in any unlawful manner or such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the public; or

(f) Violation of any part of this chapter by any employer of a permit holder, regardless of whether the employer is separately licensed under this chapter.

(2) The revocation of any permit held by an individual, corporation, partnership or other organization which serves as the employer or principal for individual peddlers shall constitute a basis for revoking the permit issued to individual applicants who are employed by or acting as agents for such individual, corporation, partnership or organization.

(3) The revocation of a permit for three or more persons who are employees or agents of an individual, corporation, partnership or organization shall constitute a basis for revoking the permit issued to the employer or principal, as well as the permits issued to all other employees or agents of that employer or principal.

(4) Notice of revocation of a permit shall be given by the City Manager in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. In addition, it shall state that the peddler’s permit shall be suspended pending the outcome of such hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at his or her last known address. The revocation shall become final if no appeal is requested as provided in CMC 5.15.080. If the permit holder is an individual, corporation, partnership or organization which employs or serves as the principal for individual permit holders, the notice shall also be mailed to the individual permit holders. (Ord. 66-03 § 4; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.080 Right of appeal.

Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Manager in the denial of an application for permit or in the decision to revoke a permit as provided in this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Hearing Examiner. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager, within 10 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner shall set a time and place for a de novo hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Hearing Examiner on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. Hearings shall be held within 21 days of the day the request is received by the City. (Ord. 66-03 § 5; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.090 Use of streets.

No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor be permitted a stationary location, nor be permitted to operate in any congested area where operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.100 Hours and notice.

No person shall engage the business of peddler between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.110 Records.

The Police Department shall report to the City Manager all convictions for violations of this chapter and the City Manager shall maintain a record for each permit issued and record the reports of violation therein. (Ord. 66-03 § 6; Ord. 95-98 § 1)


5.15.120 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. (Ord. 95-98 § 1)


Chapter 5.20 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT

Sections:

5.20.010    Findings of fact.

5.20.020    Purpose and intent.

5.20.030    Definitions.

5.20.040    Licenses required.

5.20.050    Adult entertainment business license – Application process.

5.20.060    Adult entertainment business license – Grounds for denial.

5.20.070    Manager and entertainer licenses – Application process.

5.20.080    Manager licenses and entertainer licenses – Grounds for denial.

5.20.090    License duration and renewal.

5.20.100    License fees.

5.20.110    Adult clubs – Facility specifications.

5.20.120    Adult clubs – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

5.20.130    Adult arcades – Facility specifications.

5.20.140    Adult arcades – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

5.20.150    Adult theaters – Facility specifications.

5.20.160    Adult theaters – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

5.20.170    Permission to inspect.

5.20.180    Notice of appeal.

5.20.190    Date, time, place for hearing.

5.20.200    Scope of matters considered in appeal.

5.20.210    Waiver of right to appeal.

5.20.220    Action after hearing.

5.20.230    Appeal from hearing examiner.

5.20.240    Stay during appeal.

5.20.250    Grounds for suspension and revocation of licenses.

5.20.260    Nonobscene performances, dramatic works, classes, seminars or lectures not prohibited.

5.20.270    Limitations of liability.

5.20.280    Criminal penalty.

5.20.290    Additional remedies.

5.20.300    Liquor regulations.


5.20.010 Findings of fact. 

The Covington city council makes the following findings of fact based on the evidence of conduct occurring in and around adult entertainment businesses as reported in O’Day v. King County, 109 Wn.2d 796 (1988) and as reported in public testimony and other evidence, information, documents and other materials received by the King County council, including but not limited to the legislative record supporting King County Ordinance No. 7216, adopted in 1985; Ordinance 9915, adopted in 1991; King County Ordinance 13546 and Ordinance 13548. The Covington city council also makes the following findings having taken legislative notice of the evidence of conduct occurring in and around adult entertainment businesses located in other jurisdictions, which the council hereby deems to be relevant to the experience in Covington, as reported in judicial opinions including but not limited to Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986), Ino Ino, Inc. v. City of Bellevue, 132 Wn.2c 103 (1997), DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 92 Wn.App. 660 (1998) and Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998) and as reported in the studies and findings of other city and County legislative bodies that have also adopted ordinances regulating adult entertainment businesses, including but not limited to the counties of King, Kitsap, Pierce, Snohomish and Spokane and the cities of Bellevue, Bothell, Everett, Federal Way, Kent, Lake Forest Park, Redmond, Renton, Seattle, Shoreline and Tukwila.

(1) The operation of adult entertainment businesses has historically and regularly been accompanied by secondary effects that are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Covington. Such secondary effects include significant criminal activity and activities injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community, detrimental effects on nearby businesses and residential areas and a decline in property values in the area of the adult entertainment businesses. This history of criminal and injurious activity includes prostitution, narcotics and liquor law violations, breaches of the peace, assaults, employment or involvement of minors, sexual conduct between customers or between customers and entertainers, the opportunity for the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and the presence within the industry of individuals with hidden ownership interests and outstanding arrest warrants. Accordingly, there is a compelling need and interest to regulate adult entertainment businesses as provided in this chapter to protect and promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Covington;

(2) These activities occur regardless of whether adult entertainment is presented in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages;

(3) The resources available for responding to problems associated with adult entertainment businesses are limited and are most efficiently and effectively utilized through a licensing and regulatory program;

(4) The license fees required in this chapter are necessary as reasonable fees imposed to help defray the costs of processing the license applications and the substantial expenses incurred by Covington in regulating the adult entertainment industry;

(5) Adult entertainment businesses have historically engaged in practices that involve secreting ownership interests for such purposes as money laundering, skimming profits and tax evasion. These hidden ownership interests have, on occasion, been held by individuals and entities reputed to be involved in organized crime. To detect and discourage the involvement of organized crime in the adult entertainment industry, to effectively deploy its limited law enforcement resources and to effectively protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizenry, the city must be fully apprised of the actual and controlling interests of adult entertainment businesses and the identities and criminal backgrounds of persons responsible for he management and control of such businesses;

(6) To detect and discourage the involvement of organized crime in the adult entertainment industry, to prevent the exploitation of minors, to assure the correct identification of persons working in adult entertainment businesses, to effectively deploy its limited law enforcement resources and to effectively protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizenry, the city must be fully apprised of the identity, age and criminal background of managers in adult entertainment businesses;

(7) It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of an adult entertainment business during all hours of operation so there will be a person responsible for the overall operation of the business, including the actions of customers, entertainers and other employees. To monitor the actions of these individuals, a manager must be able to observe these individuals at all times;

(8) To prevent the exploitation of minors, to assure the correct identification of persons working in adult entertainment businesses, to effectively deploy its limited law enforcement resources and to effectively protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizenry, the city must be fully apprised of the identity, age and criminal background of entertainers in adult clubs;

(9) Proximity between entertainers and customers in adult clubs facilitates sexual conduct, prostitution, transactions involving controlled substances and other crimes. To deter such conduct and assist law enforcement in detecting it, King County (before city incorporation) has historically required that an entertainer exposing nudity must be separated from customers by performing on a stage at least 18 inches above the floor and at least six feet from the nearest patron and has prohibited entertainers from engaging in sexual conduct;

(10) There is substantial evidence that such prohibitions are ineffective. Entertainers in adult clubs perform offstage erotic performances, variously referred to as “table,” “couch” or “lap” dances, which typically involve exposure of nudity or sexual conduct between entertainers and customers, or both, and may also include acts of prostitution, transactions, involving controlled substances and other crimes. To effectively deter such conduct and assist law enforcement in detecting it, it is necessary that all erotic performances in an adult club occur on a stage which is at least 10 feet from the nearest customer. Such a requirement is in effect in the city of Kent, Kitsap County and Pierce County and has been upheld as a constitutional regulation that furthers the governmental interest in preventing sexual conduct and other criminal conduct while still allowing an entertainer to convey an erotic expression (See Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998), Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986) and DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 92 Wn.App. 660 (1998), respectively).

(11) To prevent sexual conduct from occurring between entertainers and customers, customers must be prohibited from any stage where adult entertainment occurs and be prohibited from passing tips, gratuities or other payments directly to entertainers performing on stage.

(12) Adult entertainment businesses have historically attempted to prevent law enforcement and licensing officials from detecting sexual conduct, prostitution, sale and distribution of controlled substances and other violations of law occurring on the premises by employing warning systems maintaining a low level of lighting and other techniques. It is necessary, to effectively enforce this chapter and to protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city’s citizenry, that adult entertainment businesses be required to maintain a minimum level of lighting, that warning devices and systems be prohibited and that unannounced inspections be permitted by city licensing and law enforcement personnel;

(13) Adult arcades provide booths for individual viewing of live performances, videos and films distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct. Existing standards of conduct and facility specifications have not deterred customers from engaging in sexual conduct in such businesses. To detect and deter such conduct, to require maintenance of clean and sanitary conditions and to reduce the potential for the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, it is necessary to regulate the configuration and facility specifications of adult arcades as set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to restricting the occupancy of a booth to one person;

(14) An adult arcade might attempt to circumvent the limit of one person per booth by creating a small room, labeled “minitheater” rather than a booth, in which two, three or a small number of individuals would be able to view videos and films distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct. Moreover, traditional-sized theaters might also show such videos or films. Customers have used both traditional adult theaters and “minitheaters” within arcades as places to engage in sexual conduct. Existing standards of conduct and facility specifications have not deterred customers from engaging in sexual conduct in these businesses. To detect and deter such conduct and reduce the potential for the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, it is necessary to regulate the configuration and facility specifications, as set forth in this chapter, of spaces used by more than one individual to view adult entertainment. In particular, it is necessary to require that any group viewing area for such videos and films have a minimum of eight seats which may be accessed by customers without reservation in order to prevent or diminish a sense of privacy and intimacy which would be conducive to and enabling of sexual conduct between customers;

(15) To assure that minors are not subjected to adult entertainment, it is necessary to prohibit adult entertainment businesses from allowing adult entertainment performances, or pictorial representations of adult entertainment performances displaying nudity or sexual conduct, from being visible from outside the business; and

(16) To discourage customers of bars and other alcohol-serving businesses from moving to adult entertainment businesses at 2:00 a.m. for “after hours”’ activities, and the increased likelihood of breaches of the peace and other criminal conduct that arise from those customers and to reduce the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses on minors and the community, it is necessary to restrict the closing time of adult entertainment businesses. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.020 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish licensing, operational and facility standards for adult entertainment businesses located in the city of Covington to promote and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of Covington’s residents. This chapter is intended to prevent the secondary effects that have historically and regularly accompanied the operation of adult entertainment businesses, including but not limited to the incidence of prostitution, sexual conduct with the opportunity for transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, employment or involvement of minors, violation of controlled substance and alcoholic beverage laws, assaults, breaches of the peace and the presence within the industry of individuals with hidden ownership interests and outstanding arrest warrants. It is not the intent of the city council that this chapter have either the purpose or effect of suppressing speech activities protected by the constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.030 Definitions.

The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

(1) “Adult entertainment” means a performance described in the definition of adult entertainment business in this section.

(2) “Adult entertainment business” means an adult arcade, an adult club, an adult bookstore or an adult theater, each as defined in the following, or a combination of an adult arcade, an adult club, an adult bookstore or an adult theater.

(a) “Adult arcade” means a bookstore, video store, membership club or other place:

(i) To which the public or members of a membership club are invited or admitted, whether or not a membership fee, cover charge or other consideration is required for admittance; and

(ii) That provides one or more booths for viewing a live performance, as specified in the definition of an “adult club” in subsection (2)(c) of this section, or motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television shows, computer-generated images or any other visual media distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on performances involving nudity or sexual conduct.

(b) “Adult bookstore” means an establishment which in whole or in portion thereof has a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade books, magazines or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual conduct and which excludes minors by virtue of age.

(c) “Adult club” means a nightclub, membership club, bar, restaurant, salon, hall, studio or other place:

(i) To which the public or members of a membership club are invited or admitted, whether or not a membership fee, cover charge or other consideration is required for admittance; and

(ii) That provides, on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the activity on the premises, a live performance that includes nudity; is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on depictions or simulations of sexual conduct; or otherwise constitutes an erotic performance. A place that provides such a live performance only for viewing by an individual in a booth in accordance with this chapter is an adult arcade and not an adult club.

(d) “Adult theater” means a movie theater, bookstore, video store, membership club or other place, building or enclosure of any portion thereof:

(i) To which the public or members of a membership club are invited or admitted, whether or not a membership fee, cover charge or other consideration is required for admittance; and

(ii) That provides a room or other area that can accommodate more than one person for viewing motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television shows, computer-generated images or any other visual media distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on performances involving nudity or sexual conduct.

(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, “adult arcade,” “adult bookstore,” “adult club” and “adult theater” do not include:

(i) A theater or performing arts institution that presents a play, opera, musical, dance or other dramatic works that are not distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct; or

(ii) An educational institution, administered, licensed or recognized as a public or private educational institution by the State of Washington, that provides a modeling session or other class or seminar depicting nudity or sexual conduct.

(3) “Applicant” means a person who applies for an adult entertainment business license, an adult entertainment manager license or an adult entertainer license.

(4) “Booth” means a booth, cubicle, stall, room or enclosed space in an adult arcade, that is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat a single individual.

(5) “Business control person” means a partner, corporate officer, director, shareholder or other individual who has responsibility for the management of an adult entertainment business.

(6) “Business license” means an adult entertainment business license.

(7) “City” means the city of Covington, Washington.

(8) “Customer” means a customer, patron, club member or other individual who is invited or admitted to an adult entertainment business during its hours of operation, regardless of whether he or she makes a purchase or pays a fee, charge, gratuity or other consideration. However, “customer” does not include an employee or entertainer while the employee or entertainer is engaged in his or her duties or performance.

(9) “Director” means the director of the department of information and administrative services or the director’s designee.

(10) “Employee” means an individual, including an independent contractor, who works in or at or renders service directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment business, whether or not the person is paid compensation by the operator of the business.

(11) “Entertainer” means an individual who provides live adult entertainment in an adult club, whether or not a fee, tip or other consideration is charged or accepted for the entertainment.

(12) “Entertainer license” means a license for an entertainer issued under this chapter.

(13) “Erotic performance” means a performance, in an adult club, that is intended to sexually stimulate a customer.

(14) “Manager” means an individual who provides on-site management, direction or administration of the operation or conduct of any portion of an activity conducted in an adult entertainment business and includes an assistant manager working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out those purposes.

(15) “Manager license” means a license for a manager issued under this chapter.

(16) “Membership club” means a club that invites or accepts a membership application from the public.

(17) “Nudity” or “nude” means:

(a) The exposure to view, by not completely covering with an opaque material, of the human male or female pubic region, anus, cleft of the buttocks, genitalia or any portion of the areola or nipple of the female breast;

(b) The exposure to view of a device or covering that simulates the appearance of the human male or female pubic region, anus, cleft of the buttocks, genitalia or any portion of the areola or nipple of the female breast; or

(c) The display of male genitalia in a discernible state of sexual stimulation, whether covered or not with opaque material.

(18) “Obscene” means a performance that:

(a) Taken as a whole, by an average person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to a prurient interest in sex;

(b) Taken as a whole, by an average person applying contemporary community standards, depicts patently offensive representations of the sexual acts described in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b); and

(c) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.

(19) “Performance” means an exhibition, display, appearance, dance, modeling, demonstration, show, pantomime or presentation of any kind, whether live or depicted in a motion picture film, video cassette, cable television show, computer-generated image, slide or other nonlive visual image.

(20) “Person” means an individual, firm, corporation, joint venture, partnership, association, membership club, fraternal organization, estate, trust or other entity or group acting as a unit.

(21) “Premises” means the entire real estate parcel on which an adult entertainment business is located, including all interior areas and exterior areas such as parking areas.

(22) “Satisfactory documentation” means:

(a) A current valid motor vehicle operator’s license, issued by a state, bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

(b) A current, valid identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth issued by a Federal or State government agency; or

(c) A valid passport issued by the United States of America or another country.

(23) “Sexual conduct” means any of the following:

(a) Caressing, fondling or other erotic touching of genitalia, pubic region, buttocks, anus, female breast or artificial depictions of those anatomical areas, whether covered or not with opaque material; or

(b) An act of masturbation, genital intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sadomasochistic abuse or bestiality.

(24) “Police department” means the Police Department of the city of Covington. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.040 Licenses required.

(1) Business License.

(a) No person shall operate an adult entertainment business at a location in the city unless the person holds a valid adult entertainment business license issued by the director in the person’s name, for the location and for one or more of the following types of adult entertainment business being operated on the premises:

(i) Adult club;

(ii) Adult bookstore; 

(iii) Adult arcade; or

(iv) Adult theater.

(b) No person shall knowingly allow the use of that person’s property located in the city for the operation of an adult entertainment business that is not licensed under this chapter.

(c) No person shall knowingly manage or participate in the management of an adult entertainment business, located in the city, that is not licensed under this chapter.

(d) No person shall knowingly work as an employee or entertainer in or about an adult entertainment business, located in the city, that is not licensed under this chapter.

(e) No person granted an adult entertainment business license under this chapter shall operate the adult entertainment business under a name not specified on the license.

(f) No person shall operate an adult entertainment business at a location not specified on the license.

(2) Manager License. No person shall act as a manager of an adult entertainment business located in the city without having first obtained a manager license pursuant to CMC 5.20.070.

(3) Entertainer License. No person shall act as an entertainer at an adult entertainment business located in the city without having first obtained an entertainer license.

(4) Duty to Supplement. An applicant for, or a holder of, a license issued under this chapter shall modify or supplement application information, on file with the director, within 10 days of a change if the information changes materially from what is stated on the applicant or holder’s application.

(5) Assignment or transfer of license prohibited. A license issued under this chapter may not be assigned or transferred as part of a transaction, including, but not limited to, the sale, exchange, establishment of a trust or any other means.

(6) Original Required. A photocopy or other form of reproduction is not acceptable as proof of a license required under this chapter. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.050 Adult entertainment business license – Application process.

(1) An application for an adult entertainment business license must be submitted in the name of the person proposing to operate the adult entertainment business and who would be liable under RCW Title 82 for the payment of business and occupation taxes on the privilege of operating the adult entertainment business.

(2) An application for an adult entertainment business license shall be made on a form, provided by the director, that requires the following information:

(a) For the applicant and each business control person:

(i) The legal name and any alias, stage name or previous name;

(ii) The date and place of birth;

(iii) The current residential and mailing addresses;

(iv) The business telephone number;

(v) The driver’s license number and issuing state;

(vi) The employment, business and occupational history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, including the name and address of employers or persons for whom the applicant or business control person performed services as an independent contractor;

(vii) Whether the applicant or business control person holds any other licenses under this chapter or an adult entertainment-related license issued by another jurisdiction; and, if so, the name and address of the businesses to which the licenses pertain;

(viii) Whether the applicant or business control person had, within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, a license under this chapter or an adult entertainment-related license issued by another jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked; and, if so, the name and location of the adult entertainment business to which the denied, suspended or revoked license pertained, the jurisdiction that took such action, the reason for the action, the date of the action and the status of any appeal of the action; and

(ix) Whether the applicant or business control person has been the subject of a bail forfeiture, adverse finding or conviction in connection with local, State or Federal criminal law, other than a parking offense or traffic infraction, within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application; and, if so, the nature of the crime and the date, location and nature of the judicial action taken;

(b) If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company:

(i) The legal name of the corporation;

(ii) The date and place of incorporation; and

(iii) The name and address of any registered agent for service of process;

(c) If the applicant is a partnership:

(i) The legal name of the partnership;

(ii) Whether the partnership is general or limited; and

(iii) The name and address of any registered agent for service of process;

(d) The applicant’s Federal and State tax identification numbers and/or social security number;

(e) The type or types of adult entertainment proposed for the business and the business’s proposed “doing-business-as” name;

(f) The location of the proposed adult entertainment business, including a legal description of the property, the common address and each telephone number assigned to the business;

(g) The name, address and telephone number of each owner and lessee of the property at which the adult entertainment business is proposed to be conducted;

(h) Whether the applicant proposes to serve liquor in the adult entertainment business and the status of the business’s liquor license or application for the liquor license; and

(i) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(3) An application form for an adult entertainment business license must be accompanied by the following submittals:

(a) If the applicant is a corporation, evidence that the corporation is qualified to do business in the State of Washington. If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement must be included;

(b) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the interior of the adult entertainment business, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;

(c) For each applicant and business control person:

(i) Satisfactory documentation that the applicant or business control person is at least 18 years old; and

(ii) A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Police Department or sent directly to the director from another law enforcement agency;

(iii) Two two-inch by two-inch photographs of the applicant and business control person taken within six months of the date of the application showing only the full fact; and

(d) The license fee or fees established in this chapter.

(4) The application form must be verified and certified to be complete and true under penalty of perjury by the notarized signature of the applicant, if the applicant is an individual. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the notarized signature must be that of a general partner of the partnership or the president of the corporation. The director may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in the application form if necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and applicable zoning, building, fire, public health and other ordinances, statutes and rules.

(5) On receipt of a completed application and all required submittals and information, the director shall provide copies of the application materials to the Police Department and such other city departments as the director deems appropriate to assess whether the proposed adult entertainment business complies with this chapter and applicable zoning, building, fire, public health and other ordinances, statutes and rules.

(6) The director and each department shall, within 25 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the director whether such application and premises complies with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is/are not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult entertainment establishment license approved prior to the premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not be open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawing submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

(7) Within 30 days of the director’s receipt of an application and all required submittals and information, the director shall issue or deny the adult entertainment business license. If the director fails to issue or deny the license within the 30-day period, the license is deemed issued on the last day of the period and the applicant may operate, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, the business for which the license was sought.

(8) An adult entertainment business license at a minimum shall include on its face the name of the person to whom the license is issued, the “doing-business-as” name of the business, the specific type of adult entertainment business licensed, the license’s expiration date and the address of the adult entertainment business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place or near the entrance to the adult entertainment business so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.060 Adult entertainment business license – Grounds for denial. 

The director shall deny the adult entertainment business license for any of the following reasons and shall notify the applicant in writing of the grounds for the denial and the opportunity to appeal:

(1) The applicant or a business control person is less than 18 years old;

(2) The applicant failed to provide all of the information and submittals required by the director and this chapter;

(3) The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent representation or omission of material fact, either on the application for the license or by failing to modify or supplement the application as required by CMC 5.20.040;

(4) The applicant or a business control person is currently the subject of a final adult entertainment license suspension order issued by the city or is the subject of an adult entertainment license revocation order, issued by the city, that became final less than one year before the pending application; or

(5) The applicant or the adult entertainment business is not in compliance with this chapter or applicable zoning, building, fire, public health or other ordinance, statute or rule. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.070 Manager and entertainer licenses – Application process.

(1) A separate license is required for an individual to act as a manager of an adult entertainment business and to act as an entertainer at an adult club.

(2) An application for a manager license or entertainer license must be made on a form provided by the director, which form must require the following information:

(a) For the applicant:

(i) The legal name and any alias, stage name or previous name;

(ii) The date and place of birth;

(iii) The current residential and mailing addresses;

(iv) The social security number;

(v) The residential and business telephone numbers;

(vi) The driver’s license number and issuing state; 

(vii) Whether the applicant holds another license under this chapter or an adult entertainment-related license issued by another jurisdiction; and, if so, the name and address of the business to which the license pertains;

(viii) Whether the applicant had, within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, a license under this chapter or an adult entertainment-related license issued by another jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; and, if so, the name and location of the adult entertainment business to which the denied, suspended or revoked license pertained, the jurisdiction that took such action, the reason for the action, the date of the action and the status of any appeal of the action;

(ix) Whether the applicant has been the subject of a bail forfeiture, adverse finding or conviction in connection with local, State or Federal criminal law, other than a parking offense or traffic infraction, within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application; and, if so, the nature of the crime and the date, location and nature of the judicial action taken; and

(b) The name and address of each adult entertainment business at which the applicant will work as a manager or entertainer; and

(c) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.

(3) A completed application form for a manager’s license or an entertainer’s license must be accompanied by the following submittals:

(a) Satisfactory documentation that the applicant is at least 18 years old;

(b) Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs taken by the director within six months of the date of the application, showing only the full face of the applicant;

(c) A complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints taken by the Police Department; and

(d) The license fee established in this chapter.

(4) The application form must be verified and certified to be complete and true under penalty of perjury by the notarized signature of the applicant.

(5) The director shall issue or deny a manager license. or entertainer license within 14 days from the date on which a completed application and all required submittals, information and fees are received. If the director fails to issue or deny the license within said 14-day period, the license is deemed issued on the date the completed application was received and the applicant may perform, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, the function for which the license was sought.

(6) A manager license or entertainer license at a minimum shall include on its face the name of the person to whom it is issued; the person’s signature, height and weight, date of birth and photograph; the license’s expiration date; and whether the holder is licensed as a manager or entertainer.

(7) Every entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult entertainment business manager on duty on the premises prior to his or her performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the adult entertainment business. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.080 Manager licenses and entertainer licenses – Grounds for denial.

The director shall deny an application for a manager or entertainer license for any of the following reasons and shall notify the applicant in writing of the grounds for the denial and the opportunity to appeal:

(1) The applicant is less than 18 years old;

(2) The applicant failed to provide all information and submittals required by the director and this chapter;

(3) The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent omission or representation of material fact, either on the application for the license or by failing to modify or supplement the application as required by CMC 5.20.040(4);

(4) The applicant is currently the subject of a final adult entertainment license suspension order issued by the city or is the subject of an adult entertainment license revocation order issued by the city that became final less than one year before the pending application. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.090 License duration and renewal.

(1) An adult entertainment business license, manager license or entertainer license expires one year from the date of the initial license application filing. To avoid a lapse in the effectiveness of a license, an application to renew a license must be submitted to the director, on a form provided by the director, at least 30 days before the expiration of a business license and at least one business day before the expiration of a manager license or entertainer license. Notwithstanding a lapse in the effectiveness of a license, an application shall be processed as a renewal application if it is filed within 10 days after a license expired.

(2) An application for renewal must be accompanied by those initial submittals as may be required by the director. The application form must be verified and certified to be complete and true under penalty of perjury by the notarized signature of the applicant, if the applicant is an individual. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the notarized signature shall be that of a general partner of the partnership or the president of the corporation.

(3) On receipt of a complete business license renewal application and all required submittals, and fees, the director shall provide copies of the application materials to the Police Department and such other city departments as the director deems appropriate to determine whether the adult entertainment business complies with this chapter and applicable zoning, building, fire, public health and other County, State and Federal ordinances, statutes and rules.

(4) The director and personnel from another department may conduct an on-site inspection of the adult entertainment business before issuing a renewal of a business license to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(5) Within 30 days of the director’s receipt of a business license renewal application and all required submittals, information and fees, the director shall issue or deny the license renewal. If the director fails to issue or deny the license renewal within the 30-day period, the business license is deemed issued on the last day of the period and the applicant may continue to operate, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, the business for which the license renewal was sought.

(6) The director shall issue or deny a renewal of a manager license or entertainer license 14 days from the day on which the completed renewal application and all required submittals and information are received. If the director fails to issue or deny the license within said 14-day period, the license is deemed issued on the date the completed application was received and the applicant may perform, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, the function for which the license was sought.

(7) The director shall deny a license renewal for any of the reasons set forth in this chapter for denial of an initial license application and shall notify the applicant in writing of the grounds for denial and the opportunity to appeal.

(8) A license renewal expires one year from the previous license’s expiration date. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.100 License fees.

A person applying for a license under this chapter shall pay the appropriate nonrefundable fee, from the following, with a license or license renewal application:

(1) (a) Adult entertainment business:

(i) Adult club: $750.00.

(ii) Adult arcade: $750.00.

(iii) Adult theater: $750.00.

(iv) Adult bookstore: $750.00.

(b) If more than one type of adult entertainment business is licensed on the same premises, the license fee is $750.00 for the first type and $150.00 for each additional type.

(2) Manager: $75.00.

(3) Entertainer: $75.00.

(4) Replacement license if original lost or destroyed: $15.00. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.110 Adult clubs – Facility specifications.

An adult club shall meet the following facility specifications:

(1) A live adult entertainment stage shall be at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the customer seating areas and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises to which a customer has access. To separate the customer area from the stage, a continuous railing at least three feet in height shall be attached to the floor and located at least eight feet from all points of the live adult entertainment stage;

(2) A live adult entertainment stage shall be visible immediately on entering the adult club’s seating area and at least one managers’ station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by a door, curtain, drape or other obstruction whatsoever;

(3) The premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

(4) Adult entertainment occurring on the premises of an adult club, or photographs, drawings, sketches, or other pictorial or graphic representations of adult entertainment displaying nudity or sexual conduct, shall not be visible at any time from outside the business;

(5) Sufficient lighting shall be provided in and equally distributed throughout the areas that are open to and used by customers such that, during all hours of operation, all objects are plainly visible and so that on any portion of the premises which is open to customers, a program menu or list printed in eight point type will be readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away. “Sufficient lighting” means a minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers, for all areas open to and used by customers;

(6) A door to an area on the premises that is available for use by a person other than the owner or manager, or both, or owner or manager’s agent or employee, shall not be locked during business hours;

(7) Restroom facilities provided for customers shall be separate from those provided employees and entertainers;

(8) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed inside every entrance to the adult club, that states as follows:

This adult entertainment establishment is regulated by the city of Covington. Entertainers are:

(1) Not Permitted to Engage in Any Type of Sexual Conduct.

(2) Not Permitted to Appear Seminude or Nude, Except on Stage.

(3) Not Permitted to Accept Tips or Gratuities in Advance of Their Performance.

(4) Not Permitted to Accept Tips or Gratuities Directly from Patrons while Performing upon any Stage Area. 

(Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.120 Adult clubs – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

On the premises of an adult club, the adult club and its business license holders, business control persons, managers, employees, entertainers and customers shall adhere to the following operating requirements and standards of conduct:

(1) Business License Holder and Business Control Persons Responsible. The adult entertainment business license holder and any business control persons shall be responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the managers, entertainers, employees and customers of the adult club complies with this chapter;

(2) Licensed Manager Required on Premises. During all hours of operation, the adult club shall have a licensed manager on duty stationed in a location from which the manager can view every live adult entertainment stage, stage setback area and customer area of the business;

(3) Licensed Manager Responsible. The on-duty manager is responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the entertainers, employees and customers of the adult club complies with this chapter;

(4) Posting of Licenses. The holder of the adult entertainment business license shall post the license in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment business so that the license can be easily read when the business is open. The manager shall post his or her license next to the business license when he or she is on duty as the manager. An entertainer shall provide his or her license to the manager on duty who shall maintain the entertainer’s license on the premises for immediate inspection when the entertainer is on the premises. The manager shall, on request by the director or any law enforcement officer make available for inspection the license of an entertainer on the premises;

(5) Records of Entertainers and Employees. The adult club shall maintain, on a form prescribed by the director, a record by date and shift of the name, stage name if any, entertainer license number and date of birth of each person who worked as an employee or performed as an entertainer at the club. The record of each person shall be retained for at least one year after the work or performance was performed at the club;

(6) Prohibited Hours of Operation. The business license holder, business control person or manager shall not operate the adult club, or allow the adult club to be open to customers, between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.;

(7) Minors Prohibited. An individual under 18 years old shall not be in or on the premises. The business license holder, business control person or manager shall not permit or allow a person under 18 years old to be in or on the premises;

(8) Alcohol Prohibited Without a License. An individual shall not possess, consume or serve an alcoholic beverage unless, and to the extent, the adult club is covered by a valid liquor license issued by the Washington State Liquor Control Board;

(9) No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight feet from the nearest patron;

(10) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (9) of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same;

(11) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus or buttocks;

(12) No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any patron. No employer or entertainer shall encourage or permit any patron to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer. No employee or entertainer shall sit on a patron’s lap or separate a patron’s legs;

(13) No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated act of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A. RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute;

(14) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult entertainment establishment unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a torso-to-torso distance of no less than four feet from the patron or patrons for whom dance, performance or exhibition is performed;

(15)  No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any patron, Any gratuity offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment or provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult entertainment establishment shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer;

(16) Warning Device Prohibited. A person may not operate or maintain a warning device or system for the purpose of warning or aiding and abetting the warning of an entertainer, employee, customer or other person that the police, health, fire or building inspector or other public official is approaching or entered the premises. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.130 Adult arcades – Facility specifications.

An adult arcade shall meet the following facility specifications:

(1) The entire interior portion of all booths shall be visible from the common area immediately inside an adult arcade’s entrance and at least one manager’s section, unless the arcade is configured such that all the booths are located in a section of the premises dedicated solely for that purpose within the arcade, herein referred to as a “booth section.” If the booths are located in a booth section within the arcade, the entire interior portion of all booths must be visible from the entrance to the booth section and at least one manager’s station. The entrance to the booth section shall be open to the arcade common area and shall not be obstructed by a curtain, door, wall, merchandise, display rack or other material;

(2) A booth shall not exceed 12 square feet in size and shall not be equipped with a door, curtain or screening device that prevents the manager, city inspector or law enforcement personnel from determining the number of individuals inside the booth. The bottom of any door, curtain or screening device on a booth shall be at least 24 inches above the floor of the booth. The top of any door, curtain or screening device on a booth shall not exceed 66 inches above the floor unless the door, curtain or screening device has an opening, or clear, clean window, at least 12 inches in height and 24 inches in width, located between 66 and 78 inches above the floor of the booth, that provides an unobstructed view to the side walls and back wall of the booth. A booth door or other screening device may not be equipped with a locking device;

(3) A chair or seating surface in a booth shall not provide a seating surface of more than 18 inches in either length or width and shall not be higher than the bottom of a door, curtain or other screening device. There shall not be more than one chair or seating surface in a booth;

(4) If an individual is able to view a live performance from an arcade booth, the booth shall be constructed so that the opening between the booth and the performance area is entirely covered by an immovable panel of transparent nonporous material that extends the full length and width of the opening, does not contain a hole and prevents contact between the individual in the booth and the entertainer;

(5) An arcade shall not contain a space for more than one person to view adult entertainment unless the space is licensed as, and meets the specifications for, an adult theater under this chapter;

(6) A door to an area on the premises that is available for use by customers shall not be locked during business hours;

(7) Steps or risers are not allowed in a booth;

(8) Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the areas that are open to and used by customers such that, during all hours of operation, all objects are plainly visible and so that on any part of the premises which is open to customers, a program, menu or list printed in eight point type will be readable by the human eye with 20/20 visions from two feet away. “Sufficient lighting” means a minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers, for all areas open to and used by customers;

(9) A restroom shall not contain viewing equipment;

(10) The floor, walls and ceiling surfaces in a booth shall be made of nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces and shall not consist of rugs or carpeting;

(11) A ventilation device or hole in a booth shall be covered by a permanently affixed ventilation cover. A ventilation hole shall be located only within one foot from the top of or one foot from the bottom of the booth walls, or both. There shall not be any other holes or openings in the booths;

(12) The premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

(13) Adult entertainment provided on the premises of an adult arcade, or a photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation of adult entertainment displaying nudity or sexual conduct, shall not be visible from outside the business; and

(14) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed at the entrance to the arcade’s booth section, if applicable, and in each booth, that states as follows:

THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED BY COVINGTON CITY CODE WHICH INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING PROHIBITIONS:

1. No person under eighteen years old is permitted on the premises.

2. Masturbation and other sexual conduct are prohibited and unlawful on the premises,

3. More than one person may not occupy a booth at a time.

4. A violation is subject to criminal prosecution and/or civil penalties. 

(Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.140 Adult arcades – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

On the premises of an adult arcade, the adult arcade and its business license holders, business control persons, managers, employees, entertainers and customers shall adhere to the operating requirements and standards of conduct specified in the following:

(1) Business License Holder and Business Control Persons Responsible. The adult entertainment business license holder and any business control person shall be responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the managers, employees, entertainers and customers of the adult arcade complies with this chapter;

(2) Licensed Manager Required on Premises. The adult arcade shall, during all hours of operation, have a licensed manager on duty who is stationed in a location from which every booth and customer area of the business is visible at all times, either by direct line of sight or by continuous video monitoring;

(3) Licensed Manager Responsible. The on-duty manager is responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the entertainers, employees and customers of the adult arcade complies with this chapter;

(4) Posting of Licenses. The holder of the adult entertainment business license shall post the license in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment business so that the license can be easily read when the business is open. The manager shall post his or her license next to the business license when he or she is on duty as the manager;

(5) Prohibited Hours of Operation. The adult arcade business license holder, business control person or manager shall not operate the adult arcade or allow the adult arcade to be open to customers between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.;

(6) Minors Prohibited. An individual under 18 years old shall not be in or on the premises of the adult arcade. The adult arcade business license holder, business control person or manager may not permit or allow a person under 18 years old to be in or on the premises;

(7) Alcohol Prohibited Without License. An individual shall not possess, consume or serve an alcoholic beverage in the adult arcade unless, and to the extent, the business is covered by a liquor license issued by the Washington State Liquor Control Board;

(8) Live Performances. A live performance provided in the arcade shall be conducted in a performance area that is inaccessible to a customer and separated from an individual in a booth in accordance with the facility specifications set for in CMC 5.20.130;

(9) Obscene Performances Prohibited. An obscene performance shall not be displayed or exhibited in the adult arcade;

(10) Sexual Conduct Prohibited. An individual shall not engage in sexual conduct in the adult arcade;

(11) Single Occupancy of Booths. An individual shall not be present in a booth with one or more other individuals; and

(12) Warning Device Prohibited. A person shall not operate or maintain a warning device or system for the purpose of warning or aiding and abetting the warning of an employee, customer or other person that the police, health, fire or building inspector or other public official is approaching or entered the premises. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.150 Adult theaters – Facility specifications.

An adult theater shall meet the following facility specifications:

(1) The interior of an adult theater shall be configured such that any entrance used by a customer shall open into a common area. All seats in a viewing area shall be visible from the entrance to the viewing area and from at least one manager’s section without obstruction by a curtain, door, wall, merchandise, display rack or other material;

(2) An area in an adult theater in which adult entertainment is viewed shall contain at least eight seats. The seats shall be permanently affixed to the floor and shall all face the screen on which the adult entertainment is viewed;

(3) Subject to seat availability, an adult theater viewing area shall be open to any person entering the adult theater and shall not be reserved for use by one or more customers. An adult theater shall not admit more persons to a viewing area than the number of seats provided;

(4) A door to an area on the premises that is available for use by a customer shall not be locked during business hours;

(5) A chair or seating surface shall not provide a seating surface of more than 18 inches in either length or width;

(6) Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the area that is open to and used by customers such that, during hours of operation, all objects are plainly visible and so that any part of the premises which is open to customers, a program, menu or list printed in eight point type will be readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away. “Sufficient lighting” means a minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers, for all areas that are open to and used by customers. An adult theater that uses film projector technology may submit a written request to the director for permission to reduce the minimum lighting standard during the operation of the film projector. If the director finds that the specified lighting standard prevents the projection of the image onto the adult theater’s screen, the director may reduce the lighting standard for the viewing area to a level that allows for the projection of the image while still providing sufficient lighting that all objects are plainly visible within the viewing area;

(7) A restroom shall not contain viewing equipment;

(8) The premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

(9) Adult entertainment provided on the premises of the adult theater, or a pictorial photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation of adult entertainment displaying nudity or sexual conduct, shall not be visible from outside the business; and

(10) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed inside every entrance to an adult theater, that states as follows:

THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED BY COVINGTON MUNICIPAL CODE WHICH INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING PROHIBITIONS:

1. No person under eighteen years old is permitted on the premises.

2. Masturbation and other sexual conduct are prohibited and unlawful on the premises.

3. A violation is subject to criminal prosecution and civil penalties.

(Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.160 Adult theaters – Operating requirements and standards of conduct.

On the premises of an adult theater, the adult theater and its business license holders, business control persons, managers, employees and customers shall adhere to the operating requirements and standards of conduct as specified in the following:

(1) Business License Holder and Business Control Persons Responsible. The adult entertainment business license holder and any business control person shall be responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the managers, employees and customers of the adult theater complies with this chapter;

(2) Licensed Manager Required on Premises. The adult theater shall have, during all hours of operation, a licensed manager on duty who is stationed in a location from which every viewing area and all customer areas of the business are visible at all times either by direct line of sight or by continuous video monitoring;

(3) Licensed Manager Responsible. The on-duty manager is responsible for and shall assure that the conduct of the employees and customers of the adult theater complies with this chapter;

(4) Posting of Licenses. The holder of an adult entertainment business license shall post the license in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment business so that the license can be easily read when the business is open. The manager shall post his or her license next to the business license when he or she is on duty as the manager;

(5) Prohibited Hours of Operation. The adult theater business license holder, business control person or manager shall not operate the adult theater or allow the adult theater to be open to customers between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.;

(6) Minors Prohibited. An individual under 18 years old shall not be in or on the premises of the adult theater. An adult theater business license holder, business control person or manager shall not permit or allow a person under 18 years old to be in or on the premises;

(7) Alcohol Prohibited Without License. An individual shall not possess, consume or serve an alcoholic beverage in the adult theater unless, and to the extent, the business is covered by a liquor license issued by the Washington State Liquor Control Board;

(8) Obscene Performances Prohibited. An obscene performance shall not be displayed or exhibited in the adult theater;

(9) Sexual Conduct Prohibited. An individual shall not engage in sexual conduct in the adult theatre; and

(10) Warning Device Prohibited. A person shall not operate or maintain a warning device or system for the purpose of warning or aiding and abetting the warning of an employee, customer or other person that the police, health, fire or building inspector or other public official is approaching or entered the premises. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.170 Permission to inspect.

An adult entertainment business shall permit the director and personnel from the Police Department to conduct unannounced inspections, during the hours when the business is open, of all exterior and interior areas of the business premises open to and used by customers and all books and records required to be kept under this chapter. The purpose of such inspections is to determine if the business is being conducted in compliance with this chapter.

(1) The director may, at any time upon the recommendation of the chief of police and as provided below, suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter:

(a) Where such license was procured by fraud or a false representation of fact; or

(b) For the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter or any other similar local or State law by the licensee or by any of its servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by its servants, agents or employees; or

(c) For the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of the licensee’s servants, agents, or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the licensed premises when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by its servants, agents or employees.

(2) A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statues or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

(3) The director shall provide at least 10 days of prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension.

(4) Notification shall be by personal service or registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the decision. Notice mailed to the address on file shall be deemed received three days after mailing. The notice shall specify the grounds for the suspension or revocation. The suspension or revocation shall become effective 10 days from the date the notice is delivered or deemed received unless the person affected thereby files a written request with the director for a hearing before the hearing examiner within such 10-day period. The hearing examiner or other hearing body shall render its decision within 15 days following the close of the appeal hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court within 14 days of the hearing examiner decision, by writ of certiorari or mandamus. The decision of the director shall be stayed during the pendency of any administrative and judicial appeals except as provided in subsection (5) of this section.

(5) Where the Covington building official, fire marshal or the King County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of an adult entertainment business which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection (3)  of this section. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection (3) of this section; provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.180 Notice of appeal. 

Any person failing under the provision of this chapter may appeal from any notice of suspension, denial or revocation or civil penalty assessment by filing with the director within 10 days from the date of the notice is delivered or deemed received, a written appeal containing:

(1) A heading in the words: “Before the Hearing Examiner for the city of Covington”;

(2) A caption reading: “Appeal of ______” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

(3) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants participating in the appeal;

(4) A brief statement in concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

(5) A brief statement in concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

(6) The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; and

(7) The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of at least on appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.190 Date, time, place for hearing. 

As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing examiner shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date the appeal was filed with the director, unless the parties agree to an extension of time. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the hearing examiner’s office either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his or her address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.200 Scope of matters considered in appeal.

Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the written notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.210 Waiver of right to appeal.

Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.220 Action after hearing.

Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing examiner shall:

(1) Affirm the director’s decision; or

(2) Reverse or modify the director’s decision. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.230 Appeal from hearing examiner.

An appeal from a decision of the hearing examiner shall be to the County superior court and shall be served and filed within 30 days of the decision of the hearing examiner. In the event the applicant or license holder does not follow the procedures within the time periods set forth in this division, the action of the hearing examiner shall be final. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.240 Stay during appeal.

The decision of the director to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license under this chapter shall be stayed during administrative and judicial review, but refusal to issue an initial license shall not be stayed. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.250 Grounds for suspension and revocation of licenses.

(1) If a licensee is convicted of committing on the premises of an adult entertainment business a crime or offense involving one of the following, the license shall be revoked.

(a) A violation of Chapter 9A.88 RCW, Indecent Exposure – Prostitution;

(b) A liquor law violation or a transaction involving a controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW; or

(c) A violation of Chapter 9A.44 RCW, Sex Offenses, Chapter 9.68 RCW, Obscenity and Pornography or Chapter 9.68A RCW, Sexual Exploitation of Children.

(2) For a business licensee, a conviction for which the business license may be revoked includes the conviction of an employee, agent or entertainer for a crime or offense listed in subsection (1)(c) of this section occurring on the business premises when the business licensee knew or should have known of the crime or offense.

(3) For purposes of subsection (1)(c) of this section, “convicted” or “conviction” includes a bail forfeiture accepted by the court as the final disposition of the criminal charge,

(4) A licensee whose license has been revoked is not eligible to reapply for the license for one year following the date the decision to revoke is final.

(5) The director shall effect a suspension, revocation or disqualification by issuing a notice and order in accordance with KCC 6.01.130.

(6) On receipt of a notice and order of suspension or revocation, the license holder shall promptly deliver the license to the director unless an appeal is pending under this chapter. For a license suspension, the director shall return the license to the license holder for the license’s remaining term upon expiration of the suspension. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.260 Nonobscene performances, dramatic works, classes, seminars or lectures not prohibited. 

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit:

(1) A performance that is not obscene;

(2) A play, opera, musical or other dramatic work that is not obscene; or

(3) A class, seminar or lecture held for serious scientific or educational purposes. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.270 Limitations of liability.

This chapter is not intended to create a cause of action or provide the basis for a claim against the city, its officials or its employees for the performance or the failure to perform a duty or obligation running to a specific individual or specific individuals. A duty or obligation created under this chapter is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.280 Criminal penalty.

A person violating in any term of this chapter shall, on conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.290 Additional remedies.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the director may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin an act or practice that constitutes or will constitute a violation of this chapter or an applicable rule adopted under this title. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


5.20.300 Liquor regulations.

RCW Title 66, Alcoholic Beverage Control, and the rules of the Washington State Liquor Control Board govern to the extent they conflict with this chapter. The provisions of this chapter that refer to the minimum age of 18, including but not limited to the provisions relating to the required signs, require a minimum age of 21 as applied to an adult entertainment business that is licensed by the Washington State Liquor Control State Board. (Ord. 05-02 § 3)


Chapter 5.25 SOCIAL CARD GAMES

Sections:

5.25.010    Gambling tax imposed.

5.25.020    Administration of tax.

5.25.030    Tax due date – Delinquency.

5.25.040    Financial records.

5.25.050    Definitions.

5.25.060    Unlawful acts.

5.25.070    Violation – Penalty.


5.25.010 Gambling tax imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, there is levied upon all persons, associations or organizations a tax on all social card games occurring within the city as permitted by State law at the rate of 20 percent of the gross revenue from such games. (Ord. 98-98 § 1)


5.25.020 Administration of tax.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by CMC 5.25.010 shall be by the city clerk and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission. The city clerk is instructed and authorized to adopt appropriate reporting requirements, and to make such further rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-98 § 2)


5.25.030 Tax due date – Delinquency.

(1) The tax imposed by CMC 5.25.010 shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor shall accompany such return and be made on or before the thirtieth day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued.

(2) For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, there shall be added a penalty(ies) as follows:

(a) If paid on or before the fifteenth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $5.00;

(b) If paid prior to the thirtieth day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

(c) Failure to make payment by the thirtieth day of the second month succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued shall result in a penalty of 20 percent with a minimum penalty of $15.00. (Ord. 98-98 § 3)


5.25.040 Financial records.

It shall be the responsibility of all officers, directors and managers of any entity conducting any social card game subject to taxation under this chapter to make available at all reasonable times such financial records as the city clerk may require to determine full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 98-98 § 4)


5.25.050 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may after be amended. (Ord. 98-98 § 5)


5.25.060 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for any person liable for the tax imposed by ordinance to fail to pay the tax when due or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in connection with the return. (Ord. 98-98 § 6)


5.25.070 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 98-98 § 7)


Chapter 5.30 MOBILE FOOD UNITS

Sections:

5.30.010    Purpose.

5.30.020    Definitions.

5.30.030    General regulations.

5.30.040    Permit duration and fees.

5.30.050    Permitted zones.

5.30.060    License requirements.

5.30.070    Hours of operation.

5.30.080    Restrictions.

5.30.090    Revocation of permit.


5.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Provide an opportunity for mobile food units to conduct business within the City.

(2) Promote entrepreneurship and small business development.

(3) Provide regulations that protect the public health, safety, and welfare for operations associated with mobile food units. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.020 Definitions.

(1) “Cart” shall be defined as a mobile food unit that can be pushed by a single person to move between locations.

(2) “Mobile food vendor” shall be defined as a licensed and operable motor vehicle or trailer used to serve, vend, or provide ready to eat food or beverages for consumption from an approved and assigned fixed location.

(3) “Mobile food unit” shall be defined as a food service that can be easily moved from one location to another, such as a cart, trailer, or truck.

(4) “Occupied mobile food unit” shall be defined as a mobile food unit where workers will be inside of the unit, such as an enclosed truck or trailer.

(5) “Unoccupied mobile food unit” shall be defined as a mobile food unit where the workers will be outside of the unit, such as a push cart or trailer. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.030 General regulations.

A mobile food unit permit shall be required except when associated with a City-sponsored special event. The following requirements shall apply:

(1) A mobile food vendor or his/her designee shall fill out a complete application by providing, at minimum, the following information:

(a) A photograph of the vending unit, proposed signs, and any equipment.

(b) A site plan, a simple sketch of the site layout, depicting the location of the vending unit on the property on which food will be offered for sale and the location of parking, tables, tents, signage and canopies.

(c) Provide a complete “Property Owner Consent” form signed by the owner(s) of the private property or designated property manager that addresses the following:

(i) The property owner shall be responsible for the mobile food unit’s compliance with the provisions of this chapter with respect to the mobile food unit’s operation on the owner’s property.

(ii) A complete “Use of Restroom Agreement” form and a map showing the location of the restrooms in relation to the mobile food unit.

(d) Occupied mobile food units shall provide copies from all necessary licenses or permits issued by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries (L&I). L&I inspection and seal of approval must be obtained and properly affixed to the outside of the vehicle prior to operation.

(e) Copies of all the necessary license or permits issued by the Public Health – Seattle and King County, verifying that the mobile food unit is in compliance with all associated rules and regulations.

(f) The proposed hours of operation.

(2) Tables/Tents/Canopies.

(a) The arrangement of tents/canopies shall meet all building and fire code requirements.

(b) One portable pop-up tent or umbrella that does not exceed 10 feet by 12 feet in size, or up to three tables with beach type umbrellas, may be used for cover for patrons. Cooking shall not take place under any tents. Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks shall not be located under any tents. Umbrellas and canopies must be removed at the end of each day.

(3) Grease and Wastewater.

(a) A grease trap shall be installed and maintained on all mobile food preparation vehicles.

(b) Grease and wastewater shall be properly disposed of per adopted State and local health regulations.

(4) Trash. All exterior trash receptacles not intended for customer use shall be screened from the public view and securely covered.

(5) Fire Marshal Review. The Fire Marshal review and approval is required when LGP, charcoal, wood, or oil frying equipment is used.

(6) Signs. Signs associated with a mobile food unit shall comply with Chapter 18.55 CMC. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.040 Permit duration and fees.

(1) The mobile food unit permit shall be effective for one year from the date of permit issuance.

(2) Persons applying for a mobile food unit permit must pay an application fee established by the City of Covington as set forth in the current fee resolution unless exempted by CMC 5.10.040(2). (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.050 Permitted zones.

Mobile food units shall only be permitted within the mixed commercial (MC), general commercial (GC), town center (TC), or regional commercial mixed use (RMCU) zones; provided, that all other conditions of approval are satisfied. Mobile food units may be permitted on City property, including City parks for concessions subject to City approval. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.060 License requirements.

(1) A separate business license obtained from the City of Covington, as authorized under CMC Title 5, shall be required for each mobile food unit.

(2) All mobile food unit licenses shall be prominently displayed upon all vehicles or locations from which a mobile food unit sells products, including but not limited to the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries food truck/trailer sticker.

(3) All mobile food units shall comply with all laws, rules, and regulations regarding food handling, and all mobile food preparation vehicles used by food vendors shall comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations respecting such vehicles as established by Public Health – Seattle and King County, State and local traffic laws, and the provisions of the Covington Municipal Code. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.070 Hours of operation.

(1) Mobile food units may operate any day of the week.

(2) Operating hours shall be consistent with the site’s primary business operating hours, ensuring bathroom facilities are always available. When located on a vacant lot, the hours shall be consistent with the general hours of adjacent business(es).

Vendors must assemble and disassemble their spaces during these hours. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.080 Restrictions.

(1) Mobile food units on public streets, parks, City-owned property and public rights-of-way shall not be permitted unless approved by the City for concessions or a special event, including a festival, sports tournament, or similar activity.

(2) Mobile food units shall comply with Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board.

(3) The use of any portion of the vending unit as living or sleeping quarters is prohibited.

(4) Except for special events or activities authorized by a temporary use permit, no portable restrooms for use in connection with a mobile food unit shall be allowed on a site.

(5) Temporary power shall be regulated by the National Electrical Code and the International Fire Code. If electrical cord covers are used, they are required to meet the slope requirements of ANSI A117.1 Section 303. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


5.30.090 Revocation of permit.

(1) A mobile food unit permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked, suspended, or denied either the issuance or renewal of if the City finds that:

(a) The vendor has violated or failed to meet the terms of this section and all other applicable sections of the Covington Municipal Code or conditions of this permit; or

(b) The mobile food unit operation is detrimental to the surrounding businesses or to the public due to either appearance or conditions of the stand; or

(c) Any required licenses have been suspended, revoked, or canceled.

A vendor or his/her designee may appeal a revocation to the hearing examiner in accordance with Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 05-19 § 1 (Exh. A))


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Animal Control


Chapter 6.05 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.05.010    King County Code adopted – Exceptions – Conflicts.

6.05.020    Enforcement.


6.05.010 King County Code adopted – Exceptions – Conflicts.

(1) The following chapters of the King County Code (KCC) are adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, as the same have been amended by King County Ordinance No. 16861, and as they may be amended hereafter, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter:

(a) Chapter 11.04, Animal Control Regulations;

(b) Chapter 11.08, Dog Leash Law;

(c) Chapter 11.12, Rabies Control;

(d) Chapter 11.20, Disposition of Fowl and Rabbits;

(e) Chapter 11.24, Stock Restricted Area;

(f) Chapter 11.28, Exotic Animals; and

(g) Chapter 11.32, Guard Dogs.

(2) The following exceptions shall be applied to the King County Code chapters adopted by reference in this chapter:

(a) “Animal control authority” means the City or the animal control authority of King County, as agent for the City, acting alone or in concert with other municipalities for enforcement of the animal control laws of the City, King County, and the State and the shelter and welfare of animals.

(b) Unless the context indicates otherwise, “King County” means the City.

(c) “County Department of Planning” means the Covington Community Development Department.

(d) “King County Board of Appeals” means the Covington City Council; provided, however, that at such time as the City may enter into a contract with King County for the enforcement of the animal control ordinance, the contract may provide for the use of the King County Board of Appeals in which case the “King County Board of Appeals” means the King County Board of Appeals.

(e) KCC 11.04.010(B) shall provide that if there is a conflict between a provision of the KCC and a provision of the Covington Municipal Code, the provision of the Covington Municipal Code shall control.

(f) All references in Chapter 11.04 of the KCC to Title 21A of the KCC, which provide for the number of animals that may be kept as part of certain land uses, shall be replaced with a reference to CMC Title 18.

(g) KCC 11.04.050(A) shall provide that the applicant for an original animal shelter, cattery, pet shop, grooming service, or kennel license shall present to the regional animal services section a written statement from the City Community Development Department that the establishment of the animal shelter, cattery, pet shop, grooming service, or kennel at the proposed site is not in violation of the City zoning code under CMC Title 18, or has a legal nonconforming zoning status, or a conditional use permit has been issued for the intended use.

(h) KCC 11.04.050(B) shall provide that shelters, catteries, pet shops, grooming services, and kennels shall comply with the licensing requirements of the Seattle-King County Department of Public Health. Subject to applicable restrictions in the City’s zoning code in CMC Title 18, the facilities may board animals as authorized by their Seattle-King County Department of Public Health license.

(3) No portion of this chapter shall be deemed to be exclusive or exhaustive in reference to animal control and shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive local, State, or Federal provisions.

(4) The City shall maintain at all times available for review by the general public one copy of King County Code chapters adopted by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


6.05.020 Enforcement.

(1) The City Manager or designee and the regional animal services section of King County are authorized to enforce this chapter and the laws of the State of Washington that pertain to animal cruelty, shelter, welfare, and enforcement of control, consistent with the enforcement provisions set forth in Title 11 of the King County Code and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(2) Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the City Manager or designee may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin acts or practices and abate any conditions that constitute a violation of this chapter or other regulations adopted under this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


Title 7 (Reserved) 

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Electronic Security Devices

8.10    Abatement of Nuisance Vehicles

8.15    Solid Waste

8.20    Noise Control

8.25    Boating on Pipe Lake

8.30    Nuisances

8.40    Parks, Recreation, Open Space, Trails and Public Spaces


Chapter 8.05 ELECTRONIC SECURITY DEVICES

Sections:

8.05.010    Adopted.

8.05.020    True and correct copy.


8.05.010 Adopted.

The city does hereby adopt by reference Chapter 12.32 of the King County Code, entitled “Electronic Security Devices,” as is now enacted or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 73-98 § 1)


8.05.020 True and correct copy.

A true and correct copy of Chapter 12.32 KCC as enacted on the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A*. (Ord. 73-98 § 2)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. 73-98, may be found on file in the city clerk’s office.


Chapter 8.10 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE VEHICLES

Sections:

8.10.010    Purpose.

8.10.020    Definitions.

8.10.030    Certification.

8.10.040    Exemptions.

8.10.050    Abatement of nuisance vehicles.

8.10.060    Third party liability.


8.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the character and safety of the city’s neighborhoods by eliminating nuisance vehicles from private property, and to provide procedures for the removal of nuisance vehicles as authorized by RCW 46.55.240. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1)


8.10.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Code enforcement officer” means a code enforcement officer, the Director of Community Development, or the Director of Community Development’s designee.

(2) “Nuisance vehicle” means and includes any car, truck, motorcycle, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle (RV), self-propelled construction equipment or heavy machinery, or any other motorized or non-motorized means of conveyance, or any part thereof, and which:

(a) Meets any one of the following criteria:

(i) Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the following: a broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission;

(ii) Is apparently inoperable;

(iii) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it; and

(b) Is not validly licensed and/or registered under the laws of the State of Washington.

(3) “Owner” or “property owner of record” means any person owning property as shown on the real property records of King County or on the last assessment roll for taxes, and shall also mean any lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.

(4) “Property” means land and any buildings or structures located thereon.

(5) “Vehicle” has the same definition as the definition of “vehicle” in RCW 46.04.670. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1)


8.10.030 Certification.

The code enforcement officer may inspect and certify, to the best of his or her knowledge, that a vehicle meets the requirements of a nuisance vehicle. Such certification shall be in writing and shall record the make of the vehicle, the vehicle identification number, and the license plate number of the vehicle, if available. The code enforcement officer shall also describe in detail at least three of the following:

(1) The model year and age of the vehicle;

(2) The damaged or missing equipment or condition of the vehicle;

(3) The factors supporting a determination that the vehicle is apparently inoperable;

(4) The absence of a valid, current license plate; and

(5) The approximate fair market value of the vehicle and the value of the scrap in it. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1)


8.10.040 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter relating to nuisance vehicles shall not apply to the following:

(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to the provisions of RCW 46.80.130. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1)


8.10.050 Abatement of nuisance vehicles.

(1) Unless exempted under CMC 8.10.040, all nuisance vehicles placed or situated upon private property within Covington City limits are public nuisances to be abated and shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement remedies as set forth in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(2) If the City determines that such a violation has occurred or is occurring, the City shall abate said violation in accordance with the civil code enforcement procedures established in Chapter 1.30 CMC; except that the last registered and legal owner(s) of the nuisance vehicle and the property owner of record shall be given any notice required by Chapter 1.30 CMC. Said notice need not be provided to the last registered and legal owner(s) of the nuisance vehicle if the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers cannot be readily determined or if the property owner has prevented access to the vehicle.

(3) If the City invokes CMC 1.30.170 and abates the nuisance vehicle(s), the vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof shall be removed by a licensed tow truck operator or hulk hauler. The code enforcement officer shall give notice to the Washington State Patrol and to the Washington State Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked.

(4) Pursuant to CMC 1.30.170, the costs and expenses of abating the violation shall be assessed against the last registered owner of the nuisance vehicle and/or the property owner of record.

(5) This section shall apply even in cases where the owner has given permission for the vehicle to be left on the property. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1)


8.10.060 Third party liability.

(1) It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

(2) It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the registered owner and property owner of record, and no provision or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers and employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

(3) Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of a property owner or registered owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 22-01 § 1; Ord. 79-98 § 1. Formerly 8.10.090)


Chapter 8.15 SOLID WASTE

Sections:

8.15.010    Definitions.

8.15.020    Purpose.

8.15.025    Mandatory removal and disposal.

8.15.030    Hauling restrictions.

8.15.040    Contract for solid waste collection services – Terms.

8.15.050    Collection – Requirements.

8.15.060    Rates.

8.15.070    Billing.

8.15.075    Accumulation of solid waste.

8.15.080    Improper disposal.

8.15.090    Administrative and enforcement responsibility.

8.15.100    Violations.

8.15.110    Plan adopted.

8.15.120    Determining levels and types of service.


8.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise defined, the following shall have the intended definitions:

(1) “Collector” or “collector of solid waste and/or recyclables” means the company(ies) with which the City has contracted to collect, haul, or dispose of solid waste, recyclables, and/or yard waste.

(2) “Commercial” means any establishment or business that is not residential in nature, including hotels/motels, churches, nonprofit organizations, Federal, State and local government-owned facilities.

(3) “Person” means every person, firm, partnership, association, institution, and corporation. The term shall also mean the occupant and/or the owner of the premises for which service mentioned in this chapter is rendered.

(4) “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, sewage sludge, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and recyclable materials. (RCW 70.95.030(22).)

(5) “Yard waste” means compostable organic materials resulting from landscape maintenance and pre- and post-consumer organic wastes including, but not limited to, leaves, brush, tree trimmings, grass clippings, weeds, shrubs, garden waste, and food scraps. Branches or roots must be smaller than four inches in diameter and shorter than four feet in length. Yard waste does not include stumps, demolition wood, large amounts of dirt, rocks, glass, plastics, metal, concrete, sheet rock, asphalt, or any other nonorganic land-clearing debris. (The collector may change the range of materials handled as yard waste upon the approval of the City to reflect those materials allowed by the Seattle-King County Health Department to be treated as such for the frequency of collection provided by the collector.) (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to prevent harm to the health and safety of the public and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of solid waste collection and disposal and maintaining consistent and reliable solid waste services under the exclusive supervision and control of the City. 

It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon waste generators, collectors, and/or operators of solid waste handling sites, and no provision of, nor term used in, this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City nor any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or form, the basis for any liability on the part of the City or its officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any person subject to this chapter to comply with the provisions herein, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the City. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.025 Mandatory removal and disposal.

The maintenance of health and sanitation requires, and it is the intention of this chapter to make, the collection, removal and proper disposal of solid waste within the City by the collector mandatory and universal. This section does not apply to portions of the waste stream that are being recycled through private, permitted recyclers or yard waste collection. This section does not apply to any account which has received a written exception to solid waste collection service from the City pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 08-15 § 2)


8.15.030 Hauling restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 08-15. (Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.040 Contract for solid waste collection services – Terms.

(1) The City shall let a contract or contracts to provide for the collection of all solid wastes and yard waste within the City. The details of such a contract or contracts shall be agreed upon after negotiations and the City Council’s action thereon shall be final. Such negotiations may be preceded by a call for bids or proposals if determined to be necessary and at the discretion of City Council. Such contract shall obligate the collector to pick up solid wastes and yard waste in the City in accordance with this chapter and shall provide for the collector to be paid for its services out of fees for collection.

(2) Every such contract for solid waste and yard waste collection also shall contain a provision that such contract may not be assigned by the collector, or the responsibilities thereunder transferred, except with the prior consent of the City.

(3) Such contract(s) shall be for such term as the City Council shall find is in the best public interest and may contain provisions, upon proper standards, for adjustments in service rates.

(4) Such contract(s) shall contain suitable provisions permitting the forfeiture of the contract for nonperformance or violation of such contract by the collector. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.050 Collection – Requirements.

(1) Solid Waste.

(a) Solid Waste Collection Required. The collector shall collect, remove, and dispose of all solid waste from the premises, whether residential, commercial, industrial, or otherwise, existing within the City upon such periodic schedule as included in the collection contract. All persons and properties within the City are required to use the solid waste collector(s) of the City and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than those duly authorized by the City, to haul solid waste through the streets of the City. Pursuant to the definition of “solid waste” in this chapter, solid waste collection shall also include the collection of recyclable materials.

(b) Solid Waste Minimum Service Level. All persons and occupied property shall use and be responsible for at least the minimum level of solid waste collection service, including recycling, and associated charges for residential or commercial service, as applicable, offered by the collector unless exempted from such requirement under subsection (3) of this section. The collector will automatically bill the residential or commercial customer for such minimum level of service if the customer does not sign up for service within 30 days of occupying a property in the City or the effective date of the enacting ordinance of this section, whichever is later. 

(2) Yard Waste Service Level. At minimum, the collector shall offer biweekly curbside yard waste collection service to City customers on a year-round basis and pursuant to any other terms negotiated in the contract with the City. Yard waste collection is an optional service for all persons and occupied property. 

(3) Exception to Solid Waste Collection Requirement. 

(a) If one property owner owns adjacent properties on different utility accounts, one solid waste service may be shared based upon a written request to and approval from the City and the collector.

(b) If a residential customer owns a business in the City limits and the solid waste produced at the residence is being collected at the business, the residential account may be exempted from mandatory service based upon a written request to and approval from the City and the collector.

(c) If the collector is unable to provide solid waste collection service due to inadequate clearance for the disposal vehicles, a customer may file a written request with the City for an exemption from solid waste collection services. Such exemption must be approved by the collector and shall be conditioned upon agreement that solid waste will be disposed of properly on a weekly basis at a permitted landfill by the customer.

(d) If upon satisfactory evidence on an annual basis that a person or property produces no solid waste, the respective account may be exempted from mandatory service based upon a written request to and approval from the City and the collector.

(4) Self-Haul. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the limited and occasional hauling of solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard wastes by a customer from its specific property to an approved King County solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard waste collection site. Occasional haulers are not exempt from the mandatory solid waste collection service and payment requirements and are responsible for any associated fees for such collection site services, as applicable.

(5) All solid waste that is generated and/or placed for collection and collected within the City for delivery to the King County solid waste system for disposal shall be in compliance with the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as amended (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.), Chapter 70.95 RCW, King County Board of Health Rules and Regulations No. 8, and all other applicable Federal, State, and local environmental health laws, rules, or regulations.

(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons within the City, including the collector, and any other persons authorized by this chapter or other laws to collect waste within the City for disposal. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.060 Rates.

(1) The rates for solid waste and yard waste collection service shall be calculated in accordance with such collection contract(s) for solid waste collection service as the City may enter into.

(2) In the event of any change in rates, customers shall be notified in writing of such change in such manner and with such time schedule as may be established by applicable law.

(3) The City shall maintain, publish, and make available to the public a current schedule of rates for solid waste collection service. Publishing may occur via the City’s website. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.070 Billing.

(1) The collector shall bill for all solid waste and yard waste collection services in accordance with the collection contract entered into with the City. All costs related to billing and bill collection will be paid by the collector.

(2) Charges for any special services not covered in the collection contract shall be determined by the mutual agreement of the City and the collector.

(3) The bills provided by the collector will be due in accordance with guidelines established by the collector, which may include penalties for late payment.

(4) The collector may use a collection agency, a lien process, or any other available legal method to recover the past due balance from the customer. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.075 Accumulation of solid waste.

It shall be the duty of the owner of any residence or commercial establishment to ensure that all solid waste that is created or accumulated is deposited into an approved container and is collected by a City-contracted collector. (Ord. 08-15 § 3)


8.15.080 Improper disposal.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, or in any other manner dispose of solid waste and/or yard waste upon any street, alley, public place, or private property within the City.

(2) It is unlawful to deposit any solid waste and/or yard waste in a solid waste and/or yard waste container owned or maintained on the premises of another unless invited, licensed, or otherwise privileged to do so.

(3) It is unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste and/or yard waste, except brush, grass, weeds, and cuttings from trees, lawns, or gardens, in any manner not authorized by the applicable provisions of the City’s fire code.

(4) Whenever solid waste and/or yard waste dumped in violation of this chapter contains three or more items bearing the name of one individual, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the individual whose name appears on such items committed the unlawful dumping. 

(5) Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under CMC 1.30.030 and any person convicted thereof may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for no more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.090 Administrative and enforcement responsibility.

The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The Director or his/her designee may make inspections to enforce this chapter and may notify the person or collector that they are in violation of this chapter. The Director may issue any written rules that are consistent with this chapter and which he/she finds are necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.100 Violations.

Any person violating any part of this chapter shall be deemed to have created a public nuisance pursuant to CMC 1.30.030. Said violations may be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1))


8.15.110 Plan adopted.

The final 2001 King County Solid Waste Management Plan dated November 2001, including Appendices Volumes 1 and 2, is hereby designated and adopted as the City’s Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, except as otherwise set forth herein or by City ordinance. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 04-02 § 1. Formerly 8.15.010)


8.15.120 Determining levels and types of service.

Pursuant to RCW 70.95.160, the City of Covington hereby determines that King County shall not exercise any powers regarding the levels and types of service of any aspect of solid waste handling within the corporate limits of the City as now exist or as may hereafter be amended. The level of and types of service for any aspect of solid waste handling shall be determined by City ordinance and not as set forth in any County regulation or ordinance as now exists or as may hereafter be adopted, including without limitation the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 04-13 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 04-02 § 2. Formerly 8.15.020)


Chapter 8.20 NOISE CONTROL

Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Public disturbance noises.

8.20.030    Violation – Penalty.


8.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to minimize the exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological effects of excessive noise. The intent of the City Council is to control the level of noise pollution in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose and the quality of the environment by declaring certain noise producing activities to be noise disturbances. (Ord. 04-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 96-98 § 1)


8.20.020 Public disturbance noises.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance noise.

(2) The following sources of sound shall be public disturbance noises:

(a) The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except those from a police, fire or medical emergency vehicle, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property;

(b) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property;

(c) Yelling or shouting which is audible on the public streets or public grounds between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time and place so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property;

(d) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment or condominium which unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from band sessions or social gatherings;

(e) The creation of sound from any motor vehicle audio sound system, such as a tape player, radio or compact disc player, operated at a volume so as to be audible at least 50 feet from the source;

(f) The creation of sound from any audio equipment, such as a tape player, radio or compact disc player, television, musical instrument, or similar device, whether portable or stationary, operated at a volume as to be audible at least 50 feet from the source;

(g) The creation of squealing, screeching or other similar sounds from motor vehicle tires in contact with the ground or other roadway surface because of rapid acceleration, braking or excessive speed around corners or because of such other reason; provided, that sounds which result from actions which are necessary to avoid danger shall be exempt from this section;

(h) The creation of sounds originating from residential real property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of grounds and appurtenances, including but not limited to sounds from lawn mowers, powered hand tools, snow removal equipment and composters, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends;

(i) The creation of sounds originating from any construction activity, including excavation and land clearing work, or erection, demolition, alteration, repair, or relocation of any building or structure, which uses tools such as, but not limited to, powered equipment, compressors, motorized or powered hand tools, hammers or equipment of a similar nature at any location which produces noise clearly audible from another location in a residential district or at a dwelling in any district, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays or Federal holidays. Prohibitions on the above listed construction activities occurring between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or Federal holidays may be waived or modified (expanded work hours) only upon application and subject to approval by the City Manager or his/her designee by a permit applicant, or the owner of the property, with an approved building permit for work involving public utilities within the public right-of-way, or an approved Washington State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) surface mining reclamation permit limited to the unloading of fill on site.

The application fee established in the Covington fee schedule shall be paid for review and potential issuance of an expanded work hours permit. The designated City official responsible for reviewing and issuing the permit may approve, deny, or condition the permit based on the approval criteria. Approval may only be for specific dates and times and under terms that the approving official deems appropriate under the circumstances. The City may require additional measures to control noise, vibration and light/glare, including but not limited to equipping construction vehicles with ambient-sensitive back-up alarms or muffling engine noise if the site conditions or the site’s proximity to residential zoned properties, residential uses, or critical areas warrants them. The application shall contain such information as deemed necessary by the designated City official, including:

(i) Expanded Work Hours Procedures and Approval Criteria. The applicant shall outline in writing the duration and hours of the requested nighttime work, why it is necessary, a detailed description of the activities that will be undertaken in those expanded hours, and any mitigation methods proposed to minimize or eliminate noise impacts to nearby residential dwellings and critical areas. Any proposed expanded work hours application for fill activity associated with an approved DNR surface mining reclamation permit shall demonstrate they meet the provisions of CMC 14.60.160(4).

(ii) Approval. If the request is approved, the City’s approval shall include the specific construction activities, dates and hours of operation, and any appropriate noise mitigation measures that must be met to commence such activities during the approved dates and times. Upon approval by the City, the applicant shall notify all property owners within 300 feet of the property of the approved nighttime construction hours at least three days prior to commencement of the nighttime work by a notification method approved by the City. The City Manager or his/her designee may waive or modify the three-day notification requirement to affected property owners if the City Manager or his/her designee determines that a fire or life safety emergency exists that requires the work to be commenced prior to the end of the three-day notification period.

(j) The creation of sounds from gas-powered motorized foot scooters between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or during any “hours of darkness” as that phrase is defined in RCW 46.04.200. For purposes of this section, the times of sunset and sunrise shall be those times designated in a newspaper of local circulation including the King County Journal, the Seattle Times or the Seattle Post-Intelligencer.

(3) The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to a civic event or gathering approved in advance by the City Manager or his/her designee; and provided, that the City shall approve the activities and hours of operation for which the noise level shall be exempt. (Ord. 04-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 21-04 § 1; Ord. 27-01 § 1; Ord. 96-98 § 1)


8.20.030 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for the first offense. For second and subsequent offenses, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both such fine and jail.

(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 04-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 05-13 § 1; Ord. 07-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 96-98 § 1)


Chapter 8.25 BOATING ON PIPE LAKE

Sections:

8.25.010    Pipe Lake restrictions.

8.25.020    Violation – Penalty.


8.25.010 Pipe Lake restrictions.

It is unlawful to use or operate any internal combustion engine on that portion of Pipe Lake located within the boundaries of the City of Covington; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any public official or construction company from performing authorized duties. The City is authorized to post and maintain the appropriate signs. (Ord. 97-98 § 1)


8.25.020 Violation – Penalty.

Except where the violation is classified otherwise, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a Class 2 infraction consistent with Chapter 7.80 RCW, as it currently reads or is revised, except that it is a misdemeanor for any person to commit a violation designated as an infraction, if during a period of 365 days prior the person has twice committed the same infraction under this chapter. (Ord. 97-98 § 1)


Chapter 8.30 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.30.010    Definitions.

8.30.020    Prohibited conduct.

8.30.030    Nuisances declared.

8.30.040    Violation – Penalty.

8.30.050    Liability for continuing nuisance.

8.30.060    Safeguards.


8.30.010 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Building materials” means and includes lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint and similar materials.

(2) “Enforcement officer” means the city manager of the city of Covington or his/her designee authorized in writing to enforce this chapter.

(3) “Fire hazard” means vegetation which is dry and combustible, including but not limited to weeds, grass or clippings, dead bushes or trees or their parts, and other combustible vegetative materials, but specifically excluding small logs and kindling used for firewood, vegetative materials used as compost for fertilizer and decaying vegetation in wetlands and fish and wildlife habitat areas.

(4) “Health hazard” means any of the following:

(a) Vegetation or refuse which provides a harborage for rats or other pests;

(b) Vegetation which is poisonous, including but not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, poison hemlock, poison sumac, and nightshade;

(c) Vegetation which is noxious, including gorse, Japanese knotweed, purple loosestrife, giant hogweed, tansy ragwort, knapweed, Dalmatian toadflax, and any other plant which may be determined to be noxious, in accordance with RCW Title 17; and

(d) Vegetation, refuse or feces which create a danger of contamination or disease.

(5) “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or by an agent or employee.

(6) “Owner” means and includes any agent, lessee, owner, tenant or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises. An owner or agent is deemed to have such control if her or she has actual or constructive knowledge of the maintenance upon the premises of any nuisance as defined in this chapter.

(7) “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips and any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetland.

(8) “Public nuisance” and “nuisance” each mean and consist of doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:

(a) Unreasonably injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;

(b) Offends public decency; or

(c) Is offensive to the sense of reasonable persons; or

(d) In any way renders other persons insecure in life or use of property.

(9) “Vegetation” means trees, shrubs, grass, weeds, bushes, vines and other plant materials, including but not limited to clippings, fallen leaves, fruit or branches. (Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


8.30.020 Prohibited conduct.

It is a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, create, maintain, or allow upon any premises any public nuisance, as defined in CMC 8.30.010(8) or 8.30.030. (Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


8.30.030 Nuisances declared.

The following specific acts, omissions, places and conditions are declared to be public nuisances:

(1) Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place in the City for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacturing operation, which by occasioning noxious exhalation, offensive smells or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public;

(2) Keeping or maintaining any dangerous, decaying, falling, or damaged dwelling, or other structure;

(3) Keeping, using or maintaining any pen, stable, lot, place or premises in which any animal may be confined or kept, in such a manner to be noxious, foul or offensive to individuals or the public;

(4) Obstructing or encroaching upon or rendering unsafe for passage any public highway, private street, street, alley, sidewalk, crossing, park, square, driveway, lake, or stream in the City; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to events, parades, or the use of the streets or public rights-of-way when authorized by the City;

(5) Making or keeping any explosive or combustible substance in the City, or carrying it through the streets thereof, in a quantity or manner prohibited by Chapter 70.74 RCW;

(6) Placing, depositing, keeping, having or leaving in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises or in or upon any street, avenue, park, sidewalk, waterway, parkway or public or private place in the City any one or more of the following conditions, places or things:

(a) Any putrid, unhealthy or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, or waste parts of fish, vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved covered receptacles;

(b) Privies, vaults, drains, sewer and septic tanks, cesspools, sumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are noxious, foul, malodorous or injurious to the public health;

(c) Vegetation which constitutes a fire hazard or a health hazard;

(d) Refuse or feces which constitute a health hazard;

(e) Vegetation which overhangs a street, sidewalk or alley in such a way as to impede the free and full use of said street, sidewalk or alley, and vegetation which obstructs the vision of drivers such that traffic regulation signs or view of an intersection is obstructed from a position of 30 feet or closer to the intersection, and vegetation which creates injury to or other opportunity or risk of injury to passersby of the general public;

(f) Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies and/or the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinances of the city;

(g) An accumulation of material, including but not limited to tin cans, bottles, glass, plastic, scrap metal, ashes, wire, bric-a-brac, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, trash, litter, weeds, grass, rags, garbage, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing straw, or other packing materials or building materials which are not properly stored or neatly piled, and all such trash or abandoned material unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles approved by the enforcement officer; provided, however, this section shall exclude residential composting piles not greater than 25 square yards in area;

(h) Broken or discarded furniture, furnishings, appliances, household equipment and other similar items, in any front yard, back yard, side yard or vacant lot;

(i) Any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, freezer or other container having an air-tight door or lid and a snap lock or other locking device which may not be easily released from the inside when such lid or door is in a closed position;

(j) In a place accessible to children, any attractive nuisance dangerous to children, including but not limited to any abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerator, freezer or other large appliance;

(k) Any abandoned or unused well, pit, shaft, cistern, or storage tank without first demolishing or removing from the premises such storage tanks, or securely closing and barring any entrance or trapdoor thereto, or without filling any well, pit, shaft or cistern or capping the same with sufficient security to prevent access thereto;

(l) Nonoperational or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, or other articles of personal property that are discarded or left in a state of partial construction or repair in any front yard, side yard, rear yard, or vacant lot. The responsible person may have on his or her premises, at any one time, only one nonoperational or abandoned vehicle outside an enclosed building for a period not to exceed 14 days. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


8.30.040 Violation – Penalty.

If the city determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring, the city shall remedy said violation in accordance with the civil code enforcement procedures established in Chapter 1.30 CMC; except that in addition to any other person entitled to notice thereunder, the owner shall be given any notice required by Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


8.30.050 Liability for continuing nuisance.

Every successive owner or occupant of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property caused by a former owner is liable in the same manner as the one who created it. (Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


8.30.060 Safeguards.

When a nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC, the enforcement officer or other officer, agent or employee shall proceed with due care and without unnecessary destruction of property. In all cases, the enforcement officer shall be authorized to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect the entire abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 21-01 § 1; Ord. 28-99 § 1)


Chapter 8.40 PARKS, RECREATION, OPEN SPACE, TRAILS AND PUBLIC SPACES

Sections:

8.40.010    Applicability.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.030    Regulations issued by Parks and Recreation Director.

8.40.040    Parks and Recreation – Setting and establishing user fees.

8.40.050    Park scheduling – Permits.

8.40.060    Park hours.

8.40.070    Motor vehicle operation and parking.

8.40.080    Bicycle operation.

8.40.090    Skateboard operation.

8.40.100    Trails use.

8.40.110    Aircraft.

8.40.120    Rockets.

8.40.130    Restrictions on animals in parks.

8.40.140    Overnight camping.

8.40.150    Campfires.

8.40.160    Smoking.

8.40.170    Litter in parks.

8.40.180    Sales/rentals.

8.40.190    Signposting and solicitation.

8.40.200    Restricted areas – Generally.

8.40.210    Restricted areas – Specific.

8.40.220    Practicing and playing certain games.

8.40.230    Alcoholic beverages and drugs.

8.40.240    Fireworks prohibited in parks.

8.40.250    Certain weapons prohibited in parks.

8.40.260    Removal or destruction of park property.

8.40.270    Encroachments on park property.

8.40.280    Infraction – Penalty.


8.40.010 Applicability.

This chapter constitutes the general regulations which will be in effect for all Department programs, City parks and for all other property under the management of the Parks and Recreation Department including, but not limited to, property commonly known as recreation facilities, greenways, open spaces, trails, boulevards and plazas. These general regulations are in addition to other applicable City, State, and Federal laws. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1)


8.40.020 Definitions.

Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated:

(1) “Aircraft” means any machine or device designed to travel through the air including but not limited to airplanes, remotely controlled aircraft, helicopters and hot air balloons.

(2) “Alcoholic beverages” or “liquor” includes the four varieties of liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, all fermented, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquor, and all other intoxicating beverages, and every liquor, solid or semisolid or other substance, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer; all drinks or drinkable liquids and all preparations of mixtures capable of human consumption. Any liquor, semisolid, solid or other substance which contains more than one percent alcohol by weight shall be conclusively deemed to be intoxicating.

(3) “Associated marine area” means any water area within 100 feet of any City of Covington trail, open space, park area or marine facility such as a dock, pier, float, buoy, log boom, or other object that is part of a City of Covington park area; provided, that such area does not include private property.

(4) “Bicycles” shall mean nonmotorized pedal-powered transportation devices including but not limited to bicycles, BMX bikes and mountain bikes.

(5) “Boat” means any contrivance up to 65 feet in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.

(6) “Camper” means a motorized vehicle containing sleeping and/or housekeeping accommodations, and shall include a pick-up truck with camper, a van-type body, a converted bus, or any similar type vehicle.

(7) “Camping” means erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of or in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.

(8) “Campsite” means a designated site used for the purpose of camping.

(9) “Department” means any division of the City of Covington Parks and Recreation Department.

(10) “Director” means the City of Covington Parks and Recreation Department Director or designee.

(11) “Facility” means any building, structure, park or other area operated by the City of Covington Parks and Recreation Department.

(12) “Group” means a gathering of 50 or more people.

(13) “Litter” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, or any other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this section, tends to create a nuisance which annoys, injures, or endangers the health, safety, or comfort of the public.

(14) “Mechanical trapping device” shall be defined as any device, including but not limited to snares or machines, that shuts suddenly upon contact by an animal, or a device that kills or inflicts physical pain and injury upon a captured animal.

(15) “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road, and in, upon, or by which any persons or property may be transported or drawn, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, motor scooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel-drive vehicles, and snowmobiles, whether or not they can be legally operated upon the public highways.

(16) “Person” means all persons, groups, firms, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or combination of persons whenever acting for themselves or as an agent, servant, or employee.

(17) “Picnic” means an outing with food, usually provided by members of the group and eaten in the open.

(18) “Rocket” means any device containing a combustible substance which when ignited propels the device forward.

(19) “Special event” means any parade, fair, show, festival, carnival, rally, party, filming of a movie, video or television show, motorcade, run, street dance, bike-a-thon, race, walk, athletic event or other attended entertainment or celebration that is to be held in whole or in part upon publicly owned property and/or public rights-of-way, or if held wholly upon private property will nevertheless affect or impact the ordinary and normal use by the general public of public property or public rights-of-way within the vicinity of the event.

(20) “Skateboard” means any means of travel with toy wheels.

(21) “Trail” means any path, track, or right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles, equestrians, or other nonmotorized modes of transportation.

(22) “Trailer” means a towed vehicle.

(23) “Travel” means all forms of movement or transportation on a trail, including but not limited to foot, bicycle, horse and skateboards.

(24) “Travel on a trail in a negligent manner” means any form of travel on a trail in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1)


8.40.030 Regulations issued by Parks and Recreation Director.

(1) The Parks and Recreation Director is authorized to issue regulations for the use of park property, facilities, and equipment and, with the written agreement of the property owner, regulations which shall apply to the use by the public of private property which is open to public access pursuant to a condition of an open space agreement with the City or other agency. To be effective, the regulations must be made part of the City’s policies and procedures manual, and copies must be made available to the general public through the Parks and Recreation Department office and the Community Relations office.

(2) All agreements between the City and private owners granting access to open space shall authorize entry upon the land by police officers and other City employees to enforce regulations.

(3) The City assumes no liability for the condition of park property subject to the regulations, for the adequacy of the regulations on park property, or for claims for damages arising from the failure to enforce them. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1)


8.40.040 Parks and Recreation – Setting and establishing user fees.

(1) The City Manager shall review at least annually the current rates, fees and charges for facilities and programs, and amend them, if necessary, to ensure that the City is providing such services at a reasonable fair market value and consistent with fee policies and goals as recommended by the Department.

(2) The City Manager is authorized to establish or amend rates, fees and charges for Department services including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Senior adult programs, activities, classes and services;

(b) Adult programs, activities, classes and services;

(c) Family programs, activities, classes and services;

(d) Youth programs, activities, classes and services;

(e) Facility rentals (e.g., meeting rooms, picnic shelters, etc.); and

(f) Field rentals.

(3) In recommending user fees, the Director shall consider the following factors, among others:

(a) The cost of providing services;

(b) Participation levels;

(c) Target market; and

(d) Fee structure.

(4) Consistent with applicable law, the City Manager may waive, in whole or in part, user fees or provide or facilitate scholarships for individuals meeting low-income criteria, to help ensure that no one is denied access to parks and recreation facilities or activities based solely on an inability to pay. In addition, the City Manager may waive user fees as part of a concession, advertising or sponsorship agreement under which the City receives consideration equal to or greater than the total amount of the fees to be waived. The City Manager shall document all waivers of user fees.

(5) The Director shall maintain a record of the rates, fees and charges assessed and shall provide a copy to the City Clerk for audit and accounting purposes. (Ord. 09-10 § 1)


8.40.050 Park scheduling – Permits.

(1) Park facilities are available for public use whenever possible at set hours not conflicting with City programs or approved uses. Reservations or scheduling for use of facilities is required for any community special or private event involving more than routine use of a park and is done by contacting the Parks and Recreation Department office.

(2) A special event permit is required for those certain uses listed in the Covington Policies and Procedures Manual. Permit applications may be obtained from the Parks and Recreation Department.

(3) Completion of a facility reservation form is required for specific park facilities reservations such as athletic fields, park shelters, and indoor facilities. 

(4) Persons using facilities by permit will be required to protect, save and hold the City, its elected and appointed officials and employees, while acting within the scope of their duties, harmless from and against all claims, demands, and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a person or group’s members or employees or third parties on account of any action including but not limited to personal injuries, death or damage to property arising out of the use of premises, or in any way arising out of the acts or omissions of the person, group and/or its agents, employees or representatives. 

(5) The misuse of a park facility or the failure to conform to the regulations, the instructions of Department employees, or the conditions of a permit will be sufficient reason for denying any future permits. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.040)


8.40.060 Park hours.

(1) No person shall enter or be present in a City park area during hours the park is closed except persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director, or City employees, or authorized agents. Park areas are open at sunrise and closed at sunset except for activities authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director and unless another opening and/or closing time is established for a particular park, or area of a park, by the Parks and Recreation Director.

(2) No person shall enter a closed park without a special use permit.

(3) A violation of this section is a Class 3 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 11-09 §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.050)


8.40.070 Motor vehicle operation and parking.

(1)  No operator of any motor vehicle shall park such vehicle in any City park area, except where the operator is using the area for the designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in the designated parking area, or in another area with an approved special event permit. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a vehicle in any City park area after park hours except persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by a special event permit. In addition to the penalties in this section, any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be towed away at the owner’s expense.

(2) No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any trail in any City park area unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a City park area except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots, parking areas, or where otherwise permitted by proper posting. Through traffic is not permitted within the boundaries of any City park area or open space.

(3) This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, City and County maintenance vehicles, or construction vehicles authorized by the Department.

(4) No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any City park area at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour or as otherwise posted, having due regard for traffic on and the surface and width of the road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property, or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than 10 miles per hour in camping, picnic, utility, or headquarters areas, or in areas of general public assemblage.

(5) No person shall clean, wax, polish, service or wash any automobile or other vehicle in any City park area except in areas specifically designated for that use.

(6) No person shall cause a truck or other vehicle while doing commercial business to enter upon, use, or traverse any portion of any City of Covington park area or any park road except in the service of the Department, at the request of the employees of the Department, or by express permission of the Department for a special activity not inconsistent with City park use; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to cross streets or State highways.

(7) A violation of this section is a Class 2 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.060)


8.40.080 Bicycle operation.

(1) Bicycles may be operated only on paved and graveled trails and/or designated trails within City park property.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 3 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.070)


8.40.090 Skateboard operation.

(1) Skateboarding is prohibited upon any public sidewalk without yielding to any pedestrian, upon public or private property where signs prohibit the activity, in a manner endangering or likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, while being pushed or pulled by any motorized vehicle, or on any type of ramp or other object upon any sidewalk or trail.

(2) Every person who shall use a skate area or travel on a trail shall obey the skate area use policies designated in the Covington Policies and Procedures Manual.

(3) A violation of this section is a Class 3 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.080)


8.40.100 Trails use.

(1) No person shall travel on a trail at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with others who are complying with the law and using reasonable care. 

(2) No person shall travel on a trail in a negligent manner. Every person traveling on a trail shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with applicable laws unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

(3) Regional trails, local trail corridors, and paved pathways are open to all nonmotorized users unless otherwise designated and posted. Pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians are permitted on all maintained soft surface trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Trail restrictions may be posted at park entrances, trailheads or, in some cases, individual trails. Trail use designations will be based on the park master plan, resource conservation, trail use conflicts, maintenance issues, and safety hazards.

(4) Every person who shall use or travel on a trail shall obey the trail use policy designated in the Covington Policies and Procedures Manual.

(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or otherwise cause or suffer to be located any structure, device, or natural or artificial thing that threatens or endangers any portion of a trail owned or maintained by the City, or that tends to endanger persons traveling thereon, obstructs or tends to obstruct or constitutes a hazard to persons traveling thereon. This section shall not apply to employees of the City in the performance of their duties or to persons acting pursuant to written direction of the City.

(6) A violation of this section is a Class 2 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.090)


8.40.110 Aircraft.

(1) Launching, takeoff and landing of aircraft are prohibited in all City parks, except: 

(a) Aircraft used to transport injured persons, evacuees, medical personnel or public officials in the event of an accident, disaster or emergency;

(b) Aircraft may be landed in City parks when emergency circumstances prevent landing at other safe locations; provided, that the owner submits a written statement explaining the circumstances of the emergency to the Parks and Recreation Director within 72 hours following the emergency landing; 

(c) During a City-sponsored event or with an approved special event permit.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 1 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.100)


8.40.120 Rockets.

(1) Launching of rockets in City parks is allowed in designated City parks with a special event permit and following the specifications designated in the use of rockets policy in the Covington Policies and Procedures Manual.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 3 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.110)


8.40.130 Restrictions on animals in parks.

(1) Dogs and other domestic animals are allowed within those areas of City parks designated in the dog use areas policy in the Covington Policies and Procedures Manual.

(2) All dogs, where otherwise allowed on City park property as provided in the above-referenced policy, must be under control by means of a leash. This requirement does not apply to areas of park property designated for dog exercise and training or service animals.

(3) Owners and handlers are required to have in their possession the equipment necessary to remove their animals’ fecal matter when accompanied by the animal on public property or public easement. Owners or handlers are required to pick up, bag, and dispose of all animal waste left by their pets in a proper disposal can.

(4) Horses are permitted on trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Horses shall be permitted in other City park areas that are specifically posted to permit such activity. Horses shall not be permitted in any designated swimming area, or picnic area. No person shall allow a horse or other animal to stand unattended or insecurely tied.

(5) No person shall hunt, catch, or injure any wild animal or bird on park property.

(6) A violation of subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section is a Class 3 civil infraction, while a violation of subsection (5) of this section is a Class 1 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.120)


8.40.140 Overnight camping.

(1) Overnight camping is prohibited on park property except at places set aside for such purposes or by special event permit.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 2 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.130)


8.40.150 Campfires.

(1) Campfires are prohibited on park property except in designated areas.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 1 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.140)


8.40.160 Smoking.

(1) Smoking and use of tobacco products is prohibited on park property except in designated areas.

(2) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.150)


8.40.170 Litter in parks.

(1) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any park property, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park, or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter shall be carried away and properly disposed of.

(2) No person shall use the Parks and Recreation Department litter receptacles to deposit leaves, clippings, prunings, or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle. No person shall deposit household garbage in any litter receptacle; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to mean that wastes of food consumed on park property may not be deposited in litter receptacles.

(3) Whenever litter dumped in violation of this chapter contains three or more items bearing the name of one individual, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the individual whose name appears on such items committed the unlawful act of littering.

(4) A violation of this section is a Class 2 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.160)


8.40.180 Sales/rentals.

(1) The sale of food, drink, other merchandise, or any services on park property is prohibited, unless the seller has either written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director, or a concession sales contract with the City.

(2) The rental of any merchandise or materials on park property is prohibited, unless the renter has written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director or a concession contract with the City.

(3) A violation of this section is a Class 1 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.170)


8.40.190 Signposting and solicitation.

(1) It is unlawful to distribute or post any handbills or circulars or place or erect any signboard, sign, advertising, decoration, or similar structure on any park property, without the written permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(2) A violation of this section is a Class 2 civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.180)


8.40.200 Restricted areas – Generally.

(1) It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized Department of Parks and Recreation or other City employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person authorized by law, to enter or go upon any area which has been designated and posted by the Director of Parks and Recreation as a “no admittance” or “closed to use” or “no trespassing” area for the purpose of protecting park property or for protecting the public from conditions which constitute a potential hazard.

(2) It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity that has been deemed potentially hazardous to public safety or park property, or incompatible with park property usage as designated by the Parks Department.

(3) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.190)


8.40.210 Restricted areas – Specific.

(1) It is unlawful to trespass, wade, swim, or boat on park property except in designated areas or by special event permit.

(2) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.200)


8.40.220 Practicing and playing certain games.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to practice or play golf, baseball, cricket, polo, lacrosse, archery or hockey, except at park areas set apart and/or designated for such purposes by the Parks Department which will not conflict in any way with normal park usage.

(2) Except as may otherwise be permitted by the City, games of any kind are prohibited in parking lots and roadways of all City park facilities.

(3) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.210)


8.40.230 Alcoholic beverages and drugs.

(1) The possessing, opening or consuming of any alcoholic beverage on park property is prohibited, except in those areas or at those events that:

(a) Have appropriate licensing from the State of Washington; and

(b) Have written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director and an approved special event permit.

(2) A violation of this section is a civil infraction. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.220)


8.40.240 Fireworks prohibited in parks.

(1) No person shall possess, discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged, in or into any City park area, any firecracker, torpedo, firework, explosive, or substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property, unless so authorized by a special event permit.

(2) A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.230)


8.40.250 Certain weapons prohibited in parks.

(1) No person shall possess a bow and arrow, crossbow, or air, spring or gas weapon in a City park. No person shall discharge across, in, or into any City park area a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow, or air, spring or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal or damaging or destroying any public or private property.

(2) A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 12-09 § 1; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.240)


8.40.260 Removal or destruction of park property.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to remove, injure, deface, damage, or destroy park property. This prohibition applies to all aspects of the natural or landscaped environment and to any structure, object, equipment, improvement, or other park property.

(2) It is unlawful to collect, gather, or harvest natural resources or other materials on park property except by written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director.

(3) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.250)


8.40.270 Encroachments on park property.

(1) It is unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the Covington Parks Department to do any of the following acts without the written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director:

(a) Place, erect, or maintain any structure or obstruction of any kind on park property; 

(b) Deposit or store any refuse, debris, vegetation, personal property, litter, or any other material on park property; 

(c) Mow, prune, cut, clear, plant on, or otherwise alter or disturb any park property.

(2) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.260)


8.40.280 Infraction – Penalty.

(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter that are designated civil infractions shall subject the violator to the penalties as provided by City ordinance as defined herein.

(2) The court may also order a person found to have committed a civil infraction to make restitution. (Ord. 09-10; Ord. 18-02 § 1. Formerly 8.40.270)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    Criminal Code

9.10    General Provisions

9.15    Principles of Liability

9.20    Defenses

9.25    Anticipatory Offenses

9.30    Alcoholic Beverage Control

9.35    Crimes Relating to Animals

9.40    Assault and Other Crimes Relating to Persons

9.45    Controlled Substances

9.50    Custodial Interference

9.55    Abandonment of Dependent Person

9.60    Domestic Violence Protection

9.65    False Swearing and Tampering

9.70    Crime Relating to Fire Alarms

9.75    Firearms and Dangerous Weapons

9.80    Fraud

9.85    Gambling

9.90    Harassment

9.95    Inhaling Toxic Fumes

9.100    Interference with Health Care Facilities or Providers

9.105    Crimes Relating to Juries

9.110    Miscellaneous Crimes

9.115    Obstructing Governmental Operation

9.120    Official Misconduct

9.125    Public Disturbance

9.130    Public Nuisances

9.135    Reckless Burning and Malicious Mischief

9.140    Sex Offenses

9.145    Special Offenses Relative to Minors

9.150    Telecommunications Crime

9.155    Theft and Robbery

9.160    Trespass and Prowling

9.165    Right of Privacy

9.170    Littering

9.175    Miscellaneous Provisions

9.180    Civil Infractions

9.185    Metro Transit Code of Conduct

9.190    Solicitation


Chapter 9.05 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.05.010    Adoption.

9.05.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

9.05.030    Criminal jurisdiction.

9.05.040    Classes of crimes.

9.05.050    Punishment and restitution.

9.05.060    Limitation of actions.

9.05.070    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.


9.05.010 Adoption.

(1) This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the city of Covington criminal code.

(2) The provisions of this code do not apply to or govern the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to 12:01 a.m. on March 1, 1997, or to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of law existing in the city at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this code had not been enacted.

(3) The sections of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) now in effect or as subsequently amended, and specifically enumerated in this chapter, are hereby adopted by reference in this code.

(4) Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this code. (Ord. 74-98 § 1)


9.05.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.

(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:

(a) To forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individuals or public interests;

(b) To safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation as criminal;

(c) To give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense; and

(d) To differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.

(2) The provisions of this code shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, and when the language is susceptible of differing constructions, it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in this code.

(3) In adopting State statute by reference, only those crimes and offenses within the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted, and in those sections adopted which define both misdemeanors and felonies, only the language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied. (Ord. 74-98 § 2)


9.05.030 Criminal jurisdiction.

Any person who commits any offense defined by this code, in whole or in part, within the corporate limits of the city is liable to arrest, prosecution and punishment. (Ord. 74-98 § 3)


9.05.040 Classes of crimes.

An offense defined by this code, for which a sentence of imprisonment is authorized, constitutes a violation of city ordinance and a crime. Crimes are classified as gross misdemeanors or misdemeanors. (Ord. 74-98 § 4)


9.05.050 Punishment and restitution.

(1) Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(2) Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(3) The court may impose restitution as provided in RCW 9A.20.030.

(4) In the event there is a conflict in the penalties which can be imposed upon conviction for a specific offense between the provisions of the Covington Criminal Code and the Revised Code of Washington, the penalty provisions of the Revised Code of Washington shall apply. (Ord. 74-98 § 5)


9.05.060 Limitation of actions.

(1) A gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, may not be prosecuted more than two years after its commission. A misdemeanor may not be prosecuted more than one year after its commission.

(2) Periods of limitation do not run during any period of time the person charged is not usually and publicly resident within this State.

(3) If a complaint or information filed before the end of the period of limitation is thereafter set aside, then the period of limitation is extended by a period equal to the length of time from the filing to the setting aside. (Ord. 74-98 § 6)


9.05.070 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

(1) Every person charged with an offense is presumed innocent unless proven guilty by competent evidence establishing each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.

(2) When an offense has been proven against a person but a reasonable doubt exists as to the degree of the crime, a conviction shall be entered only as to the lowest degree. (Ord. 74-98 § 7)


Chapter 9.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

9.10.005 – 

9.10.080    Statutes adopted.


9.10.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter. 

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.10.010	People capable of committing crimes – Culpability of children	9A.04.050

	9.10.020	Common law to supplement statutes	9A.04.060

	9.10.030	Who amenable to criminal statutes	9A.04.070

	9.10.040	Application of general provisions of code	9A.04.090

	9.10.050	Definitions	9A.04.110

	9.10.060	Citizen immunity if aiding officer	9.01.055

	9.10.070	Omission, when not punishable	9.01.110

	9.10.080	Sending letter, when complete	9.01.130

(Ord. 74-98 § 8)


Chapter 9.15 PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY

Sections:

9.15.005 – 

9.15.030    Statutes adopted.


9.15.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.15.010	General requirements of culpability	9A.08.010

	9.15.020	Liability for conduct of another – Complicity	9A.08.020

	9.15.030	Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting or under a duty to act in their behalf	9A.08.030

(Ord. 74-98 § 9)


Chapter 9.20 DEFENSES

Sections:

9.20.005 – 

9.20.080    Statutes adopted.


9.20.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.20.010	Defense of insanity	9A.12.010

	9.20.020	Definitions	9A.16.010

	9.20.030	Use of force – When lawful	9A.16.020

	9.20.040	Duress	9A.16.060

	9.20.050	Entrapment	9A.16.070

	9.20.060	Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense	9A.16.080

	9.20.070	Intoxication	9A.16.090

	9.20.080	Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable	9A.16.100

(Ord. 74-98 § 10)


Chapter 9.25 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

Sections:

9.25.005 – 

9.25.030    Statutes adopted.


9.25.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.25.010	Criminal attempt	9A.28.020

	9.25.020	Criminal solicitation	9A.28.030

	9.25.030	Criminal conspiracy	9A.28.040

(Ord. 74-98 § 11)


Chapter 9.30 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL

Sections:

9.30.005 – 

9.30.360    Statutes adopted.


9.30.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.30.010	Definitions	66.04.010

	9.30.020	“Card of Identification,” “Licensee,” “Store employee” defined for certain purpose	66.20.160

	9.30.030	Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card – Penalty	66.20.200

	9.30.040	Licensee’s immunity to prosecution or suit – Certification card as evidence of good faith	66.20.210

	9.30.050	Alcohol servers – Definitions	66.20.300

	9.30.060	Alcohol servers – Permits – Requirements – Suspension, revocation – Violations – Exemptions	66.20.310

	9.30.070	Alcohol servers – Violations of rules – Penalties	66.20.340

	9.30.080	Keg registration – Seller	66.28.200

	9.30.090	Keg registration – Purchaser	66.28.210

	9.30.100	Keg registration – Penalties	66.28.230

	9.30.110	Search and seizure	Ch. 66.32

	9.30.120	Acting without license	66.44.090

	9.30.130	Opening or consuming liquor in public place – Penalty	66.44.100

	9.30.140	Buying liquor illegally	66.44.150

	9.30.150	Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverages	66.44.160

	9.30.160	Illegal possession of liquor with intent to sell – Prima facie evidence, what is	66.44.170

	9.30.170	General penalties – Jurisdiction for violations	66.44.180

	9.30.180	Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor	66.44.200

	9.30.190	Obtaining liquor for ineligible person	66.44.210

	9.30.200	Drinking in public conveyance – Penalty against carrier – Exception	66.44.240

	9.30.210	Drinking in public conveyance – Penalty against individual – Restricted application	66.44.250

	9.30.220	Candidates giving or purchasing liquor on election day prohibited	66.44.265

	9.30.230	Furnishing liquor to minors – Possession, use – Exhibition of effects – Exceptions	66.44.270

	9.30.240	Minor applying for permit	66.44.280

	9.30.250	Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor	66.44.290

	9.30.260	Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor – Penalty against persons between ages of 18 and 20, inclusive	66.44.291

	9.30.270	Treats, gifts, purchases for or from minor, or holding minor as at least 21 in public place where liquor sold	66.44.300

	9.30.280	Minors frequenting off-limits area – Misrepresentation of age – Penalty – Classification of licenses	66.44.310

	9.30.290	Certain persons 18 years and over permitted to enter and remain upon licensed premises during employment	66.44.316

	9.30.300	Employees aged 18 to 21 stocking, merchandising, and handling beer and wine	66.44.318

	9.30.310	Sales of liquor to minors a violation	66.44.320

	9.30.320	Unlawful transfer to a minor of an identification of age	66.44.325

	9.30.330	Preparation or acquisition and supply to persons under age 21 a facsimile of official identification card – Penalty	66.44.328

	9.30.340	Employees 18 years and over allowed to sell and handle beer and wine for Class E and/or F licensed employers	66.44.346

	9.30.350	Employees 18 years and over allowed to serve and carry liquor, cleanup, etc., for Class A, C, D and/or H licensed employers	66.44.350

	9.30.360	Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title	66.44.370

(Ord. 74-98 § 12)


Chapter 9.35 CRIMES RELATING TO ANIMALS

Sections:

9.35.005 – 

9.35.180    Statutes adopted.


9.35.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.35.010	Diseased animals 	9.08.020

	9.35.020	False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed	9.08.030

	9.35.030	Definitions	9.08.065

	9.35.040	Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty	9.08.070

	9.35.050	Definitions – Principles of liability	16.52.011

	9.35.060	Enforcement – Law enforcement agencies and animal care and control agencies	16.52.015

	9.35.070	Removal of animals for feeding – Examination – Notice – Euthanasia	16.52.085

	9.35.080	Transporting or confining in unsafe manner – Penalty	16.52.080

	9.35.090	Docking horses – Misdemeanor	16.52.090

	9.35.100	Cutting ears – Misdemeanor	16.52.095

	9.35.110	Confinement without food or water – Intervention by others	16.52.100

	9.35.120	Old or diseased animals at large	16.52.110

	9.35.130	Animal fighting – Owners, trainers, spectators – Exceptions	16.52.117

	9.35.140	Poisoning animals	16.52.190

	9.35.150	Poisoning animals – Strychnine sales, etc.	16.52.193

	9.35.160	Poisoning animals – Penalty	16.52.195

	9.35.170	Animal cruelty in the second degree	16.52.207

	9.35.180	Dogs or cats used as bait – Seizure – Limitation	16.52.300

(Ord. 74-98 § 13)


Chapter 9.40 ASSAULT AND OTHER CRIMES RELATING TO PERSONS

Sections:

9.40.005 – 

9.40.040    Statutes adopted.


9.40.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.40.010	Assault in the fourth degree	9A.36.041

	9.40.020	Reckless endangerment	9A.36.050

	9.40.030	Coercion	9A.36.070

	9.40.040	Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence	9A.36.150

(Ord. 74-98 § 14)


Chapter 9.45 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES

Sections:

9.45.005    – 

9.45.130    Statutes adopted.

9.45.140    Drug-free zones – Enhanced penalty.


9.45.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.45.010	Definitions	69.50.101

	9.45.020	Drug paraphernalia – Definitions	69.50.102

	9.45.030	Schedule 1 – Marijuana	69.50.204

	9.45.040	Possession of forty grams of marihuana – Penalty	69.50.4014

	9.45.050	Conspiracy	69.50.407

	9.45.060	Second or subsequent offenses	69.50.408

	9.45.070	Prohibited acts: E – Penalties	69.50.412

	9.45.080	Violations – Juvenile driving privileges	69.50.420

	9.45.090	Misdemeanor violations – Minimum imprisonment	69.50.425

	9.45.100	Seizure and forfeiture	69.50.505

	9.45.110	Burden of proof; liabilities	69.50.506

	9.45.120	Search and seizure of controlled substances	69.50.509

	9.45.130	Search and seizure at rental premises – Notification of landlord	69.50.510

(Ord. 18-04 § 1; Ord. 74-98 § 15)


9.45.140 Drug-free zones – Enhanced penalty.

(1) Civic Center Drug-Free Zones Designated. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 69.50.435, the City of Covington hereby designates the following civic centers located within the City of Covington and their 1,000-foot perimeters as drug-free zones:

(a) The City of Covington’s Aquatics Center and the area within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of the City of Covington’s Aquatic Center;

(b) Covington City Hall and the area within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of Covington City Hall;

(c) The City of Covington’s Public Works Maintenance Facility and the area within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of the City of Covington’s Public Works Maintenance Facility.

Said drug-free zones are depicted on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit A, which is fully incorporated by this reference and hereby designated as the City of Covington’s civic center drug-free zone map. A copy of the City of Covington’s civic center drug-free zone map shall be maintained in the offices of the Covington City Clerk.

(2) Definitions. The definitions of terms contained in RCW 69.50.435(6), as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 10-15 §§ 1, 2)


Chapter 9.50 CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE

Sections:

9.50.005 – 

9.50.030    Statutes adopted.


9.50.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.50.010	Definitions	9A.40.010

	9.50.020	Custodial interference in the second degree	9A.40.070

	9.50.030	Custodial interference – Assessment of cost – Defense – Consent defense, restricted	9A.40.080

(Ord. 74-98 § 16)


Chapter 9.55 ABANDONMENT OF DEPENDENT PERSON

Sections:

9.55.005 – 

9.55.030    Statutes adopted.


9.55.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.55.010	Definitions	9A.42.010

	9.55.020	Abandonment of dependent person in the third degree	9A.42.080

	9.55.030	Abandonment of dependent person – Defense	9A.42.090

(Ord. 74-98 § 17)


Chapter 9.60 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROTECTION

Sections:

9.60.005 – 

9.60.300    Statutes adopted.


9.60.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.60.010	Definitions	10.99.020

	9.60.020	Law enforcement officers – Training, powers, duties – Domestic violence reports	10.99.030

	9.60.030	Restrictions upon and duties of court	10.99.040

	9.60.040	Appearances by defendant – No-contact order	10.99.045

	9.60.050	Victim contract – Restriction, prohibition – Violation, penalties – Written order – Procedure	10.99.050

	9.60.060	Enforcement of orders against defendants	10.99.055

	9.60.070	Notification of victim of prosecution decision – Description of procedures available to institute criminal proceedings	10.99.060

	9.60.080	Definitions	26.50.010

	9.60.090	Commencement of action – Jurisdiction – Venue	26.50.020

	9.60.100	Petition for an order of protection – Availability of forms and instructional brochures – Fee – Bond not required	26.50.030

	9.60.110	Fees not permitted – Filing, service of process, certified copies	26.50.040

	9.60.120	Hearing – Service – Time	26.50.050

	9.60.130	Appointment of interpreter	26.50.055

	9.60.140	Relief – Duration – Realignment of designation of parties – Award of costs, service fees, and attorney’s fees	26.50.060

	9.60.150	Ex-parte temporary order for protection	26.50.070

	9.60.160	Issuance of order – Assistance of peace officer – Designation of appropriate law enforcement agency	26.50.080

	9.60.170	Hearing reset after ex-parte order – Service by publication – Circumstances	26.50.085

	9.60.180	Order – Service – Fees	26.50.090

	9.60.190	Order following service by publication	26.50.095

	9.60.200	Order – Transmittal to law enforcement agency – Record in law enforcement information system – Enforceability	26.50.100

	9.60.210	Violation of order – Penalties	26.50.110

	9.60.220	Enforcement of ex-parte order – Knowledge of order prerequisite to penalties – Reasonable efforts to serve copy of order	26.50.115

	9.60.230	Violation of order – Prosecuting attorney or attorney for municipality may be requested to assist – Cost and attorney’s fees	26.50.120

	9.60.240	Service by mail	26.50.123

	9.60.250	Service by publication or mailing – Costs	26.50.125

	9.60.260	Order – Modification – Transmittal	26.50.130

	9.60.270	Residential placement or custody of a child – Prerequisite	26.50.135

	9.60.280	Peace officer – Immunity	26.50.140

	9.60.290	Title to real estate – Effect	26.50.200

	9.60.300	Proceedings additional	26.50.210

(Ord. 74-98 § 18)


Chapter 9.65 FALSE SWEARING AND TAMPERING

Sections:

9.65.005 – 

9.65.090    Statutes adopted.


9.65.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.65.010	Definitions	9A.72.010

	9.65.020	False swearing	9A.72.040

	9.65.030	Perjury and false swearing – Inconsistent statements – Degree of crime	9A.72.050

	9.65.040	Perjury and false swearing – Retraction	9A.72.060

	9.65.050	Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense	9A.72.070

	9.65.060	Statement of what one does not know to be true	9A.72.080

	9.65.070	Jury tampering	9A.72.140

	9.65.080	Tampering with physical evidence	9A.72.150

	9.65.090	Committal of witness – Detention of documents	9A.72.090

(Ord. 74-98 § 19)


Chapter 9.70 CRIME RELATING TO FIRE ALARMS

Sections:

9.70.005 – 

9.70.020    Statutes adopted.


9.70.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.70.010	Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester	9.40.040

	9.70.020	Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment – False alarm – Penalties	9.40.100

(Ord. 74-98 § 20)


Chapter 9.75 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS

Sections:

9.75.005 – 

9.75.170    Statutes adopted.


9.75.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.75.010	Terms defined	9.41.010

	9.75.020	Carrying firearms	9.41.050

	9.75.030	Exceptions to restriction on carrying firearms	9.41.060

	9.75.040	Officials and agencies – Immunity, writ of mandamus	9.41.0975

	9.75.050	Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation	9.41.098

	9.75.060	Certain transfers forbidden	9.41.120

	9.75.070	Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions	9.41.140

	9.75.080	Unlawful firearms and parts contraband	9.41.220

	9.75.090	Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons	9.41.230

	9.75.100	Possession of pistol by person from 18 to 21	9.41.240

	9.75.110	Dangerous weapons – Penalty	9.41.250

	9.75.120	Dangerous exhibitions	9.41.260

	9.75.130	Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Unlawful carrying or handling – Penalty – Exceptions	9.41.270

	9.75.140	Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities – Penalty – Exceptions	9.41.280

	9.75.150	Weapons prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty	9.41.300

	9.75.160	Surrender of weapons or licenses, prohibition on future possession or licensing	9.41.800

	9.75.170	Penalty	9.41.810

(Ord. 74-98 § 21)


Chapter 9.80 FRAUD

Sections:

9.80.005 – 

9.80.120    Statutes adopted.


9.80.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter. 

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.80.010	Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction	9.45.060

	9.80.020	Mock auctions	9.45.070

	9.80.030	Fraudulent removal of property	9.45.080

	9.80.040	Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance	9.45.090

	9.80.050	Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors	9.45.100

	9.80.060	Definitions	9A.60.010

	9.80.070	Criminal impersonation in the first degree	9A.60.040

	9.80.075	Criminal impersonation in the second degree	9A.60.045

	9.80.080	False certification	9A.60.050

	9.80.090	Defrauding a public utility – Definitions	9A.61.010

	9.80.100	Defrauding a public utility	9A.61.020

	9.80.110	Defrauding a public utility in the third degree	9A.61.050

	9.80.120	Restitution	9A.61.060

(Ord. 18-04 § 2; Ord. 74-98 § 22)


Chapter 9.85 GAMBLING

Sections:

9.85.005 – 

9.85.160    Statutes adopted.

9.85.170    Use of premises for social card games prohibited.


9.85.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.85.010	False or misleading entries or statements, refusal to produce records	9.46.170

	9.85.020	Causing person to violate rule or regulation	9.46.185

	9.85.030	Violations relating to fraud or deceit	9.46.190

	9.85.040	Cities and towns – ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter – Limitations – Penalties	9.46.192

	9.85.050	Cities and towns – ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter – Jurisdiction of courts	9.46.193

	9.85.060	Obstruction of public servant in administration or enforcement as violation – Penalty	9.46.195

	9.85.070	Cheating	9.46.196

	9.85.080	Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty	9.46.198

	9.85.090	Enforcement – Commission as law enforcement agency	9.46.210

	9.85.100	Gambling records – Penalty – Exceptions	9.46.217

	9.85.110	Professional gambling in the third degree	9.46.220

	9.85.120	Gambling devices, real and personal property – Seizure and forfeiture	9.46.231

	9.85.130	Slot machines, antique – Defenses concerning – Presumption created	9.46.235

	9.85.140	Gambling information, transmitting or receiving	9.46.240

	9.85.150	Gambling property or premises – Common nuisances, abatement – Termination of mortgage, contract or leasehold interest, licenses – Enforcement	9.46.250

	9.85.160	Proof of possession as evidence of knowledge of its character	9.46.260

(Ord. 74-98 § 23)


9.85.170 Use of premises for social card games prohibited.

It is unlawful within the city for any person to allow any premises or any facilities to be used for, to participate in or to conduct as a commercial stimulant or otherwise, any social card game as defined in RCW 9.46.0282; provided, that this section shall not apply to social card games conducted upon member premises of a licensed, bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as authorized by RCW 9.46.0311; and provided further, that this section shall not apply to social card games conducted or played in the dwelling or other place of residence of one of the players. (Ord. 103-98 § 1)


Chapter 9.90 HARASSMENT

Sections:

9.90.005 – 

9.90.150    Statutes adopted.


9.90.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.90.010	Definition – Penalties	9A.46.020

	9.90.020	Place where committed	9A.46.030

	9.90.030	Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation	9A.46.040

	9.90.040	Arraignment – No-contact order	9A.46.050

	9.90.050	Crimes included in harassment	9A.46.060

	9.90.060	Enforcement of orders restricting contact	9A.46.070

	9.90.070	Order restricting contact – Violation	9A.46.080

	9.90.080	Nonliability of peace offer	9A.46.090

	9.90.090	“Convicted,” time when	9A.46.100

	9.90.100	Stalking	9A.46.110

	9.90.110	Telephone harassment	9.61.230

	9.90.120	Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass – Permitting telephone to be used	9.61.240

	9.90.130	Telephone calls to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass – Offense, where deemed committed	9.61.250

	9.90.140	Disobedience of order – Penalties	10.14.120

	9.90.150	Criminal penalty	10.14.170

(Ord. 74-98 § 24)


Chapter 9.95 INHALING TOXIC FUMES

Sections:

9.95.005 – 

9.95.050    Statutes adopted.


9.95.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.95.010	Definition	9.47A.010

	9.95.020	Unlawful inhalation – Exception	9.47A.020

	9.95.030	Possession of certain substances prohibited, when	9.47A.030

	9.95.040	Sale of certain substances prohibited, when	9.47A.040

	9.95.050	Penalty	9.47A.050

(Ord. 74-98 § 25)


Chapter 9.100 INTERFERENCE WITH HEALTH CARE FACILITIES OR PROVIDERS

Sections:

9.100.005 – 

9.100.040    Statutes adopted.


9.100.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.100.010	Definitions	9A.50.010

	9.100.020	Interference with health care facility	9A.50.020

	9.100.030	Penalty	9A.50.030

	9.100.040	Informational picketing	9A.50.060

(Ord. 74-98 § 26)


Chapter 9.105 CRIMES RELATING TO JURIES

Sections:

9.105.005 – 

9.105.030    Statutes adopted.


9.105.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter. 

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.105.010	Misconduct of officer drawing jury	9.51.010

	9.105.020	Soliciting jury duty	9.51.020

	9.105.030	Misconduct of officer in charge of jury	9.51.030

(Ord. 74-98 § 27)


Chapter 9.110 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES

Sections:

9.110.005    – 

9.110.070    Statutes adopted.

9.110.080    Repealed.


9.110.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.110.010	Unlawful bus conduct	9.91.025

	9.110.020	Leaving children unattended in parked automobile	9.91.060

	9.110.030	Metal buyers – Records of purchases – Penalty	9.91.110

	9.110.040	Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle	9.91.130

	9.110.050	Food stamps	9.91.140

	9.110.060	Tree spiking	9.91.150

	9.110.070	Personal protection spray devices	9.91.160

(Ord. 74-98 § 28)


9.110.080 Aggressive begging.

Repealed by Ord. 06-10. (Ord. 33-08 § 2)


Chapter 9.115 OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATION

Sections:

9.115.005 – 

9.115.160    Statutes adopted.


9.115.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.115.010	Definitions	9A.76.010

	9.115.020	Obstructing a law enforcement officer	9A.76.020

	9.115.030	Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer	9A.76.030

	9.115.040	Resisting arrest	9A.76.040

	9.115.050	Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of term	9A.76.050

	9.115.060	Relative defined	9A.76.060

	9.115.070	Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree	9A.76.070

	9.115.080	Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree	9A.76.080

	9.115.090	Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree	9A.76.090

	9.115.100	Compounding	9A.76.100

	9.115.110	Escape in the third degree	9A.76.130

	9.115.120	Introducing contraband in the third degree	9A.76.160

	9.115.130	Bail jumping	9A.76.170

	9.115.140	Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant	9A.76.175

	9.115.150	Malicious prosecution	9.62.010

	9.115.160	Instituting suit in the name of another	9.62.020

(Ord. 74-98 § 29)


Chapter 9.120 OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT

Sections:

9.120.005 – 

9.120.010    Statutes adopted.


9.120.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.120.010	Official misconduct	9A.80.010 

(Ord. 74-98 § 30)


Chapter 9.125 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE

Sections:

9.125.005 – 

9.125.040    Statutes adopted.


9.125.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.125.010	Riot	9A.84.010

	9.125.020	Failure to disperse	9A.84.020

	9.125.030	False reporting	9A.84.040

	9.125.040	Interference, obstruction of any court, building or residence – Violations	9.27.015

(Ord. 74-98 § 31)


Chapter 9.130 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:

9.130.005 – 

9.130.050    Statutes adopted.


9.130.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.130.010	Public nuisances	9.66.010

	9.130.020	Unequal damages	9.66.020

	9.130.030	Maintaining or permitting nuisance	9.66.030

	9.130.040	Abatement of nuisance	9.66.040

	9.130.050	Deposit of unwholesome substances	9.66.050

(Ord. 74-98 § 32)


Chapter 9.135 RECKLESS BURNING AND MALICIOUS MISCHIEF

Sections:

9.135.005 – 

9.135.060    Statutes adopted.


9.135.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.135.010	Definitions	9A.48.010

	9.135.020	Reckless burning in the second degree	9A.48.050

	9.135.030	Reckless burning – Defense	9A.48.060

	9.135.040	Malicious mischief in the third degree	9A.48.090

	9.135.050	Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined	9A.48.100

	9.135.060	Defacing a state monument	9A.48.110

(Ord. 74-98 § 33)


Chapter 9.140 SEX OFFENSES

Sections:

9.140.005 – 

9.140.120    Statutes adopted.


9.140.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.140.010	Definitions	9A.44.010

	9.140.020	Testimony – Evidence – Written motion – Admissibility	9A.44.020

	9.140.030	Defenses to prosecution under this chapter	9A.44.030

	9.140.040	Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree	9A.44.096

	9.140.050	Indecent exposure	9A.88.010

	9.140.060	Prostitution	9A.88.030

	9.140.070	Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial – No defense	9A.88.050

	9.140.080	Promoting prostitution – Definitions	9A.88.060

	9.140.090	Permitting prostitution	9A.88.090

	9.140.100	Patronizing a prostitute 	9A.88.110

	9.140.110	Additional fee assessments	9A.88.120

	9.140.120	“Sexually explicit material” – Defined – Unlawful display	9.68.130

(Ord. 74-98 § 34)


Chapter 9.145 SPECIAL OFFENSES RELATIVE TO MINORS

Sections:

9.145.005 – 

9.145.090    Statutes adopted.


9.145.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.145.010	Definition	9.68A.011

	9.145.020	Processors of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Report required	9.68A.080

	9.145.030	Communication with a minor for immoral purposes	9.68A.090

	9.145.040	Certain defenses barred, permitted	9.68A.110

	9.145.050	Definitions	9.68A.140

	9.145.060	Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance	9.68A.150

	9.145.070	Penalty	9.68A.160

	9.145.080	Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty	9.69.100

	9.145.090	Selling or giving tobacco to minors – Belief of representative capacity no defense – Penalty	26.28.080

(Ord. 74-98 § 35)


Chapter 9.150 TELECOMMUNICATIONS CRIME

Sections:

9.150.005 – 

9.150.050    Statutes adopted.


9.150.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.150.010	Telephone company credit cards – Prohibited acts	9.26A.090

	9.150.020	Definition	9.26A.100

	9.150.030	Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty	9.26A.110

	9.150.040	Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle	9.26A.120

	9.150.050	Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin	9.26A.130

(Ord. 74-98 § 36)


Chapter 9.155 THEFT AND ROBBERY

Sections:

9.155.005 – 

9.155.130    Statutes adopted.


9.155.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.155.010	Definitions	9A.56.010

	9.155.020	Theft – definition, defense	9A.56.020

	9.155.030	Theft in the third degree	9A.56.050

	9.155.040	Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts	9A.56.060

	9.155.050	Theft and larceny equated	9A.56.100

	9.155.060	Possessing stolen property – Definition – Access devices, presumption	9A.56.140

	9.155.070	Possessing stolen property in the third degree	9A.56.170

	9.155.080	Obscuring identity of a machine	9A.56.180

	9.155.090	Theft of subscription television services	9A.56.220

	9.155.100	Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation	9A.56.240

	9.155.110	Connection of channel converter	9A.56.260

	9.155.120	Shopping cart theft	9A.56.270

	9.155.130	Theft of rental, leased or leased-purchased property	Chapter 346, § 1 (1997 Regular Legislative Session)

(Ord. 74-98 § 37)


Chapter 9.160 TRESPASS AND PROWLING

Sections:

9.160.005 – 

9.160.020    Statutes adopted.

9.160.030    Repealed.

9.160.040 – 

9.160.090    Statutes adopted.

9.160.100    Making or having burglar, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft tools.


9.160.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.160.010	Definitions	9A.52.010

	9.160.020	Other crime in committing burglary punishable	9A.52.050

	9.160.030	Making or having burglar tools	Repealed by Ord. 01-06.

	9.160.040	Criminal trespass in the first degree	9A.52.070

	9.160.050	Criminal trespass in the second degree	9A.52.080

	9.160.060	Criminal trespass – Defenses	9A.52.090

	9.160.070	Vehicle prowling in the second degree	9A.52.100

	9.160.080	Computer trespass in the second degree	9A.52.120

	9.160.090	Computer trespass – Commission of other crime	9A.52.130

(Ord. 01-06 § 1; Ord. 74-98 § 38)


9.160.100 Making or having burglar, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft tools.

(1) Every person who shall make or mend, or cause to be made or mended, or have in his or her possession, any engine, machine, tool, false key, pick lock, bit, nippers, slim jim, false master key or master purpose key, altered or filed key, trial key or jiggler key, slide hammer, lock puller, or implement adapted, designed, or commonly used for the commission of burglary, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft, under circumstances evincing an intent to use or employ, or allow the same to be used or employed in the commission of a burglary, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft, or knowing that the same is intended to be so used, shall be guilty of making or having burglar, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft tools.

(2) For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “False master key” or “master key” means any key or other device made or altered to fit locks or ignitions of multiple vehicles, or vehicles other than that for which the key was originally manufactured.

(b) “Altered key” means any key so altered, by cutting, filing, or other means, to fit multiple vehicles, or vehicles other than the vehicle for which the key was originally manufactured.

(c) “Trial key” or “jiggler key” means a key or set of keys designed or altered to manipulate a vehicle locking mechanism other than the lock for which the key was originally manufactured.

(d) “Vehicle” means a “motor vehicle,” as defined by RCW Title 46, any aircraft, or any vessel equipped for propulsion by mechanical means or by sail.

(3) Making or having burglar, vehicle prowl, or vehicle related theft tools is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-06 § 2)


Chapter 9.165 RIGHT OF PRIVACY

Sections:

9.165.005 – 

9.165.070    Statutes adopted.


9.165.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.165.010	Divulging telegram	9.73.010

	9.165.020	Opening sealed letter	9.73.020

	9.165.030	Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions	9.73.030

	9.165.040	Person and activities excepted from chapter	9.73.070

	9.165.050	Intercepting, recording, or divulging private communication – Penalty	9.73.080

	9.165.060	Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards – Court authorizations – Admissibility	9.73.090

	9.165.070	Intercepting, recording or disclosing private communications – Not unlawful for building owner – Conditions	9.73.110

(Ord. 74-98 § 39)


Chapter 9.170 LITTERING

Sections:

9.170.005 – 

9.170.020    Statutes adopted.


9.170.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.    

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.170.010	Littering prohibited – Penalties	70.93.060

	9.170.020	Civil infraction penalties adopted	7.80.120

(Ord. 74-98 § 40)


Chapter 9.175 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

9.175.010    Leaving materials under windshield wipers of parked cars prohibited.

9.175.020    Nonappearance after written promise.

9.175.030    Provoking assault.

9.175.040    Disorderly conduct.

9.175.050    Determination of civil contempt – Costs.

9.175.060    Copies of State statutes to be filed in office of city clerk.


9.175.010 Leaving materials under windshield wipers of parked cars prohibited.

It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to distribute handbills, papers, notices or other advertising matter by leaving it under the windshield wiper of a parked car or leaving such material anywhere upon any parked car within the city. Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $75.00 inclusive of statutory assessments. (Ord. 74-98 § 41)


9.175.020 Nonappearance after written promise.

Any person who, after having been issued a citation for a criminal traffic or a criminal nontraffic violation by a law enforcement officer or by any other person authorized to issue criminal citations or complaints under law and where the person so charged signed a written promise to appear in court at a specific date and time or as otherwise indicated on the citation or complaint, fails to appear an court at the date and time so indicated shall be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge with which he or she was originally cited. Violation of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment in jail for a period of up to 90 days or a fine in the amount of up to $1,000 or both such jail and fine. (Ord. 74-98 § 42)


9.175.030 Provoking assault.

It is unlawful for any person to willfully provoke or attempt to provoke, by word, sign or gesture, another person to commit an assault or breach of peace. Every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of the misdemeanor of provoking assault. (Ord. 74-98 § 43)


9.175.040 Disorderly conduct.

(1) A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:

(a) Fights or encourages others to fight in any public place within the city;

(b) Willfully annoys, molests, bothers, insults, offers an affront to another person and thereby intentionally creates the risk of assault;

(c) Willfully breaks, impairs, injures or defaces any building, fence, awning, window, sign, signboard, tree, shrub, or other thing of value being the property of another;

(d) Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian travel or traffic without lawful authority;

(e) Removes, interferes with, carries away or destroys the property of another, or tears down, destroys or mutilates any notice or handbill lawfully posted by the city;

(f) Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority;

(g) Looks into the windows of the residence of another without a lawful right to do so; and

(h) Urinates or defecates in any place open to the public view.

(2) Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 74-98 § 44)


9.175.050 Determination of civil contempt – Costs.

A court may, in its discretion, treat any intentional failure to comply with a court order in respect to fines or costs, or both, upon conviction, as civil contempt. Upon judgment for fine and cost rendered on a conviction, execution may be issued against the property of a defendant and returned in the same manner as in civil actions. Whenever anyone is convicted of any offense in the city, in addition to the fine imposed, he or she must pay the costs of prosecution. Costs of prosecution shall include any and all of the following: cost of docket, cost of issuing a warrant, cost per mileage in processing the warrant, a fee for a personal recognizance bond, and costs for witness fees. (Ord. 74-98 § 45)


9.175.060 Copies of State statutes to be filed in office of city clerk.

A copy of each State statute adopted in this chapter, in the form in which each is adopted, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 74-98 § 46)


Chapter 9.180 CIVIL INFRACTIONS

Sections:

9.180.002    Purchasing or obtaining tobacco by persons under the age of 18 – Civil infraction.

9.180.005 – 

9.180.130    Statutes adopted.


9.180.002 Purchasing or obtaining tobacco by persons under the age of 18 – Civil infraction.

RCW 70.155.080, as presently constituted or as hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 94-98 § 1)


9.180.005 Statutes adopted.

Revised Code of Washington provisions, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, are adopted by reference and are given respective section numbers as set forth in this chapter.     

	CMC Section No.	Topic/Title	Source of Adopted Law (RCW)

	9.180.010	Enforcement officer defined	7.80.040

	9.180.020	Notice of infraction – Issuance, service, filing	7.80.050

	9.180.030	Person receiving notice – Identification and detention	7.80.060

	9.180.040	Notice – Determination final unless contested – Form	7.80.070

	9.180.050	Response to notice – Contesting determination – Mitigating circumstances – Hearing – Failure to respond or appear	7.80.080

	9.180.060	Hearings – Rules of procedure – Counsel	7.80.090

	9.180.070	Hearings – Contesting determination that infraction committed – Appeal	7.80.100

	9.180.080	Hearings – Explanation of mitigating circumstances	7.80.110

	9.180.090	Monetary penalties – Restitution	7.80.120

	9.180.100	Order of court – Civil nature – Modification of penalty – Community service	7.80.130

	9.180.110	Costs and attorney fees	7.80.140

	9.180.120	Notices – Record of – Cancellation prohibited, penalty – Audit	7.80.150

	9.180.130	Notice, failure to sign, nonappearance – Failure to satisfy penalty	7.80.160

(Ord. 94-98 § 2)


Chapter 9.185 METRO TRANSIT CODE OF CONDUCT

Sections:

9.185.010    Chapter 28.92 KCC adopted.

9.185.020    KCC sections adopted by reference.


9.185.010 Chapter 28.92 KCC adopted.

Chapter 28.92 of the King County Code, as now enacted or as hereinafter amended, is hereby adopted by reference. A true and correct copy of that chapter as adopted is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as an exhibit and designated as Exhibit A*. (Ord. 15-99 § 1)


9.185.020 KCC sections adopted by reference.

KCC 28.96.010, 28.96.410, 28.96.420, 28.96.440 and 28.96.450 are hereby adopted by reference, as now enacted or as may hereafter be amended. True and correct copies of these sections as adopted are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and marked as Exhibit B*. (Ord. 15-99 § 2)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibits A and B, attached to Ordinance No. 15-99, may be found on file in the city clerk’s office.


Chapter 9.190 SOLICITATION

Sections:

9.190.010    Purpose.

9.190.020    Definitions.

9.190.030    Aggressive solicitation – Prohibited.

9.190.040    Place of solicitation.

9.190.050    Penalties.


9.190.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and penalize acts of aggressive solicitation and acts of solicitation that occur at locations and under circumstances specified herein which create an enhanced sense of fear or intimidation in the person being solicited, or pose a risk to traffic and public safety. (Ord. 06-10 § 2)


9.190.020 Definitions.

(1) “Aggressive solicitation” shall mean:

(a) To approach, speak or gesture to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to feel fearful of safety to their person, another person or property in the person’s possession;

(b) To approach within one foot of a person for the purpose of making a solicitation without obtaining said person’s initial consent;

(c) To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response;

(d) To impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, public places adjacent to any public roadway where the solicitation is directed to or intended to attract the attention of the occupant of any vehicle stopped or traveling on the roadway, unless said vehicle is legally parked;

(e) To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to intimidate or compel or force a person being solicited to accede to demands;

(f) Solicitation on private property, unless the solicitor has prior written permission from the owner or occupant;

(g) To make any false or misleading representation in the course of making a solicitation; or

(h) Soliciting in a manner that exploits children.

(2) “Exploit children” shall mean using children in an unethical, selfish, or abusive manner or in any other manner that gives an unfair advantage.

(3) “Public place” shall mean any road, alley, lane, parking area, sidewalk or any place, private or otherwise, adopted to and fitted for vehicular or pedestrian travel that is in common use by the public with the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner or owners, and further, any public playground, school grounds, recreation grounds, parks, parkways, park drives, park paths and rights-of-way open to the use of the public.

(4) “Solicitation” shall mean any means of asking, begging, requesting, or pleading made in person, orally or in a written or printed manner, directed to another person, requesting an immediate donation of money, contribution, alms, financial aid, charity, gifts of items or service of value, or the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. (Ord. 06-10 § 2)


9.190.030 Aggressive solicitation – Prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly engage in aggressive solicitation in any public place. (Ord. 06-10 § 2)


9.190.040 Place of solicitation.

It shall be unlawful to solicit within a public right-of-way or park within 300 feet of a school when children are present. (Ord. 06-10 § 2)


9.190.050 Penalties.

Violation of any section of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 06-10 § 2)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Washington Model Traffic Ordinance

10.10    Compression Brakes

10.15    Cutting Corners

10.20    Cruising

10.25    Parking

10.30    Vehicle Weight Limits

10.35    Motorized Foot Scooters

10.40    Highway Access Management

10.45    Vehicle Impound Upon Arrest of Driver for Driving While License Suspended or Revoked

10.50    Inattentive Driving


Chapter 10.05 WASHINGTON MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.05.010    Adoption by reference.

10.05.020    Provisions not adopted.


10.05.010 Adoption.

The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” Chapter 308-330 WAC, as now written or hereinafter amended is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the City of Covington as if set forth in full. A true and correct copy of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance in effect as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and marked Exhibit A and can be found on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 51-97 § 2)


10.05.020 Provisions not adopted.

The following sections of the model traffic ordinance are expressly not adopted by reference:

WAC 

308-330-250    Police department to administer bicycle licenses

308-330-275    Traffic safety commission-powers and duties

308-330-500    Bicycle license required

308-330-505    Bicycle license application

308-330-510    Issuance of bicycle license

308-330-515    Attachment of bicycle license plate or decal

308-330-520    Inspection of bicycles

308-330-525    Renewal of bicycle licenses

308-330-530    Bicycle transfer of ownership

308-330-535    Bicycle rental agencies

308-330-540    Bicycle dealers

308-330-560    Bicycle penalties

(Ord. 51-97 § 3)


Chapter 10.10 COMPRESSION BRAKES

Sections:

10.10.010    Compression brakes prohibited.

10.10.020    Exception for fire department.

10.10.030    Signage.

10.10.040    Violation – Penalty.


10.10.010 Compression brakes prohibited.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall, within the City limits, use motor vehicle brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. It shall be an affirmative defense that said compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of the person and/or property. (Ord. 56-97 § 1)


10.10.020 Exception for fire department.

This chapter shall not apply to any member of King County Fire Protection District Nos. 37 or 43 operating a vehicle of either fire protection district, nor to any person operating any public conveyance within the City limits. (Ord. 56-97 § 1)


10.10.030 Signage.

The Public Works Director of the City of Covington shall direct the posting of signs at all appropriate locations within the City informing the public of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall take reasonable steps to inform the public and businesses located within the City of this chapter. (Ord. 56-97 § 1)


10.10.040 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a civil infraction punishable as follows:

(1) Every person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000;

(2) On a second conviction for a violation of this chapter within a five-year period, a person shall be punished by a fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000; and

(3) On a third conviction for a violation of this chapter within a five-year period, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000. (Ord. 56-97 § 1)


Chapter 10.15 CUTTING CORNERS*

Sections:

10.15.010    Cutting corners.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 60-97.


10.15.010 Cutting corners.

It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon the highways of this City to turn such vehicle either to the right or to the left upon approaching or leaving an intersection to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by proper authorities. Violation of this section shall be a civil traffic infraction and punishable by a fine of $75.00, inclusive of statutory assessments. (Ord. 68-98 § 1)


Chapter 10.20 CRUISING*

Sections:

10.20.010    Definitions.

10.20.020    Acts constituting cruising prohibited.

10.20.030    No-cruising areas – Determination.

10.20.040    No-cruising areas – City Council resolution required.

10.20.050    No-cruising areas – Posting of signs.

10.20.060    Third passage constitutes violation.

10.20.070    Exceptions.

10.20.080    Violation – Penalty.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 63-98.


10.20.010 Definitions.

As used within this chapter, the following words and terms have the following definitions:

(1) “No-cruising area” means an area designated by the Police Chief or his designee and by City Council resolution, in which acts constituting cruising, as set forth in CMC 10.20.020, are prohibited.

(2) “Traffic control point” means any point or points within a no-cruising area established by the police department for the purpose of monitoring cruising. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.020 Acts constituting cruising prohibited.

Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no person shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his care, custody or control to be driven past a traffic control point more than two times in the same direction of travel within a one-hour period in or around a posted no-cruising area so as to contribute to traffic congestion, obstruction of streets, sidewalks or parking lots, impediment of access to shopping centers or other buildings open to the public, or interference with the use of property or conduct of business in the area adjacent thereto. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.030 No-cruising areas – Determination.

The Police Chief or his designee shall determine when an area has become so congested by traffic as to present a danger of traffic congestion, obstruction of streets, sidewalks or parking lots, impediment of access to shopping centers or other buildings open to the public, or interference with the use of property or conduct of business in the area adjacent thereto or that emergency vehicles cannot respond in that area within a reasonable period of time. The Police Chief or his designee shall then direct that the no-cruising signs shall be erected or installed and maintained until the congestion has lessened to an acceptable degree, as determined by the Police Chief or his designee. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.040 No-cruising areas – City Council resolution required.

No area shall be designated or posted as a no-cruising area except upon the passage of a resolution by the City Council specifically mandating said designation and posting for a particular area. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.050 No-cruising areas – Posting of signs.

At every point where a public street or alley becomes or provides ingress to a no-cruising area, there shall be posted a sign which designates the no-cruising area. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.060 Third passage constitutes violation.

No violation of this chapter shall occur except upon the third passage by the same traffic-control point in the same direction of travel within the aforementioned one-hour period between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.070 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, County, public district, State or Federal agency;

(2) Any vehicle licensed for public transportation, including but not limited to buses and taxi cabs;

(3) Any in-service emergency vehicle; and

(4) Any vehicle being driven for necessary commercial or medical reasons. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


10.20.080 Violation – Penalty.

A violation of this chapter shall be a civil infraction and shall be punished by a fine of $75.00, inclusive of statutory assessments. (Ord. 67-98 § 1)


Chapter 10.25 PARKING

Sections:

10.25.010    Parking vehicles upon highways – Adopted.

10.25.020    Parking adjacent to mailboxes.

10.25.030    Parking restriction of certain vehicles within residential areas.


10.25.010 Parking vehicles upon highways – Adopted.

The City hereby adopts WAC 308-330-436, as now enacted or as hereinafter amended, in the initial form as attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and marked Exhibit A, which can be found on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 106-98 § 1)


10.25.020 Parking adjacent to mailboxes.

No person shall park directly adjacent to a clearly visible residential mailbox in a manner which would restrict vehicular access to the mailbox, between 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day of scheduled mail delivery by the United States Postal Service. A violation of this section shall be a Class 4 civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00, not including statutory assessments. (Ord. 03-00 § 1)


10.25.030 Parking restriction of certain vehicles within residential areas.

No persons shall park a vehicle, which is more than 80 inches wide at any point along its body, on any street or alley in residentially zoned areas as defined in the City of Covington zoning code between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A person found to have committed a violation of this section shall be assessed a civil monetary penalty of $75.00. (Ord. 10-16 § 1; Ord. 28-01 § 1)


Chapter 10.30 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS

Sections:

10.30.010    Adoption of Chapter 46.44 RCW by reference.


10.30.010 Adoption of Chapter 46.44 RCW by reference.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.180, 35A.11.020 and 35A.21.160, the City adopts by reference Chapter 46.44 RCW, as presently constituted or hereinafter amended. (Ord. 13-97 § 1)


Chapter 10.35 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS

Sections:

10.35.010    Definitions.

10.35.020    Duty to obey traffic-control devices and rules of the road.

10.35.030    Unsafe use prohibited.

10.35.040    Use prohibited in certain areas.

10.35.050    Helmets required.

10.35.060    No passengers or towing.

10.35.070    Hours of operation.

10.35.080    Muffler required.

10.35.090    Parental responsibility.

10.35.100    Violation – Penalty.

10.35.110    Violation – Children under the age of 16.

10.35.120    Release of motorized foot scooter.

10.35.130    Contesting impound.

10.35.140    Disposal of motorized foot scooter.


10.35.010 Definitions.

A “motorized foot scooter” is a device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion.

A motor-driven cycle, a moped, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle, as defined in Chapter 46.04 RCW, is not a motorized foot scooter. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.020 Duty to obey traffic-control devices and rules of the road.

Any person operating a motorized foot scooter shall obey all the rules of the road applicable to vehicle or pedestrian traffic, as well as the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.030 Unsafe use prohibited.

No motorized foot scooter shall be ridden in a negligent or unsafe manner, but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and other persons. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.040 Use prohibited in certain areas.

Motorized foot scooters are prohibited from being operated:

(1) On sidewalks within the City limits;

(2) In City parks;

(3) On multiple use trails, including without limitation bicycle paths, bikeways, equestrian trails, hiking trails and recreation trails, except where such trails are specifically marked stating that such use is permitted; and

(4) On any City street with a posted maximum speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour, unless operated within a marked bicycle lane. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.050 Helmets required.

Any person operating a motorized foot scooter upon any street or public area in the City shall wear an approved helmet designed for safety that meets or exceeds the requirements of Standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Foundation, or a subsequent nationally recognized standard for helmet performance as the City may adopt. The helmet shall be worn over the head and equipped with either a neck or chin strap that shall be fastened securely while the motorized foot scooter is in motion. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.060 No passengers or towing.

No person shall transport another person on or in tow of a motorized foot scooter upon any street or public area in the City. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.070 Hours of operation.

A motorized foot scooter may only be used or operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided, however, no motorized foot scooter shall be operated during “hours of darkness” as that phrase is defined in RCW 46.04.200. For the purposes of this section, the times of sunset and sunrise shall be those times designated in a newspaper of local circulation including either the King County Journal, the Seattle Times or the Seattle Post-Intelligencer. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.080 Muffler required.

Any gas motorized foot scooter used or operated within the City of Covington shall have affixed a muffler in good working order and in constant operation. The use of a cutout, bypass, or similar muffler elimination device is prohibited on any gas motorized foot scooter. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.090 Parental responsibility.

A parent who has custody of any child under the age of 18 years and the guardian of any ward under the age of 18 years shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.100 Violation – Penalty.

Except as stated in CMC 10.35.110, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.110 Violation – Children under the age of 16.

When a violation of any provision of this chapter by a child under the age of 16 years occurs, the City may impound the motorized foot scooter, if in the discretion of the officer there is not a parent who has custody of the child or guardian of the child available to whom the motorized foot scooter can be released and taking custody of the motorized foot scooter is (1) reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, or (2) reasonable necessary to protect persons or property. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.120 Release of motorized foot scooter.

If the City impounds the motorized foot scooter under CMC 10.35.110, the motorized foot scooter shall only be released to a parent who has custody of the child or a guardian of the child who was handling the motorized foot scooter at the time it was taken into custody. In order to secure release, the parent or guardian shall present identification to the City and pay an impound fee in the amount of $50.00. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.130 Contesting impound.

If a parent or guardian of a child wishes to contest the validity of an impound occurring under CMC 10.35.110, the parent or guardian shall request a contested impound hearing with the City Manager, or his designee, within 30 days of the impound. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing within three business days to determine whether the impound was proper. If the City Manager determines that the impound was improper, the motorized foot scooter shall be released under CMC 10.35.120 without an impound fee. If the City Manager determines that the violation has in fact occurred, an appeal may be filed to the Covington Municipal Court if served on the City Clerk and filed with the Court within 20 days of the mailing of the City Manager’s decision to the parent or guardian who requested the contested hearing. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


10.35.140 Disposal of motorized foot scooter.

A motorized foot scooter shall be considered abandoned and the City may dispose of it upon the expiration of the following time periods:

(1) Thirty days after the impoundment if no request has been made by a parent or guardian for its release pursuant to CMC 10.35.120 or for a contested impound hearing pursuant to CMC 10.35.130;

(2) Twenty days after the mailing of the City Manager’s decision to the parent or guardian following a contested impound hearing, unless an appeal of the decision has been served and filed pursuant to CMC 10.35.130; or

(3) Twenty days after a decision by the Covington Municipal Court finding the impound to have been proper. (Ord. 20-04 § 1)


Chapter 10.40 HIGHWAY ACCESS MANAGEMENT

Sections:

10.40.010    Statutes adopted.

10.40.020    Definitions – Fees.


10.40.010 Statutes adopted.

Pursuant to the requirements and authority of Chapter 47.50 RCW, there is hereby adopted by reference the provisions of Chapters 468-51 and 468-52 WAC, together with all future amendments, in order to implement the requirements of Chapter 47.50 RCW. (Ord. 23-08 § 1)


10.40.020 Definitions – Fees.

For purposes of this chapter and of the regulations adopted by reference, the term “government entity” means the City of Covington. Where there is any reference to “the department” in the administrative and procedural sections adopted by reference, that reference shall be deemed to mean the City of Covington for purposes of this chapter. All fees due and payable in connection with access permitting shall be paid to the City of Covington. (Ord. 23-08 § 1)


Chapter 10.45 VEHICLE IMPOUND UPON ARREST OF DRIVER FOR DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED OR REVOKED

Sections:

10.45.010    Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

10.45.020    Impoundment authorized.

10.45.030    Administrative fee.

10.45.040    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

10.45.050    Redemption of impounded vehicles.

10.45.060    Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

10.45.070    Contracts for towing and storage.

10.45.080    Severability.


10.45.010 Appointment of King County as agent for the City.

King County and the King County Sheriff’s Office and/or its designees are appointed and authorized to act as agent of the City in regard to all impoundments and actions permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.020 Impoundment authorized.

(1) When the driver of a motor vehicle is arrested for a violation of driving while license suspended (“DWLS”) in the third degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(c), as written or hereafter amended, or if the driver is arrested for driving when his or her privilege to drive is suspended or revoked in any other state, the vehicle is subject to summary impoundment, at the discretion of a law enforcement officer.

(2) When the driver of a motor vehicle is arrested for a violation of DWLS in the second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(b), as written or hereafter amended, the vehicle is subject to summary impoundment, at the discretion of a law enforcement officer. The period of impoundment shall be for 30 days.

(3) When the driver of a motor vehicle is arrested for a violation of DWLS in the first degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(a), as written or hereafter amended, the vehicle is subject to summary impoundment, at the discretion of a law enforcement officer. The period of impoundment shall be for 30 days.

(4) When the driver of a commercial motor vehicle is arrested for violation of RCW 46.20.342, and the driver of the vehicle is not the owner, the police officer shall attempt in a reasonable and timely manner to contact the owner of the vehicle before the summary impoundment authorized by this section. The police officer may release the vehicle to the owner if the owner is reasonably available, as long as the owner was not in the vehicle at the time of the stop and arrest, and the owner has not received a prior release under this subsection or RCW 46.55.120(1)(a)(ii).

(5) When the driver of a motor vehicle is arrested for violation of driving while under the influence pursuant to RCW 46.61.502; RCW 46.61.503; RCW 46.61.504, the arresting officer will impound the vehicle in accordance with RCW 46.55.360. (Ord. 09-17 § 1; Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.030 Administrative fee.

If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the City of Covington prior to redemption of the vehicle as provided by this chapter. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practicable, the cost to the City of implementing, enforcing and administering this chapter and must be deposited in an appropriate account. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.040 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

(1) Not more than 24 hours after impoundment of any vehicle, the tow truck operator shall mail a notice by first class mail to the last known address of the legal and registered owner(s) of the vehicle, as may be disclosed by the vehicle identification number, and as provided by the Washington State Department of Licensing. The notice shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number. The notice shall include the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice also shall include written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing and storage charges pursuant to this chapter, as set forth on a form provided by the King County Sheriff’s Office. The notice shall state the mandatory length of the impound. The notice shall state that a person who desires to redeem an impounded vehicle at the end of the mandatory period must, within five days of the impound, at the request of the tow truck operator, pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than one-half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound to ensure payment of the costs of the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(b). The notification shall state that if the security deposit is not posted within five days of the impound, the vehicle will be processed and sold at auction as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130. The notice shall set forth the requirements of CMC 10.45.050 regarding the payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage as well as providing proof of payment of the administrative fee and proof of satisfaction of any penalties, fines, or forfeitures before redemption. The notice must also state that the registered owner is ineligible to purchase the vehicle at the abandoned vehicle auction, if held.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rented vehicle it owns by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for a suspended license impound. The officer directing the impound shall notify the rental car business as soon as practicable of the impound.

(3) If the date on which a notice required by subsection (1) of this section is to be mailed falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or postal holiday, the notice may be mailed on the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor a postal holiday.

(4) Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed. The tow truck operator shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person’s signature that the notification was provided. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.050 Redemption of impounded vehicles.

Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances, and pursuant to agreement between the City and the King County Sheriff’s Office:

(1) Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and insurance.

(2) Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall pay the tow truck operator for costs of impoundment (removal, towing, and storage) and the administrative fee prior to redeeming such vehicle. The tow truck operator shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(e), as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to this chapter and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter can be released only pursuant to written order from the King County Sheriff’s Office or a court.

(3) The King County Sheriff’s Office shall assign an administrative hearings officer(s) to conduct post-impoundment hearings pursuant to this chapter. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter has a right to a hearing before an administrative hearings officer to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing and storage charges or administrative fee. Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing, on a form provided by the King County Sheriff’s Office and signed by such person, and received by the King County Sheriff’s Office within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the latter of the date the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for hearing was mailed to the person or the date the notice was given to the person by the tow truck operator. Such hearing shall be provided as follows:

(a) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under CMC 10.45.020, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.

(b) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under CMC 10.45.020, have not been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing, which shall be held within two business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the written request for hearing.

(c) Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in this section may petition the King County Sheriff’s Office for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purpose of this section, “good cause” shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.

(d) If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and neither the City nor County shall be liable for removal, towing and storage charges arising from the impoundment.

(4) The Covington Police Chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse or domestic partner of the registered owner of the vehicle, based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse or domestic partner resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle, and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from the release of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of payment of the penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the driver, and with the exception of the administrative fee.

(5) The Covington Police Chief, or designee, is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon the petition of the registered owner of the vehicle based upon economic or personal hardship or equity, provided the registered owner was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the impound, the owner did not know that the operator’s driver’s license and/or driving privilege was suspended or revoked, and the owner has not received a prior release under this subsection. If such release is authorized, the registered owner must satisfy the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, with the exception of the administrative fee, in order to redeem the vehicle.

(6) In order to avoid discriminatory application, the Covington Police Chief, or designee, shall deny release in all circumstances without discretion, except as set forth in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.060 Post-impoundment hearing procedure.

Hearings requested pursuant to CMC 10.45.050 shall be held by an administrative hearings officer who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated towing and storage and administrative fees charged were proper. 

(1) At the hearing, the King County Sheriff’s Office may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees, or both, were proper. An abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.

(2) At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that either the impound or fees or both were not proper.

(3) If the impoundment is found to be proper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment (removal, towing, storage, and administrative fees) have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of CMC 10.45.050(1) or (2) satisfied, or any period of impoundment has not expired, the administrative hearings officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic violations.

(4) If the impoundment is found to be improper, the administrative hearings officer shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter judgment against the County and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment, which are removal, towing, storage and administrative fees, plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date that person paid the costs, and the County shall comply with the order. If the costs of impoundment, which are removal, towing and storage, have not been paid, the hearings officer shall enter an order directing the County to pay the costs to the tow truck operator, and the County shall comply with the order. The County and City are not liable for damages if the police officer who ordered the impound relied in good faith and without gross negligence on the records of the Department of Licensing in ascertaining whether the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license.

(5) In the event that the administrative hearings officer finds that the impound was proper, but that the removal, towing or storage fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the administrative hearings officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall enter a judgment against the County and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year on the overpayment from the date that person paid the costs, and the County shall comply with the order. The tow truck operator is liable to the County for the amount of the overpayment and interest at the rate of 12 percent per year. The tow truck operator shall make the payment to the County no later than 60 days after the tow truck operator receives notice of the requirement to pay. The County may bring an action in the King County District Court against the tow truck operator to recover the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per year.

(6) No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.

(7) An appeal of the administrative hearings officer’s decision shall be conducted according to, and is subject to, the procedures of this section. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by an administrative hearings officer may be appealed to the King County District Court for final judgment. The hearing on the appeal under this subsection shall be de novo. A person appealing such a decision must file a request for an appeal in district court within 15 days after the decision of the administrative hearings officer and must pay a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in District Court. If a person fails to file a request for an appeal within the time specified by this section or does not pay the filing fee, the right to an appeal is waived and the administrative hearings officer’s decision is final. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.070 Contracts for towing and storage.

The King County Sheriff’s Office, and the City Manager and/or designees, are authorized and directed to enter into appropriate agreements and to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any contract(s) awarded to registered tow truck operators pursuant to this chapter. Such contracts shall be at no cost to the County and the City and shall provide that the tow truck operator may recover the costs of towing and storage only from the person seeking to redeem the impounded vehicle, or from the proceeds of sale of an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130, and that the County and City shall not be responsible for payment of such costs except upon order of the administrative hearing officer pursuant to CMC 10.45.060. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


10.45.080 Severability.

If any portion of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 26-08 § 1)


Chapter 10.50 INATTENTIVE DRIVING

Sections:

10.50.010    Inattentive driving.

10.50.020    Violation – Penalty.


10.50.010 Inattentive driving.

It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or way open to the public of the City in an inattentive manner. “Inattentive manner” means the operation of a motor vehicle in a manner which, without regard to speed, evidences a lack of (1) that degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions, including, but not limited to, the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of pedestrians, or the presence of other traffic; or (2) that degree of attentiveness as will allow the driver of a motor vehicle to observe anything resting on or travelling on the roadway in time to take appropriate action as circumstances require. The offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a vehicle in a negligent manner under RCW 46.61.525, and any person charged pursuant to RCW 46.61.525 may be found to have committed the lesser offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner. (Ord. 13-11 § 1)


10.50.020 Violation – Penalty. 

Violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a monetary penalty of $250.00, not including statutory costs and assessments. (Ord. 13-11 § 1)


Title 11 (Reserved) 

 


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND BRIDGES

Chapters:

12.05    General Provisions

12.10    Official City Street System

12.15    Load Restrictions on City Streets

12.20    Load Limits on Bridges

12.25    Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction

12.30    Road Construction Rules Adopted

12.35    Right-of-Way Use

12.40    Special Events on City Property

12.45    Installation of Public Benches

12.50    Street Closure by Petition

12.55    Street and Public Easement Vacation

12.60    City of Covington Design and Construction Standards

12.65    Franchised Utility Work Within City Rights-of-Way

12.67    Non-Franchised Utility Right-of-Way Placement

12.70    Utilities on City of Covington Real Property

12.75    Snow Emergency Routes

12.80    Sidewalks, Planting Strips and Street Trees

12.85    Nonmotorized Vehicle Program

12.90    Commute Trip Reduction

12.95    Integrated Transportation Program

12.100    Transportation Concurrency Management

12.105    Repealed

12.110    Intersection Standards

12.115    Excavation in City Streets

12.120    Traffic Impact Fee Funding Source Adjustment

12.125    Transportation Benefit District


Chapter 12.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

12.05.010    Financial guarantees authorized.


12.05.010 Financial guarantees authorized.

The Community Development and Public Works Departments are authorized to require all applicants for permits under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of this title and CMC Title 14. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 2; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.01.020))


Chapter 12.10 OFFICIAL CITY STREET SYSTEM

Sections:

12.10.010    Official street system.

12.10.020    Street maps.

12.10.030    Maps are exhibits.

12.10.040    Streets included.

12.10.050    Revision of street exhibits.

12.10.060    Additions and deletions made by ordinance.

12.10.070    Streets constructed by Washington State Department of Transportation included.

12.10.080    Inclusion of roads which have reverted to City.

12.10.090    Director’s annual report.

12.10.100    Inaccuracies corrected.


12.10.010 Official street system.

The City Manager of the City of Covington has been advised by the Director of Public Works that the need exists for an official street system. This system will show, by maps and/or exhibits, the streets for which the City of Covington has maintenance responsibility. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.010))


12.10.020 Street maps.

The official City of Covington street system will be indicated on an officially adopted City of Covington street system map. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.020))


12.10.030 Maps are exhibits.

The aforementioned maps will also be known as exhibits to be indicated by the sheet designation. Computer sheets contained in a loose-leaf binder shall be used as reference exhibits in conjunction with the map exhibits. These computer sheets must be revised periodically to correspond with revisions made on the map exhibits. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.030))


12.10.040 Streets included.

Only those streets which are within the incorporated City boundary and exclusive of limited access State roads/highways shall be considered part of the City of Covington street system. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.040))


12.10.050 Revision of street exhibits.

It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Public Works, or his appointed representative, to revise the City of Covington street exhibits. Revisions shall be made as soon as practicable after any change occurs. The Director of Public Works shall furnish annually a completely revised and current set of exhibits which shall be used for a period of one year as official designator of City of Covington streets. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.050))


12.10.060 Additions and deletions made by ordinance.

Authority for additions to, deletions from, or characteristic changes in the streets on the design and construction standards and specifications drawings shall be by ordinance or by statute as set forth in the Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.060))


12.10.070 Streets constructed by Washington State Department of Transportation included.

All streets constructed by the Washington State Department of Transportation in conjunction with, and/or adjacent to, an interstate highway, State primary or State limited access highway and used as access, exit, frontage road or service road and covered by a maintenance agreement between the Washington State Department of Transportation and the City of Covington shall be considered a part of the City of Covington street system whether or not the State has relinquished any or all claim. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.070))


12.10.080 Inclusion of roads which have reverted to City.

The City of Covington street system shall include all roads/streets which have reverted to the City of Covington by virtue of prescriptive rights. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.080))


12.10.090 Director’s annual report.

The Director of Public Works shall have an annual report prepared of the City of Covington street system for study and recommendations. The report shall be submitted by the Director on January 2nd or as soon thereafter as possible and practicable. The report must contain all additions and deletions to the street system. It must also include all physical changes including total mileage of streets in the system and any other information considered relevant to a concise and comprehensive representation of the City of Covington street system. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.090))


12.10.100 Inaccuracies corrected.

If any inaccuracies appear on the exhibits in conflict with records on file, the inaccuracies shall be corrected on the exhibits and in no case shall affect the provisions of this chapter or the status of the exhibits as official designators of the official City of Covington street system. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.02.100))


Chapter 12.15 LOAD RESTRICTIONS ON CITY STREETS

Sections:

12.15.010    Street closure policy.

12.15.020    Winter and emergency load restrictions.


12.15.010 Street closure policy.

The following policy is approved and adopted, and henceforth all street closure and load limit restrictions will be disseminated in accordance with this policy insofar as it is possible to do so:

(1) A list of streets which will remain open and available for school bus use during thawing conditions will be supplied to each and every school district operating on City streets. This will be accomplished during the month of September of each school year.

(2) In the event street closures are required, the school district will be notified prior to 1:00 p.m. of the day preceding the road closures on school bus routes, to be effective the following day. If the morning pick-up of children is accomplished, the school district will be permitted to use these routes for the returning of the children to their normal bus stops.

(3) School buses will be permitted to turn around at the intersection of a school bus route which is closed, and the open route with the minimum maneuvering possible on the closed road in the intersection area.

(4) The City will establish the necessary communications with the school districts to provide the proper notification. The City Public Works Director will initiate street closures and, unless specified otherwise, closures shall be City-wide. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.03.010))


12.15.020 Winter and emergency load restrictions.

The following emergency restrictions shall be in effect on City streets during such periods of freezing and thawing conditions as determined by the City Public Works Director:

	REGULAR WINTER LOAD RESTRICTIONS

	Conventional Tubeless or Special with .5 Marking

	Gross Load	Gross Load

	Tire Size	 Each Tire	Tire Size	 Each Tire

	7.00	1,800 lbs.	8-22.5	2,250 lbs.

	7.50	2,250 lbs. 	9-22.5	2,800 lbs.

	8.25	2,800 lbs.	10-22.5	3,400 lbs.

	9.00 	3,400 lbs.	11-22.5	4,000 lbs.

	10.00	4,000 lbs. 	11-24.5	4,000 lbs.

	11.00	4,500 lbs. 	12-22.5	4,500 lbs.

	12.00 or over 	4,500 lbs.	12-24.5 or over	4,500 lbs.

	 

	EMERGENCY LOAD RESTRICTIONS

	Conventional Tires Tubeless or Special with .5 Marking

	Gross Load	 Gross Load

	Tire Size	 Each Tire	Tire Size	 Each Tire

	7.00	1,800 lbs.	8-22.5	1,800 lbs.

	7.50	1,800 lbs. 	9-22.5	1,900 lbs.

	8.25	1,900 lbs. 	10-22.5	2,250 lbs.

	9.00	2,250 lbs. 	11-22.5	2,750 lbs.

	10.00	2,750 lbs. 	11-24.5	2,750 lbs.

	11.00 or over	3,000 lbs. 	12-22.5 or over	3,000 lbs.

A further load restriction of five tons gross on any vehicle may be placed on specific streets under severe conditions. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.03.020))


Chapter 12.20 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES

Sections:

12.20.010    Gross weight allowed and notification.

12.20.020    Limited special permits.

12.20.030    Maximum gross vehicle weight.

12.20.040    Enforcement.


12.20.010 Gross weight allowed and notification.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle over any bridge when such vehicle has a gross weight that is greater than the posted maximum weight for that bridge, unless the driver is in possession of a limited special permit issued by the City Public Works Director or designee for the safe use of such bridge. Notice of closing of individual bridges to certain classes or weights of vehicles shall be:

(a) Published in a local newspaper of general circulation; and

(b) Posted on signs at each end of subject bridge, on or prior to the date of publication. All signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with RCW 46.61.450 and Chapter 47.36 RCW. Maximum gross weights for vehicles operating over bridges shall be established by ordinance in accordance with and RCW 46.44.080.

(2) The City Public Works Director shall have the authority by administrative determination to immediately impose temporary gross weight limits on bridges based on the results of an engineering and traffic investigation. The Traffic Engineer shall have the authority to immediately erect and maintain official traffic control devices for temporary gross weight limits on bridges as directed by the City Public Works Director and in accordance with Chapter 46.90 RCW and WAC 308-330-265. The temporary gross weight limits on bridges shall be in effect for not longer than one year from the date of posting or until the weight limits are established by ordinance. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.04.010))


12.20.020 Limited special permits.

The City Public Works Director or designee is authorized to issue limited special permits for the safe use of load limited bridges by emergency vehicles and other vehicles exceeding the posted maximum weight. Applications for limited special permits shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 3; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.04.015))


12.20.030 Maximum gross vehicle weight.

Those bridges that are posted one legal load are done so pursuant to definitions and standards for maximum gross vehicle weight contained in Chapter 46.44 RCW, particularly the vehicle weight table of RCW 46.44.041. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.04.020))


12.20.040 Enforcement. 

The Director of the Department of Public Works and Police Chief are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. Any violation of this chapter is a traffic infraction and subject to a penalty of $250.00 exclusive of costs and assessments. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.04.030))


Chapter 12.25 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

12.25.010    Standard specifications adopted.

12.25.020    Department of Public Works to comply with standards.


12.25.010 Standard specifications adopted.

The 2000 English Edition of the “Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction” issued by the Washington State Department of Transportation and the American Public Works Association, Washington State Chapter, is adopted as the standard specifications for road, bridge and drainage construction in the City of Covington. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.05.010))


12.25.020 Department of Public Works to comply with standards.

The Department of Public Works will comply with the Soil Conservation Service standards, specifications and contracting procedures when working in conjunction with the Federal government on a project requiring such compliance. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.05.020))


Chapter 12.30 ROAD CONSTRUCTION RULES ADOPTED

Sections:

12.30.010    Rules adopted.

12.30.020    Enforcement.


12.30.010 Rules adopted.

Standards, rules and regulations pertaining to the construction of plat roads and the performance of other road construction work on rights-of-way are hereby adopted and approved by the Council and made an integral part of this chapter. The Department of Public Works shall print copies of said standards, rules and regulations and subsequent revisions and additions thereto, and make the same available to anyone proposing to do work on rights-of-way. It is also made the duty of the Department of Public Works to prepare and periodically update a City bonding schedule for use in determining appropriate construction, maintenance or restoration bonds for road and drainage facilities developed in compliance with adopted standards. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.06.010))


12.30.020 Enforcement.

The Directors of the Department of Community Development and Department of Public Works are authorized to enforce the provision of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.06.020))


Chapter 12.35 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE

Sections:

12.35.010    Definitions.

12.35.020    Permit required for improvement or use – Application processing.

12.35.030    Permit – Additional requirements.

12.35.040    Permit – Fees.

12.35.050    Permit – Duration, extension.

12.35.060    Repealed.

12.35.070    Permit – Interpretation.

12.35.080    Compliance required of driveway connections or other access to City street rights-of-way.

12.35.090    Enforcement.


12.35.010 Definitions.

(1) “Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility which owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.

(2) “Department” means either the Department of Public Works or the Department of Community Development, as indicated within this chapter.

(3) “Development approval” means the granting of a building permit, mobile home on-site permit, short subdivision or other City of Covington land use approval or approvals.

(4) “Development Engineer” means City of Covington representative authorized to oversee the review, conditioning, inspection and acceptance of right-of-way use permits, road and drainage projects constructed pursuant to permits administered by the Department. The Development Engineer or designee shall be a professional civil engineer registered and licensed under the laws of the State of Washington.

(5) “Right-of-way use permit” means a permit authorizing the use of the City of Covington right-of-way for a designated purpose and for a period of time limited to 180 days or less. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 5; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.010))


12.35.020 Permit required for improvement or use – Application processing.

(1) Permits Required. City of Covington street rights-of-way shall not be privately improved or used for access or other purposes and no development approval shall be issued which requires use of privately maintained rights-of-way unless a permit therefor has been issued pursuant to this chapter, except for utility construction work authorized pursuant to Chapters 12.65 and 12.67 CMC. This section shall not apply to driveway connections from private property to City of Covington street rights-of-way.

(2) General Procedures.

(a) Upon receipt of an application for right-of-way use permit, the Department shall determine whether the proposed activity is within City-owned right-of-way.

(b) The Community Development Department shall be the lead agency for the compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act. In addition, the Development Engineer shall review applications for compliance with applicable City of Covington plans, policies, regulations and standards. Prior to issuing a right-of-way use permit, the Department shall determine and secure an appropriate financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of this title and CMC Title 14. 

(c) The Department shall, when feasible, consolidate right-of-way use permits with other development approvals to prevent duplication and increase efficiency. The fee for a consolidated approval shall be reduced to the extent separate fees would be duplicative. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 6; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.020))


12.35.030 Permit – Additional requirements.

(1) Plans. Detailed engineering and restoration plans and/or drainage plan, pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC, may be required when considered necessary by the Development Engineer. Costs for the development of such plan and conduct of required studies shall be borne by the permit applicant, and, if the plan is returned, it shall be returned to the applicant.

(2) Survey. When considered necessary by the Development Engineer to adequately define the limits of right-of-way, the permit applicant shall cause the right-of-way to be surveyed by a licensed land surveyor. Such survey shall be recorded in accordance with the Survey Recording Act.

(3) Dedication. A permit applicant may be required to deed additional right-of-way across property under his authority when allowed pursuant to Chapter 35A.47 RCW.

(4) Illegal Subdivision. A permit shall not be issued to provide access to a lot or parcel created in violation of State and City codes, statutes and/or standards. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.030))


12.35.040 Permit – Fees.

The Community Development Department shall require right-of-way use/improvement permit application and inspection fees. Each application requires a fee payable to the City of Covington for the administrative costs, expenses of reviewing the application, and inspection time as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 7; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.040))


12.35.050 Permit – Duration, extension.

(1) Upon filing of a complete application, payment of the fee, and posting of the required financial guarantee for construction, maintenance, and restoration of the right-of-way consistent with this code, the City may issue a permit authorizing the use of City’s road right-of-way for use by designated private parties for a specific use which is less than 180 days in duration.

(2) The permit may require construction and restoration of the right-of-way to adopted standards based on the nature and duration of the specific use, and subject to Department inspection. In addition, conditions may be set to assure the compliance with City plans, policies, standards and regulations. Such conditions may require performance in excess of adopted road standards.

(3) The permit applicant shall assume sole responsibility for the safe and adequate operation and maintenance of any improvements to the City right-of-way during the period of time the permit is in effect.

(4) The permit applicant may apply for a single 180-day extension to the right-of-way use permit, upon written application for an extension, payment of the fee for a request for extension as set forth in the current fee resolution, and being found to have fully complied with the conditions and requirements of the original permit. The application for extension may be made only after the first 90 days of the original permit life. (Ord. 20-07 § 8; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.050))


12.35.060 Permit – Extended.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.060))


12.35.070 Permit – Interpretation.

Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to convey any vested right or ownership interest in any City right-of-way. Every right-of-way use permit shall state on its face that any City right-of-way opened pursuant to this chapter shall be open to use by the general public except in those cases where specific conditions in a right-of-way use permit (limited) restrict the use of the right-of-way for safety reasons. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.070))


12.35.080 Compliance required of driveway connections or other access to City street rights-of-way.

No driveway connection or other access from private property to a City street right-of-way shall be built or maintained which does not comply with the street standards. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.080)) 


12.35.090 Enforcement.

The Director of the Department of Community Development is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of CMC 1.30.060, 1.30.070 and 1.30.080. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.07.090))


Chapter 12.40 SPECIAL EVENTS ON CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

12.40.010    Definitions.

12.40.020    Permit requirement.

12.40.030    Repealed.

12.40.040    Permit issuance.

12.40.050    Liability.

12.40.060    Additional requirements.

12.40.070    Fee.

12.40.080    Interpretation.

12.40.090    Enforcement.


12.40.010 Definitions.

(1) “City property” herein means all City real property, including but not limited to recreational trails, City road rights-of-way and dedicated open space.

(2) “Special event permit” means a permit for the use of City property issued pursuant to this chapter.

(3) “Custodial Departments” means those City Departments whose function it is to manage and control City use of said rights-of-way or other City property. (Ord. 20-07 § 11; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.010))


12.40.020 Permit requirement.

(1) Special event permits shall be required for any use of City property except uses relating to utility permits or relating to City rights-of-way use or construction permits.

(2) Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit upon City property, the Community Development Department shall determine whether the proposed use is upon City-owned property.

(3) The Community Development Department shall forward the application to all City Departments for review.

(4) The City Departments shall review the application and forward their recommendation whether the permit shall be issued. If a Department recommends denial, the Community Development Department shall deny the permit.

(5) If there is no Department with jurisdiction over the City property, the Community Development Department shall evaluate the feasibility of the proposed use, its impact on other uses of the City property and its impact on public health and safety. Based on this evaluation, the Community Development Department shall determine whether the permit should be issued.

(6) In all cases, the Community Development Department shall develop recommendations on sensitive area issues and the Department shall be responsible for assuring that any application meets the requirements of the sensitive areas code set out in Covington Municipal Code and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder before the permit is issued. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 12; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.020))


12.40.030 Inspection fee.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.025))


12.40.040 Permit issuance.

(1) Upon filing of a complete application, necessary approval of said application and the payment of the administrative fee and posting of any required bond, the Community Development Department may issue a permit authorizing the special event use of City property by the permittee.

(2) The permit may require restoration of the City property to standards prescribed by the City in view of the nature and duration of the special event. In addition, conditions may be set by the Community Development Department to assure compliance of the permit with City policies, ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations.

(3) The permit applicant may be required to post a performance bond, consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14, in an amount which will:

(a) Guarantee the special event will be in compliance with standards and conditions prescribed by the Public Works and Community Development Departments;

(b) Guarantee restoration of the City property to a condition consistent with the special event permit and the City’s own use of its property. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 14; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.030))


12.40.050 Liability.

The permit applicant shall be solely responsible for the adequate operation and maintenance of any improvements constructed by the permittee to the City property and shall assume liability for all injuries to persons or property as the result of activities pursuant to a special event permit. (Ord. 20-07 § 15; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.040))


12.40.060 Additional requirements.

(1) Survey. When considered necessary by the Community Development Department to adequately determine the limits of the City property, the permit applicant shall cause the City property to be surveyed by a licensed land surveyor. Such survey shall be recorded in accordance with the Survey Recording Act. The cost of such survey shall be paid by the permit applicant.

(2) Dedication. A permit applicant may be required to deed additional right-of-way across property under his authority when necessary to fulfill any City policy, ordinance or laws. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.050))


12.40.070 Fee.

(1) An applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as set forth in the current fee resolution, to recover the cost of processing the application. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to waive a permit fee when the waiver is in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.

(2) The Community Development Department shall have the authority to charge an annual fee for uses of City property when determined by the Director to be appropriate considering the duration of the special event.

(3) The Community Development Department shall have the authority to require applicants to reimburse the City of Covington for all expenses to be incurred by the City of Covington as a result of issuance of a special event permit. Payment for such expenses shall be made at the time of permit issuance. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 16; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.060))


12.40.080 Interpretation.

Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to convey any vested right of ownership interest in any City property. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.070))


12.40.090 Enforcement.

The Director of Community Development is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.08.080))


Chapter 12.45 INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC BENCHES

Sections:

12.45.010    Definitions.

12.45.020    Permit – Required for each bench.

12.45.030    Permit – Application – Bench plans.

12.45.040    Consent of property owner.

12.45.050    Bench owner to sign permit application – Inspection fee.

12.45.060    Permit – Expiration – Renewal application and fee.

12.45.070    Transfer of bench ownership or title.

12.45.080    Permit – Grounds for denial.

12.45.090    Permit – Withdrawal of consent by property owner.

12.45.100    Permit – Cancellation after installation delay.

12.45.110    Permit – Protest of nearby property owner.

12.45.120    Distance of bench from curb.

12.45.130    Height and length of bench.

12.45.140    Bench to display name and permit number of permittee.

12.45.150    Maintenance of bench by permittee.

12.45.160    Location and space permitted advertising.

12.45.170    Use of words misleading to traffic.

12.45.180    Disposition of bench on revocation of permit – Recovery by permittee.

12.45.190    Enforcement.

12.45.200    Bond.

12.45.210    Schedule of liability limits for bonds and insurance policies.


12.45.010 Definitions.

(1) “Bench” means a seat located upon public property along any public thoroughfare for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

(2) “Street” means any public thoroughfare including the sidewalk, the parkway and any other public property bordering upon a public thoroughfare. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.010))


12.45.020 Permit – Required for each bench.

No person shall install or maintain any bench on any street without a permit therefor from the City Community Development Director. A separate permit must be obtained for each bench, which permit shall be valid only for the particular location specified thereon. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.020))


12.45.030 Permit – Application – Bench plans. 

(1) No bench permit shall be issued except upon written application, made upon a form prescribed by the Community Development Director, showing the proposed location of each bench, the advertising, if any, to appear thereon and such other information as the City may require.

(2) Detailed plans and specifications of each bench shall be supplied by the applicant. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.030))


12.45.040 Consent of property owner. 

Each application must be accompanied by a writing signed by the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property abutting upon the public street at the place where the bench is proposed to be located, giving his consent to the installation and maintenance of the bench. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.040))


12.45.050 Bench owner to sign permit application – Inspection fee. 

Each application must be signed by the owner of the bench or benches for which permits are requested. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.050))


12.45.060 Permit – Expiration – Renewal application and fee. 

Each permit shall expire on July 1st next following the date of issuance unless renewed. Application for renewal must be made prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.070))


12.45.070 Transfer of bench ownership or title. 

Whenever a bench for which a permit has been issued is sold or title or control thereof assigned or transferred, a new permit must be obtained for its maintenance. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.080))


12.45.080 Permit – Grounds for denial.

The application shall be denied if the City finds that the placement of the bench would tend to obstruct passage along any public thoroughfare or to create a hazard or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.090))


12.45.090 Permit – Withdrawal of consent by property owner. 

If the abutting owner withdraws his consent to the continued maintenance of the bench, and gives written notice thereof to the City, then at the expiration of the current term of the permit a renewal of the permit shall be denied. The Engineer shall inform the permittee of the receipt of such notice. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.100)) 


12.45.100 Permit – Cancellation after installation delay. 

Any permit issued under this chapter shall be cancelled and revoked if the permittee fails to install the bench within 60 days after the date of the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.120))


12.45.110 Permit – Protest of nearby property owner. 

The application shall be cancelled and denied, or the permit revoked, as the case may be, if 60 percent of the property owners or tenants living or having their place of business within 200 feet of the location of the bench or benches protest the same. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.130)) 


12.45.120 Distance of bench from curb. 

No permittee shall locate or maintain any bench at a point less than 24 inches from the face of the curb, and each bench must be kept parallel with the curb. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.140))


12.45.130 Height and length of bench. 

No bench shall be more than 42 inches high nor more than two feet, six inches wide, nor more than seven feet long, overall. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.150))


12.45.140 Bench to display name and permit number of permittee. 

Each bench must have displayed thereon, in a conspicuous place, the name of the permittee and the permit number. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.160))


12.45.150 Maintenance of bench by permittee. 

It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain each bench at all times in a safe condition and at its proper and lawful location, and to inspect each bench periodically. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.170))


12.45.160 Location and space permitted advertising. 

No advertising matter or sign shall be displayed upon any bench. No pictures or representations shall appear on any bench. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.180))


12.45.170 Use of words misleading to traffic.

No sign on any bench shall display the words “Stop,” “Look,” “Drive-In,” “Danger” or any other word, phrase, symbol or character calculated to interfere with, mislead or distract traffic. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.190))


12.45.180 Disposition of bench on revocation of permit – Recovery by permittee.

After the revocation of any permit, the City may remove and store the bench if the permittee fails to do so within 10 days after notice. The permittee may recover the bench if, within 60 days after the removal, he pays the cost of such removal and storage. After 60 days the City may sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of the bench at his discretion. All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the permittee and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.200))


12.45.190 Enforcement. 

The City is authorized to enforce the provision of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 1.30.060, 1.30.070 and 1.30.080. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.220))


12.45.200 Bond. 

No permit shall be issued unless the applicant posts and maintains with City of Covington a surety bond or policy of public liability insurance, approved by the Community Development Director and conditioned as hereinafter provided, that permittee will indemnify and save harmless the City of Covington, its officers and employees from any and all loss, costs, damages, expenses or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting of the permit, or the installation or maintenance of the bench for which the permit is issued, and that the permittee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of or which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or maintenance. The bond or policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the permittee at his expense at all times during the period for which the permit is in effect. In the event that two or more permits are issued to one permittee, one such bond or policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two or more benches, and each bond or policy shall be of such a type that its coverage shall be automatically restored immediately from and after the time of the reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.230))


12.45.210 Schedule of liability limits for bonds and insurance policies.

The limit of liability upon any bond or policy of insurance, posted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, shall in no case be less than $2,000,000 for bodily injuries to or death of one person. The permissible limit of liability for bodily injuries or death of more than one person shall depend upon the number of bench permits covered thereby. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.32.240))


Chapter 12.50 STREET CLOSURE BY PETITION

Sections:

12.50.010    Authority.

12.50.020    Petitions.

12.50.030    Determination.


12.50.010 Authority. 

The Public Works Department shall be responsible for receiving and processing all street closure petitions, and for recommending to the Council whether or not the streets identified in the petition should be closed. The authority to make and issue said recommendations shall be vested to the Public Works Director. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or abridge the powers of the Director to temporarily close City streets, as may be authorized by law. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 18; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.38.010))


12.50.020 Petitions. 

(1) Petitions to close City of Covington streets shall be filed with the Public Works Director.

(2) Said petitions shall include: the names, signatures and legal addresses of the persons filing the petition; the location of the roads or streets which the petitioners wish to have closed, including the intersections delineating the boundaries of the road or street sections to be closed; a map depicting the road or street sections requested to be closed; and the reasons for petitioning for closure of the street or road. Other information or documents as the petitioners deem pertinent may be included. Petitions for street closures shall include the names and signatures of at least a simple majority of the owners of property residing along the section(s) of the street being petitioned for closure and the signatures of at least 10 percent of the owners of property being served by arterial streets and neighborhood collector streets to which traffic would be diverted within a distance of 660 feet from the street section petitioned for closure.

(3) Reasons for petitioning the City for the closure of a street shall be limited to safety hazards posed to pedestrians, contiguous real property, and/or traffic such as, but not limited to, traffic speeds, volume, or types of vehicle using the road or street, the adequacy of road signage, and road design considerations.

(4) Petitioners shall submit whatever quantitative or other analyses they may possess in support of their petition, such as traffic volumes or counts, or numbers of accidents which have occurred on the road or street petitioned to be closed.

(5) The Director may consider a request for street closure which is not in conformance with the petition provisions of this chapter from any person. The decision of the Director on such a request shall not be subject to the provisions of CMC 12.50.030. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 19; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.38.020))


12.50.030 Determination. 

(1) The Public Works Director shall do the following upon the receipt of a petition for street closure:

(a) Acknowledge in writing within 10 calendar days the receipt of the petition.

(b) Refer the petition to the City Engineer for investigation, determination, and for the making of a recommendation on road closure to the Director.

(2) The City Engineer’s recommendation shall be submitted to the Director in writing no later than 60 days after the receipt of the petition.

(3) The Director shall notify the petitioners in writing of his recommendation within 10 days of the receipt of the City Engineer’s recommendation on the street closure petition. Said notification shall delineate the process for Council consideration of the Director’s recommendation on a petition to close a City street.

(4) The Director may oppose the petition for street closure or may determine that the portion of the street specified in the petition should be fully closed, closed to through traffic only, open to emergency vehicles only, closed in one direction only, closed to certain types of vehicles or temporarily closed in one of the ways specified.

(5) In addition to making a determination on the merits of the street closure petition, the Director may also identify safety measures for the area defined by the street closure petition as an alternative to road closure and may implement those street safety-related mitigations.

(6) The recommendation of the Director to close a City street shall be forwarded to the Council for consideration and adoption by ordinance.

(7) The recommendation of the Director to reject a petition to close a City street shall be conveyed by letter to the Council which reserves the option, following such notification, of closing all or a portion of the street that is the subject of the petition. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 20; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.38.030))


Chapter 12.55 STREET AND PUBLIC EASEMENT VACATION

Sections:

12.55.010    Authority.

12.55.020    Applicability.

12.55.030    Initiation of street vacation.

12.55.040    Vacation of waterfront streets.

12.55.050    Complete application.

12.55.060    Sufficiency of signatures.

12.55.070    Public hearing – Date fixing.

12.55.080    Notice of public hearing.

12.55.090    Criteria for granting street vacation.

12.55.100    Public hearing and final decision.

12.55.110    Compensation for street vacation.

12.55.120    Payment of compensation for street vacation.

12.55.130    Appeals.


12.55.010 Authority. 

Petitions for the vacation of City streets and public easements may be granted by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 35.79 RCW and as provided herein. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.020 Applicability.

(1) This chapter applies to each request for vacation by petition or initiated by the City Council and includes streets, alleys, public easements, access tracts, undeveloped right-of-way, or a portion thereof. For the purpose of this chapter “street vacation” refers to a public right-of-way and “easements” refers to public easements. 

(2) If the street to be vacated is shown on the official zoning and street map, the approved street vacation will also change the official zoning and street map to remove the vacated street. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.030 Initiation of street vacation.

(1) A vacation may be initiated by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting a street, alley, or portion thereof, sought to be vacated, or in the case of an easement, the owners of more than two-thirds of the property underlying the portion of the easement to be vacated. 

(2) The City Council may initiate a street vacation by resolution without a petition by property owners. The resolution shall contain a legal description of the subject property. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.040 Vacation of waterfront streets.

(1) The City shall not vacate a street, alley or public easement governed by this chapter if any portion of the subject property abuts a body of water unless:

(a) The vacation is sought to enable the City acquire the subject property for port purposes, beach or waterfront access purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, park, public view, recreation, or educational purposes, or other public uses;

(b) The City Council, by resolution, declares that the subject property is not presently being used as a street, alley, or public easement and that the subject property is not suitable for any of the following purposes: port, be ach or water access, boat moorage, launching sites, park, public view, recreation, or education; or

(c) The vacation is sought to enable the City to implement a plan, adopted by resolution or ordinance, that provides comparable or improved public access to the same shoreline area to which the subject property abuts, had the subject property included in the plan not been vacated.

(2) Before adopting a resolution vacating subject property under subsection (1)(b) of this section, the City shall:

(a) Compile an inventory of all rights-of-way within the City that abut the same body of water that is abutted by the subject property;

(b) Conduct a study to determine if the subject property is suitable for use by the City for any of the following purposes: port, boat moorage, launching sites, beach or water access, park, public view, recreation or education; and

(c) Make a finding that the subject property is not suitable for any of the purposes listed under subsection (2)(b) of this section, and that the vacation is in the public interest.

(3) No vacation under this section shall be effective until the fair market value has been paid for the subject property. Money received from the vacation may be used by the City only for acquiring additional beach or water access, acquiring additional public view sites to a body of water, or acquiring additional moorage or launching sites. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.050 Complete application.

(1) A petitioner(s) for a street vacation shall submit a complete application to the City that includes the following, unless otherwise determined by the Director: 

(a) A vacation petition with supporting affidavits on forms provided by the City; 

(b) A legal description of the street, alley, or easement, or part thereof to be vacated. The legal description shall be prepared by a surveyor licensed in the State of Washington;

(c) For each petitioner, a title report indicating ownership and providing a legal description of the property owned by the petitioner;

(d) A site plan showing the street, alley, easement, or part thereof to be vacated and showing all properties and any developed or undeveloped rights-of-way within 500 feet of the street, alley, easement, or part thereof, to be vacated; 

(e) An appraisal, prepared by an appraiser licensed in the State of Washington with an MAI designation, establishing the fair market value of the street, alley, or part thereof to be vacated. An appraisal is not required if only a utility easement is proposed to be vacated; 

(f) Mailing labels of property owners, in accordance with the King County Assessor’s office, located within 500 feet of any boundary of the street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated; 

(g) Other information as deemed necessary by the Director to consider the requested vacation; and

(h) The application fee in the amount as set forth in the current fee resolution. 

(2) When deemed necessary by the Director, an additional deposit adequate to cover other direct costs will be required. The Department may elect to have the petition reviewed by a City-approved and hired consultant. For reviews completed by a consultant, the City is authorized to charge the applicant the actual costs charged by the consultant, in addition to the City’s application fee. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.060 Sufficiency of signatures.

For the purpose of determining the sufficiency of signatures of property owners on a petition for street vacation, the following rules shall govern:

(1) Where property is subject to a mortgage, the signature of the mortgagor shall be sufficient.

(2) Where property is subject to a contract of purchase, the signature of the contract vendee shall be sufficient.

(3) Where property is subject to a deed of trust, the signature of the grantor shall be sufficient.

(4) In the case of ownership by partnership or corporation, the signature of any officer authorized by the bylaws or resolution of the partners or board of directors shall be sufficient when evidenced by a copy of the section of bylaws or resolution granting such authority.

(5) Where property is subject to a long-term lease (in excess of 25 years) the signature of either the lessor or lessee shall be sufficient.

(6) In the case of property subject to a life estate, the signature of the holder of the life estate shall be sufficient.

(7) In the case of property owned by the estate of a decedent or incompetent, the signature of the duly qualified personal representative or guardian shall be sufficient. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.070 Public hearing – Date fixing.

Upon receiving a completed application for vacation, or upon passage of a resolution by the City Council seeking vacation, the City Council shall, by resolution, establish a date and time for an open record public hearing before the Hearing Examiner. In cases where street vacation is initiated by City Council resolution, the resolution seeking vacation shall include the date and time of the open record public hearing before the Hearing Examiner. A public hearing for a street vacation petition shall be scheduled no more than 60 days and no less than 20 days after the City Council passes the resolution fixing the date and time for the public hearing. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.080 Notice of public hearing. 

(1) Notice of a petition or City Council resolution seeking any street vacation shall contain the minimum information as follows:

(a) The City file number; 

(b) A statement that a petition has been filed or resolution has been passed to vacate the street or alley, along with a description of the street or alley to be vacated; 

(c) The date, time, place, and type of the public hearing before the Hearing Examiner; and

(d) A statement of the right of any person to submit written comments to the City prior to the public hearing or appear before the Hearing Examiner at the public hearing to provide comment.

(2) At least 20 calendar days before the public hearing, public notice shall be distributed as follows: 

(a) Mailed notice shall be sent to each resident living immediately adjacent to the street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated; 

(b) Mailed notice shall be sent to the property owners within 500 feet of any boundary of the street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated; 

(c) Mailed notice shall be sent to utility agencies that have facilities located within the City or that possess a franchise agreement for providing utility service within the City; 

(d) A copy of the notice shall be published in the City’s official newspaper; 

(e) A copy of the notice shall be posted in three public places within the City; and

(f) A copy of the notice shall be provided on a public notice board, as prescribed by the City, located on the street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated. 

(3) If 50 percent or more of the abutting property owners file written objection to a City Council-initiated vacation with the City Clerk prior to the time of the scheduled public hearing, then the City Council shall be prohibited from proceeding with the public hearing or granting the vacation. The calculation of the 50 percent threshold under this section shall be based on front footage, in the case of streets and alleys, and square footage of the easement area in the case of public easements. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.090 Criteria for granting street vacation. 

The Hearing Examiner and City Council shall review the requested vacation, provided the applicant can demonstrate that: 

(1) Granting the vacation will not conflict with the general purposes and objectives of the City’s comprehensive plan regarding land use, streets, utilities, drainage, parks, trails, and open space;

(2) The street, or portion thereof, is not likely to serve a useful public purpose both now and in the future, which cannot be met through use of easements for a specific purpose, or the vacation will best serve the public interest;

(3) The vacated area will not increase the number of single-family building sites or multifamily density. This may be mitigated by appropriate conditions on the vacated area; and

(4) The request for vacation was not initiated to correct a condition created by an applicant in violation of City ordinance. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.100 Public hearing and final decision.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on vacations and provide a recommendation to the City Council. The hearing held before the Hearing Examiner shall be the sole open public hearing.

(2) The City Council may adopt, reject, or modify the Hearing Examiner’s recommendation based on the criteria demonstrated by the applicant in CMC 12.55.090. 

(3) The City may condition the vacation to retain easements for the construction, repair, and maintenance of public utilities and services and establish easement trails for pedestrians and nonmotorized vehicular travel. The City Council shall grant easements to utility agencies within the right-of-way of said vacation to maintain the existing location of its facilities. Such easements may also be granted to utility agencies to allow for future location of facilities as reasonably anticipated by the utility agency. 

(4) The final decision of the City Council shall be adopted by ordinance. 

(5) The adopting ordinance shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office and recorded with the King County Department of Records and Elections. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.110 Compensation for street vacation. 

(1) The final ordinance passed to vacate a street, alley, public easement, or part thereof, shall not become effective until the owners of property abutting upon the street, alley, or part thereof, provide full compensation to the City.

(2) The amount of compensation owed to the City for the vacated street, alley, public easement, or part thereof, shall be recommended by the Hearing Examiner and shall be determined by the City Council according to the following criteria:

(a) The full appraised value owed for a street of which public funds have been expended, through an approved capital improvement project, for the acquisition or construction of the street or property;

(b) Seventy-five percent of the full appraised value owed for a street for which funds have been expended for improvements and maintenance within five years from the date of the petition; 

(c) Fifty percent of full appraised value owed for streets for which no funds have been expended in the acquisition, improvements, and maintenance;

(d) Administrative costs of the vacation owed for street vacation issued as a matter of the laws of 1889-1890 and affirmed by City Council action; 

(e) Real property of equal or greater value, or public right-of-way which has value for access, may be accepted in lieu of cash compensation;

(f) Any combination of subsections (2)(a) through (e) of this section may be accepted; provided, that the total value of the combined compensation does not total more than the maximum amount of monetary compensation allowed under subsections (2)(a) through (c) of this section. 

(3) When a street is vacated for a governmental agency, compensation shall be in accordance with the classification of the street, except that some or all of the compensation may be waived at the discretion of the City Council if it will fulfill a public purpose. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.120 Payment of compensation for street vacation.

(1) The compensation determined to be owed shall be a condition of the vacation and shall be paid to the City by the applicant within 90 days of the approval of the adopting ordinance by the City Council. The adopting ordinance shall not become effective until the compensation owed to the City is paid in full.

(2) One-half of the revenue received by the City as compensation for the area vacated must be dedicated to the acquisition, improvement, development, and related maintenance of public open space or transportation capital projects within the City. 

(3) A development proposal subject to a street vacation shall not be issued approvals or development permits until the street vacation has been acted upon by the City Council and any required compensation has been paid to the City. 

(4) If the applicant fails to pay the required compensation sum within 90 days, the adopting ordinance passed by the City Council shall be rescinded and the vacation shall be void. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


12.55.130 Appeals. 

In the event the City Council denies the vacation petition, an appeal may be filed following the procedures for a Type 4 application outlined in Chapter 14.45 CMC for a Type 4 decision. (Ord. 06-12 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 12.60 CITY OF COVINGTON DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

Sections:

12.60.005    Purpose.

12.60.010    Adoption of standards.

12.60.020    Hierarchy of terms.

12.60.030    Applicability.

12.60.040    Associated references.

12.60.050    Design deviations and design variances.

12.60.060    Repealed.


12.60.005 Purpose.

(1) The City has adopted the Design and Construction Standards in this chapter:

(a) To set forth specific, consistent design elements for developers and other private parties constructing or modifying street or right-of-way and stormwater facilities;

(b) To establish uniform criteria to guide the City’s construction or reconstruction of City streets and stormwater facilities;

(c) Support the City’s goals of achieving affordable housing, providing adequate facilities for development in an efficient manner, and complying with stormwater management and critical area policies, and to balance these goals with the general safety and mobility needs of the traveling public;

(d) Encourage the standardization of street design elements where necessary for consistency and to assure so far as practical that motoring, bicycling, and pedestrian public safety needs are met. Considerations include safety, convenience, pleasant appearance, proper drainage, and economical maintenance.

(2) The Design and Construction Standards cannot provide for all situations. They are intended to assist but not to substitute for competent work by design professionals. It is expected that land surveyors, engineers, and architects will bring to each project the best of skills from their respective disciplines. These standards are also not intended to limit unreasonably any innovative or creative effort which could result in better quality, better cost savings, or both. Any proposed departure from the standards will be judged, however, on the likelihood that such variance will produce a compensating or comparable result. (Ord. 27-16 § 3)


12.60.010 Adoption of standards.

(1) All development within the City of Covington must comply with the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards, as adopted and amended, as it pertains to street design, stormwater design and general construction requirements. The “City of Covington Design and Construction Standards” shall also be known and referred to as the “standards.”

(2) Consistent with Council’s direction and intent in adopting these standards, the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to develop public rules and make minor changes to the drawings and add drawings in order to better implement the standards and as needed to stay current with changing design and construction technology and methods.

(3) As required by RCW 35A.12.140, one copy of the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards has been filed with the ordinance codified in this chapter in the office of the City Clerk.

(4) If any part of the Design and Construction Standards is found invalid, all other parts shall remain in effect. (Ord. 27-16 § 4; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.42.010))


12.60.020 Hierarchy of terms. 

Unless otherwise defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC, the terms defined in the Design and Construction Standards are applicable. If there is conflict, the definitions in the Design and Construction Standards shall govern. (Ord. 27-16 § 5)


12.60.030 Applicability. 

(1) The standards apply to all newly constructed public and private street and stormwater features or modifications of existing facilities which are within the scope of reconstructions or capital improvement projects when so required by City of Covington or to the extent they are expressly referred to in project plans and specifications.

(2) These standards are not intended to apply to “resurfacing, restoration, and rehabilitation” projects as those terms are defined in the Local Agency Guidelines, Washington State Department of Transportation, as amended. However, the Engineer may consider the standards as optional goals for resurfacing, restoration, and rehabilitation projects.

(3) The Design and Construction Standards are intended to be consistent with the Covington Municipal Code, adopted comprehensive plan, and other planning, public works and parks related studies on file with the City.

(4) In case of inconsistency or conflict between the Covington Municipal Code and the Design and Construction Standards, the most restrictive provision shall apply, unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director.

(5) Failure to comply with these standards may result in denial of plan or development permit approval, revocation of prior approvals, and/or other penalties as provided in Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 27-16 § 6; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.42.030))


12.60.040 Associated references.

The Design and Construction Standards as approved, supplemented and amended by the City Engineer for specific design applications and in consultation with the City Council on policy issues or broad citywide implications and are consistent with and support the provisions of CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. A complete list of associated references to adopted standards and manuals is provided in Chapter 1 of the Design and Construction Standards. (Ord. 27-16 § 7)


12.60.050 Design deviations and design variances.

(1) Design deviation and variances from the requirements in the Design and Construction Standards may be granted by the Public Works Director, or his assignee, pursuant to the process outlined in Chapter 1 of the Design and Construction Standards. All requests for design deviation and variances are subject to the fees as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) Design deviation and variances shall be approved prior to issuance of any construction permits for the project and reviewed as follows:

(a) A design deviation shall be processed as a Type 2 decision in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(b) A design variance shall be processed as a Type 2 decision in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(3) Appeals of a design deviation or variance shall be in accordance with Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 27-16 § 8; Ord. 20-07 § 27; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 1; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.42.060))


12.60.060 Penalties. 

Repealed by Ord. 27-16. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.42.070))




Chapter 12.65 FRANCHISED UTILITY WORK WITHIN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.65.010    Purpose.

12.65.020    Construction permit – Required.

12.65.030    Construction permit – Application –General.

12.65.040    Construction permit – Application – Fees.

12.65.050    Construction permit – Application – Review.

12.65.055    Emergency construction permits – Unfranchised utilities.

12.65.060    Policy on accommodation of utilities – Adoption.

12.65.070    Coordination of right-of-way construction.

12.65.080    Performance guarantee required.

12.65.090    Construction permit – Form.

12.65.100    Notification by permittee of construction commenced.


12.65.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the granting of right-of-way construction permits and to ensure that utility construction work undertaken pursuant to such permits is consistent with the applicant’s right-of-way franchise from the City, the applicable district comprehensive plan, the sensitive areas code, the City comprehensive plan, sound engineering and design standards, health and sanitation regulations, and applicable standards for water mains and fire hydrants. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.010))


12.65.020 Construction permit – Required. 

(1) All construction work performed by franchised utilities, telephone and telegraph companies and within City of Covington right-of-way shall require a right-of-way construction permit to be issued by the Community Development Department, City of Covington; provided, that construction work undertaken by the City of Covington or under contract to the City of Covington or requested by the City of Covington due to new construction shall be exempted from this requirement.

(2) Construction work shall include the construction and maintenance of waterlines, gas pipes, sewer lines, petroleum pipelines, telephone, telegraph and electric lines, cable TV and petroleum products and any other such public and private utilities. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.020))


12.65.030 Construction permit – Application –General.

Applications for all right-of-way construction permits shall be submitted, in writing, to the Community Development Department. The application shall contain whatever information, including plans and specifications, which the Community Development Department shall require. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.030))


12.65.040 Construction permit – Application – Fees. 

(1) Each application requires a fee payable to the City of Covington for the administrative costs, expenses of reviewing the application, and inspection time as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) City of Covington fees are nonrefundable.

(3) The fees shall be collected in accordance with administrative procedures developed by the Community Development Department, City of Covington. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 29; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.040))


12.65.050 Construction permit – Application – Review. 

(1) The Community Development Department shall coordinate the review by all Departments of right-of-way construction permit applications and shall determine whether the proposed construction is consistent with the applicant’s right-of-way franchise from the City.

(2) The Community Development Department shall review and evaluate applications in respect to the hazard and risk of the proposed construction, location of the proposed construction in relation to other utilities in the right-of-way and the adequacy of the engineering and design of the proposed construction. 

(3) The Community Development Department shall review and evaluate all applications for right-of-way construction permits for sewer and water main extensions to determine whether the proposed construction is consistent with the applicable sewer or water comprehensive plan. If the facility is not consistent with an approved comprehensive plan, then the construction permit shall not be issued. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.050))


12.65.055 Emergency construction permits – Unfranchised utilities. 

(1) The Community Development Department may issue right-of-way construction permits to unfranchised utilities under the following circumstances:

(a) When the Seattle-King County Department of Public Health has determined that the proposed work is necessary to address a public health hazard; or

(b) When the Community Development Department has determined that the proposed work is necessary to address actual or imminent damage to City right-of-way or to address hazards to users of City right-of-way.

(2) The permit applicant shall be required to meet all conditions of this chapter. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.055))


12.65.060 Policy on accommodation of utilities – Adoption. 

“King County Regulations for Accommodation of Utilities on Road Rights-of-Way 1997” is hereby approved and adopted as the City of Covington policy for utility installation and maintenance operations within City of Covington street rights-of-way. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.060))


12.65.070 Coordination of right-of-way construction. 

(1) The applicant, at the time of submitting an application for a right-of-way construction permit, shall notify all other public and private utility entities known to be using or proposing to use the same right-of-way of the applicant’s proposed construction and the proposed timing of such construction. Any such entity notified may, within seven days of such notification, request a delay in the commencement of such proposed construction for the purpose of coordinating other right-of-way construction with that proposed by the applicant.

(2) The Community Development Department shall also coordinate the approval of right-of-way construction permits with City street improvements and maintenance and may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s right-of-way construction for 90 days or less, except in the case of emergencies, if it finds that such delay will reduce the inconvenience to road users from construction activities, if it finds that such delay will not create undue economic hardship on the applicant, or if it finds that such delay will allow the City to install conduit for future installation of fiber optic cable. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.070))


12.65.080 Performance guarantee required. 

Prior to final approval of all right-of-way construction permits, the Department of Community Development shall determine the amount of the performance guarantee necessary to assure compliance with the approved construction plans, applicable State and local health and sanitation regulations, applicable standards for water mains and fire hydrants and to assure proper restoration of the road and the health and safety of the users of the road. The applicant shall submit the financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of this title and CMC Title 14. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 30; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.080))


12.65.090 Construction permit – Form. 

The right-of-way construction permit granted shall be in a form approved by and be made subject to all reasonable and necessary terms and conditions imposed by the Department of Community Development. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.090))


12.65.100 Notification by permittee of construction commenced. 

The permittee is required to give oral or written notice of the date construction will begin to the following agencies: Community Development Department for all right-of-way construction; Seattle-King County Department of Public Health for construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections); City of Covington Fire Marshal for waterworks. Failure to give such notice is grounds for the revocation or suspension of the construction permit. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.44.100))


Chapter 12.67 NON-FRANCHISED UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY PLACEMENT

Sections:

12.67.010    Purpose.

12.67.020    Definitions.

12.67.030    Permit required.

12.67.040    Terms of use and occupancy.

12.67.050    Application.

12.67.060    Payment of fees and charges.

12.67.070    Review.

12.67.080    Deferment of construction.

12.67.090    Issuance of permit.

12.67.110    Specifications.

12.67.111    Permit exception.

12.67.112    Revocation of permits.

12.67.114    Performance deposits/insurance.

12.67.115    Hold harmless/indemnity.

12.67.117    Inspections.

12.67.118    Correction and discontinuance of unsafe nonconforming or unauthorized conditions.

12.67.119    Displacement for public use.

12.67.120    Additional ducts or conduits.

12.67.130    Joint use poles.

12.67.140    City use for government communication.

12.67.150    Painting poles.

12.67.160    Accommodating moving of building(s) and/or equipment.

12.67.170    Removal.

12.67.180    Billing and collections.

12.67.190    Appeals.

12.67.200    Liability.

12.67.210    Tree trimming.

12.67.212    Underground electric power facilities.

12.67.214    Notice of tariff changes affecting permitted facilities.

12.67.216    Violation – Penalties.


12.67.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of the use of the public right-of-way by any business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, sanitary sewer, or transportation service that does not have a current franchise or other agreement with the City of Covington addressing the subject matters covered in this chapter. To the extent the provision of any current franchise or other written agreement with a public utility conflicts with any provision of this chapter, the applicable provision of the franchise or other written agreement shall prevail. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.020 Definitions.

(1) “City,” as used herein, means the City of Covington, King County, Washington.

(2) “City Manager,” as used herein, means the City Manager of the City or his/her designee.

(3) “Facilities,” as used herein means all conduit, wires, lines, poles, pipes, cables, communication and signal lines, braces, guys, anchors, vaults, and all other structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto owned, operated or maintained by a public utility.

(4) “Public improvement,” as used herein, means all work, construction, alterations, repair or improvements, executed at the cost of or under contract with the City, or caused to be performed by any person or entity as a condition or requirement of an approval or permit for zoning, land use, construction, or development if dedicated or required to be dedicated to the public use, benefit or enjoyment.

(5) “Public utility,” as used herein, means a company or entity engaged in any business or service regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is a public need and consequence, such as gas, electricity, water, sanitary sewer, or transportation, including any business subject to regulation as to rates and service by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission (hereinafter “WUTC”) under the provisions of RCW Title 81; provided, that it shall not include any such company the issuance of stocks and securities of which is subject to regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission; provided further, that it shall not include any “motor carrier” as that term is defined in RCW 81.80.010 or any “solid waste collection company” subject to the provisions of Chapter 81.77 RCW; provided, further, that it shall not include any company or entity otherwise meeting this definition of a public utility that is specifically regulated for use of the public right-of-way by any other chapter of this code exempting the company or entity from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.030 Permit required.

It is unlawful for anyone to construct, maintain or operate on, under or over the streets, alleys, or rights-of-way of the City (collectively referred to herein as “right-of-way”), any railroad tracks, pipes, ducts, utility tunnels, vaults, maintenance holes, poles, fixtures, wires, or any other appurtenances necessary for the purpose of conducting any public utility business, either public or private, or to go upon such public place to perform any work therein which will disturb the surface of the street, alley, planting strip or sidewalk, or to occupy area upon the surface or beneath the surface of the street, planting strip or sidewalk, without complying with all the provisions of any ordinance in relation thereto and obtaining and having the permit required by this chapter for such purpose. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.040 Terms of use and occupancy.

(1) The terms and conditions of the use and occupancy of public streets and alleys in the City by anyone constructing, maintaining or operating a public utility or the facilities thereof shall be as provided in this chapter.

(2) Existing facilities installed or maintained by a public utility over, under or across public rights-of-way within the City in accordance with an expired franchise agreement or other issued permit may be maintained, repaired and operated by the public utility at the locations at which such facilities exist only by means of a permit issued by the City Manager under the terms of this chapter within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, except as allowed by the provision of any existing franchise agreement between the City and a public utility, no such facilities may be enlarged, improved or expanded without further compliance with the standards and procedures set forth in this chapter.

(3) All work by a public utility in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the Covington Design and Construction Standards and Specifications (hereinafter “Covington Standards”) as adopted by City Council ordinance and incorporated herein by reference, and as may be later amended. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.050 Application.

(1) To obtain a right-of-way placement permit the applicant shall file an application with the City Manager. The applicant may request a blanket permit for the current calendar year to cover repetitive work or the repetitive installation of like facilities at different locations throughout the City. A blanket permit may be issued at the discretion of the City Manager.

(2) Every application shall include the location of the proposed right-of-way use, a description of the use, the planned duration of the use, applicant contact information, and all other information which may be required as specified in procedures adopted under this chapter and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fees.

(3) The City Manager shall examine each application submitted for review and approval to determine if it complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and procedures adopted under this chapter. Other departments that have authority over the proposed use or activity may be required to review and approve or disapprove the application. The City Manager may inspect the right-of-way proposed for use to determine any facts which may aid in determining whether a permit should be granted. If the City Manager finds that the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and procedures adopted under this chapter, that the proposed use of such right-of-way will not unduly interfere with the rights and safety of the public, and if the application has not been disapproved by a department with authority, the City Manager may approve the permit, and may impose such conditions thereon as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare, and safety and to mitigate any impacts resulting from the use.

(4) All applications for permits will be submitted 15 days or more before the planned need for the permit. If unforeseen conditions require expedited processing time the City will attempt to cooperate, but additional fees to cover additional costs to the City shall be charged.

(5) Upon submittal of a completed application, the City Manager shall collect from the applicant an application fee and the estimated Permit Plan and Development Review Fee in such amount as authorized by the current fee resolution. (Ord. 20-07 § 32; Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.060 Payment of fees and charges.

(1) The fees for each facility location covered by a permit shall be set forth in a fee resolution adopted, and from time to time amended, by the City Council.

(2) Repair and Replacement Charges. If the City should incur any costs in repairing or replacing any property as the result of the permittee’s actions, the costs of repair and replacement will be charged to the permittee. These charges will be for the actual costs to the City. Such charges may be collected or taken by the City from any bond or other security required by the City Manager as a requirement of the permit. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.070 Review.

Prior to the granting of any permit, the City Manager may require such modifications or changes to the proposed work as the City Manager deems necessary to properly protect the public in the use of the public place, and shall in the permit, if the same be granted, fix the time or times within and during which such work shall be done. The City Manager shall have the power to regulate the construction and enforce permit and ordinance requirements. The City Manager shall keep a record of the permit and the work done thereunder. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.080 Deferment of construction.

The City Manager may, in such official’s reasonable discretion, defer construction or other activity under any permit provided for in this chapter, until such time as such official deems it proper in all cases where the public place on which the work is desired to be done is occupied or is about to be occupied for any work by the City, or by some other person having a right to use the same in such manner as to render it seriously inconvenient to the public to permit any further obstruction thereof at such time, and in granting such permit, the City Manager may so regulate the manner of doing such work in order to cause the least inconvenience to the public in the use of such public place. In all cases, any work of the City or its contractors or employees for municipal purposes shall have precedence over all work of every other kind. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.090 Issuance of permit.

All permits shall be issued by the City Manager. The City Manager may issue the permit to the applicant if all requirements deemed relevant by the City Manager are met. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) Compliance with all applicable Covington Standards.

(2) The duration of the permit shall be perpetual unless revoked, modified or expired under the provisions of this chapter and utilities otherwise permitted by a current franchise agreement with the City; provided, however, all work authorized by the permit shall be completed within 90 days of its issuance or such other time as authorized by the City Manager in the permit.

(3) The applicant shall agree to sign an indemnification agreement as provided for in CMC 12.67.115.

(4) Such other conditions as are imposed by the City Manager to reasonably ensure that the requested use does not in any way create a likelihood of endangering those who are lawfully using the public place or right-of-way; and

(5) All conditions not specifically set forth in the Covington Standards or in the provisions of this chapter shall be subscribed on, referenced, or attached to the permit. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.110 Specifications.

(1) All work to be performed under any permit issued under this chapter shall conform to all other applicable City codes and ordinances, the current development standards, and all other standards used by the City in the administration of this title. In case of any conflict, the most restrictive provision shall apply. 

(2) No facilities or work related thereto shall protrude into or over any portion of a public place open to vehicle or pedestrian travel in such a manner as to create a likelihood of endangering the use of such place by vehicles or pedestrian travel. In addition, in the event the requested permit involves encroachment or partial obstruction of a sidewalk or other walkway open to the public, a minimum of five feet of unobstructed sidewalk or other walkway shall be maintained at all times.

(3) During any period of any relocation, construction or maintenance of its facilities within the right-of-way, a public utility shall conduct its activities so as not to unreasonably interfere with the free passage of traffic or the use of adjoining property. The applicant shall, at all times, post and maintain proper barricades and comply with all applicable safety regulations during such period of construction as required by the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State of Washington, including RCW 39.04.180, for the construction of trench safety systems.

(4) Upon request by the City, the permittee shall, within 10 business days submit to the City, at no cost to the City, the permittee’s most current and accurate as-built drawings in use by the permittee showing the location, specified by the City in its request. As-builts shall show all facilities including but not limited to power poles, guy poles and anchors, overhead transformers, pad-mounted transformers, submersible transformers, conduit, substation (with its name) pedestals, pad-mounted J boxes, vaults, switch cabinets, and meter boxes. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.111 Permit exception.

(1) A right-of-way placement permit shall not be required of franchised utilities or City contractors when responding to emergencies that require work in the right-of-way, such as water or sewer main breaks, gas leaks, downed power lines, or similar emergencies; provided, that the City Manager shall be notified by the responding utility or City contractor verbally or in writing, as soon as practicable following onset of an emergency. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a responding utility or City contractor from the requirement of obtaining a right-of-way use permit after beginning emergency work in the right-of-way.

(2) Permits shall not be required for routine maintenance and construction work performed by City utilities and City maintenance crews. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.112 Revocation of permits.

(1) The City Manager may revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter whenever:

(a) The work does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved, or conditions of approval, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or procedures, or any other City ordinances, resolutions, or State law; or

(b) The City has been denied access to investigate and inspect how the right-of-way is being used; or

(c) The permittee has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for a permit; or

(d) The progress of the approved activity indicates that it is or will be inadequate to protect the public and adjoining property or the street or utilities in the street, or any excavation or fill endangers or will endanger the public, the adjoining property or street, or utilities in the street; or

(e) The City Manager has determined there are adequate grounds to revoke the permit as provided in CMC 12.67.118 and 12.67.216.

(2) Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, all use of the right-of-way shall cease, except as authorized or directed by the City Manager. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.114 Performance deposits/insurance.

(1) The guarantees, bonds and insurance required by the Covington Standards shall be required for permits issued under this chapter.

(2) If the City Manager determines that there is a potential for injury, damage, or expense to the City as a result of damage to persons or property arising from an applicant’s proposed use of any right-of-way, the applicant shall be required to make a cash deposit with the City Manager or to provide a security device or insurance in a form acceptable to the City Manager for the activities described in the subject permit. The amount of the cash deposit, security device, or insurance shall be determined by the City Manager and shall be in addition to the requirements of any other applicable provision of the Covington Standards or applicable provision of the Covington Municipal Code.

(3) The requirements for any such special performance deposits and insurance are based on considerations of applicant’s prior performance, nature of the proposed use, cost of the activity, length of use, public safety, potential damage to right-of-way, and potential liability or expense to the City.

(4) When there is a need to ensure conformance with the City’s development standards, City or State construction standards, or other requirements, the applicant shall be required to provide a guarantee of workmanship and materials for the life of the permit or the underlying improvement or activity for which the permit was required, whichever is longer. Such guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit or a security device in a form and amount approved by the City Manager, consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14. (Ord. 20-07 § 33; Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.115 Hold harmless/indemnity.

(1) Anyone accepting permits under the terms of this chapter shall agree to release, covenant not to bring suit, and agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives from any and all claims, costs, judgments, awards or liability to any person, including claims by the public utility’s own employees for which the public utility might otherwise be immune under RCW Title 51, for injury or death of any person or damage to property caused by or arising out of the acts or omissions of the public utility, its agents, servants, officers, or employees in the performance of any permit granted under this chapter, and any rights granted hereunder. Inspection or acceptance by the City of any work performed by a public utility during or at the time of completion of construction shall not be grounds for avoidance by the public utility of any of its obligations under said indemnity agreement. Such indemnification obligation shall extend to claims which are not reduced to a suit and any claims which may be compromised prior to the culmination of any litigation or the institution of any litigation. It shall be further specifically and expressly understood that the indemnification provision provided herein constitutes the public utility’s waiver of immunity under RCW Title 51, solely for the purposes of this indemnification, and it shall further provide that this waiver has been mutually negotiated by the parties. Such indemnity agreement is required until the facilities or any other appurtenances are removed from the public right-of-way, or, until the City furnishes a written release of the indemnity requirement to the public utility.

(2) In addition, the City may require that anyone accepting such a permit provide the City with additional indemnification, such as an indemnification from a parent company, and/or the City may require that the permittee provide proof of insurance acceptable to the City which covers potential exposure of the City. 

(3) The indemnification provided for herein does not apply to injuries to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting solely from the negligence of the City, its agents or employees. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.117 Inspections.

As a condition of issuance of any permit or authorization which requires approval of the City Manager, each applicant shall be required to consent to inspections by the City Manager or any other appropriate City department. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.118 Correction and discontinuance of unsafe nonconforming or unauthorized conditions.

(1) Whenever the City Manager determines that any condition on any right-of-way is in violation of, or any right-of-way is being used contrary to, any provision of this chapter or procedures adopted under this chapter or other applicable codes or standards, or without a right-of-way use permit, the City Manager may order the correction or discontinuance of such condition or any activity causing such condition.

(2) The City Manager is authorized to order correction or discontinuance of any such condition or activities following the methods specified in procedures adopted pursuant to this chapter.

(3) The City Manager shall also have all powers and remedies which may be available under State law, this chapter, and procedures adopted under this chapter for securing the correction or discontinuance of any condition specified in this section.

(4) The City Manager is authorized to use any or all of the following methods in correction or discontinuance of any such conditions, or activities as the City Manager determines appropriate:

(a) Serving of oral or written directives to the permittee or other responsible person requesting immediate correction or discontinuance of the specified condition;

(b) Service of a written notice of violation, ordering correction or discontinuance of a specific condition or activity within five days of notice, or such other reasonable period as the City Manager may determine;

(c) Revocation of previously granted permits where the permittee or other responsible person has failed or refused to comply with requirements imposed by the City related to such permits;

(d) Issuance of an order to immediately stop work until authorization is received from the City to proceed with such work;

(e) Service of a summons and complaint certified by the City attorney or a citation and notice to appear by an arresting peace officer upon the permittee or other responsible person who is in violation of this chapter or other City ordinances.

(5) Any object or thing which shall occupy any right-of-way without a permit is a nuisance. The City Manager may attach a notice to any such object or thing stating that if it is not removed from the right-of-way within 24 hours of the date and time stated on the notice, the object or thing may be taken into custody and stored at the owner’s expense. The notice shall provide an address and phone number where additional information may be obtained. If the object or thing is a hazard to public safety, it may be removed summarily by the City. Notice of such removal shall be thereafter given to the owner, if known. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles.

(6) All expenses incurred by the City in abating the condition or any portion thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the City jointly and severally by such persons who have been given notice or who own the object or thing or placed it in the right-of-way, which debt shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt.

(7) The City shall also have all powers and remedies which may be available under law, this chapter, and procedures adopted under this chapter for securing the correction or discontinuance of any conditions specified by the City. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.119 Displacement for public use.

A public utility or permittee under order of the City Manager shall, upon a minimum of 45-day notice at its own cost and expense, move any underground, service or overhead facilities which interfere with any local improvement district work or with any construction for street or transportation purposes or other public improvement authorized or ordered by the City. The actual number of days shall be specified by the City Manager in the City Manager’s order. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.120 Additional ducts or conduits.

For electric, communication and similar infrastructure, anyone constructing, under authority of this chapter and ordinances amendatory thereof, any underground ducts or conduits shall:

(1) When the number of mainline ducts or conduits exceeds two, reserve free of cost to the City for the exclusive use of governmental communication, traffic signal, and other governmental signal purposes, additional ducts in the proportion of one duct for every five or less constructed; provided, the City Manager may, in the City Manager’s reasonable discretion, limit the number of ducts to be reserved; and

(2) Upon request, provide the City with additional duct or conduit space over and above the conduit or conduits planned to be constructed for the entity holding the permit or provided free to the City pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. Such additional ducts or conduits shall be of a size and configuration specified by the City and shall be dedicated to the City. The City shall have the right to use the ducts and conduits for any purpose, including but not limited to leasing them to other entities. The incremental costs of adding the specified ducts and conduits for the City shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.130 Joint use poles.

(1) Subject to applicable State and Federal law, any public utility erecting or maintaining any privately owned poles installed under the authority of this chapter shall permit joint use of such pole to another who is authorized to construct and maintain such a pole or attachments thereto if directed to do so by the City Manager and shall obey any order issued by the City Manager relative to the joint use of such pole.

(2) Other than the City, anyone who, pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, makes a joint use of a privately owned pole or set of poles of another, shall pay to the owner a reasonable proportion of the cost of installing and maintaining the pole or set of poles, respectively, provided, by mutual agreement, the effective parties may adopt an alternative arrangement for compensation. CMC 12.67.140 below denies compensation for use of a privately owned pole by the City for government communication. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.140 City use for government communication.

Anyone erecting or maintaining poles under authority of this section shall allow the City the right, free of charge, to attach, maintain and operate as governmental communication and signals wires and/or fixtures on cross-arms, or on the poles erected and so maintained. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.150 Painting poles.

Anyone erecting or maintaining poles under authority of this chapter shall, under order of the City Manager, paint or repaint its poles to such height and in such colors and at such times as said official may direct. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.160 Accommodating moving of building(s) and/or equipment.

Anyone maintaining wires, cables or appurtenances in a public place under this chapter, upon seven days notice from the City Manager, shall disconnect or move his/her/its wires, cables or appurtenances to allow for the moving of building(s) and/or equipment across or along any such street, alley or other public place; provided, that said advance notice may be reduced to 24 hours if the wires, cables or appurtenances are below the minimum clearance set by law or regulation and in the case of an emergency. The cost to the public utility of moving the wire, cable or appurtenance shall be borne as follows: (a) by the public utility if the wires, cables or appurtenances are below the minimum vertical clearance required by State statutes, City ordinance, or rules of the City Manager, are above the surface of the public place, and no adjustment would be necessary if the minimum clearance had been maintained; and (b) under all other circumstances, by the person desiring to move the building(s) and/or equipment. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.170 Removal.

Anyone accepting permits under the terms of this chapter for the installation of any facilities shall remove such installation when it is no longer required or used, and the City Manager orders its removal. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.180 Billing and collections.

The City Manager, jointly with the Finance Manager, may establish procedures pertaining to the billing and collection of fees and charges adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.190 Appeals.

A decision of the City Manager made in accordance with this chapter shall be considered a final decision appealable to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City within 15 days of the date of decision being appealed from. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.200 Liability.

The City Manager and other employees charged with the enforcement and administration of this chapter, acting on behalf of the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act required or by reason of an act required by this chapter or omission in the discharge of such duties. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.210 Tree trimming.

Any public utility required by State statute or regulation to trim or remove trees which may interfere with their facilities shall ensure that their tree trimming activities protect the appearance, integrity and health of the trees to the extent reasonably possible. The public utility shall prepare and maintain a tree trimming schedule to ensure compliance with this provision and to avoid exigent circumstances where tree cutting, trimming or removal is necessary to protect the public safety or continuity of service without regard for the appearance, integrity or health of the trees that planned maintenance would otherwise allow. The public utility shall submit the schedule to the City Manager. Except where exigent circumstances do not permit, the public utility shall give the owner of the property on which the trees are located at least five days advance written notice of the tree trimming. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.212 Underground electric power facilities.

(1) Subject to and in accordance with any applicable rates and tariffs on file with the WUTC, the public utility shall cooperate with the City in promoting a policy of undergrounding facilities within the public right-of-way. If the City shall direct the public utility to underground their facilities, such undergrounding shall be arranged and accomplished subject to and in accordance with applicable rates and tariffs on file with the WUTC (or such other regulatory agency having jurisdiction).

(2) In the event that the City undertakes any public improvement which would otherwise require, in the discretion of the City Manager, the relocation of the public utility’s above-ground facilities, the City Manager may, by written notice to the public utility, direct that any such facilities be converted to underground facilities. Any such conversion shall be done subject to and in accordance with applicable schedules and tariffs on file with the WUTC (or such other regulatory agency having jurisdiction). (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.214 Notice of tariff changes affecting permitted facilities.

A permittee shall, when making application for any change in tariffs affecting the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder, notify the City in writing of the application and provide the City Manager with a copy of the submitted application. The permittee shall further provide the City Manager with a copy of any actual, approved tariff change affecting any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


12.67.216 Violation – Penalties.

(1) No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(2) A violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute a gross misdemeanor subject to the enforcement provisions of this code.

(3) A violation or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, including any order of the City Manager authorized by this chapter shall, in addition to any other remedies, constitute grounds for the City Manager to revoke the underlying permit issued to the permittee, if any, and shall constitute grounds for the denial of any additional permits under this chapter until the permittee is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 22-99 § 1)


Chapter 12.70 UTILITIES ON CITY OF COVINGTON REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

12.70.010    Purpose.

12.70.020    Permit – Required – Exceptions.

12.70.030    Permit – Issuance authority – Use.

12.70.040    Permit – Privilege limitations.

12.70.050    Permit – Compliance with applicable provisions.

12.70.060    Permit – Terms and conditions.

12.70.070    Permit – Application – Required information.

12.70.080    Permit – Application and inspection fee.

12.70.090    Review and certification by agencies.

12.70.100    Financial guarantee requirements.

12.70.110    Notice of proposed use and commencement – Departmental coordination of permit approval.

12.70.120    Notice to agencies of construction date.

12.70.130    Permit revocation.

12.70.140    Termination of privileges – Assessment.

12.70.150    Enforcement.

12.70.160    Rights reserved to City – Conformance and payment of cost required.

12.70.170    Rule and regulation promulgation.


12.70.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter shall be to authorize and regulate the issuance of permits for the accommodation of public and private utility facilities, and other uses upon City of Covington owned real property which is not dedicated as right-of-way and to insure that privileges authorized by the permits are consistent with public ownership of the property, the City comprehensive plan, the sensitive areas code, sound engineering and design standards, and health and sanitation regulations. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.010))


12.70.020 Permit – Required – Exceptions. 

All utility construction work and other uses performed upon, along, over, under or across any public place in City of Covington shall require a permit to be issued by the Director of the Department of Community Development; provided, that construction work undertaken by City of Covington or under contract to City of Covington or requested by City of Covington due to new construction shall be exempted from this requirement. Utility construction work includes, but is not limited to, construction and maintenance of waterworks, gas pipes, telephone, telegraph and electric lines, sewers, cable television and petroleum products and any other such public and private utilities. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.020))


12.70.030 Permit – Issuance authority – Use. 

The Community Development Department is authorized to issue revocable permits for all utility construction work and installation, and other uses upon, along, over, under or across any public place in City of Covington. The permits shall be used to authorize an act or series of acts on City of Covington owned real property which is not dedicated as right-of-way. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.030))


12.70.040 Permit – Privilege limitations. 

The permits shall not be construed to convey any vested right in the property. The permits grant only a personal and revocable privilege and license to do one or more acts on the property without possessing any interest in the property. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.040))


12.70.050 Permit – Compliance with applicable provisions. 

The issuance of permits authorized in this chapter does not relieve or release the permittee from complying with other applicable statutes, ordinances, restrictions, regulations, rules or obligations in connection with the permittee’s proposed use of the property. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.050))


12.70.060 Permit – Terms and conditions. 

The permits shall be subject to all terms, conditions and restrictions, imposed by the Department responsible for the management of the property to be affected, deemed necessary to preserve all characteristics consistent with public ownership; consequently, the general and specific terms, conditions and restrictions of the permits will vary according to, but not limited to, the following:

(1) The property interest owned by City of Covington;

(2) All Federal, State or local restrictions placed on the use of the property;

(3) The purpose for acquiring the property;

(4) Plans for the future development of the property;

(5) The applicant’s proposed use of the property; and

(6) The individual characteristics of the property. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.060))


12.70.070 Permit – Application – Required information. 

Applications for all permits shall be submitted, in writing, to the Community Development Department. The application shall contain whatever information, including plans and specifications, the Department shall require. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.070))


12.70.080 Permit – Application and inspection fee. 

Each application requires a fee in an amount as outlined in the current fee resolution, payable to the City of Covington for the administrative costs and expenses of processing the application. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.080))


12.70.090 Review and certification by agencies. 

(1) The Community Development Department shall coordinate the review by all Departments of permit applications.

(2) The Department responsible for the management of the property to be affected shall review and evaluate applications with respect to the hazard and risk of the proposed construction or use, location of the proposed construction or use in relation to other facilities using the property, the adequacy of the engineering and design of the proposed construction or use, and applicable Federal, State, County and local laws and regulations.

(3) The Department of Public Health shall review and evaluate applications for the construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections) to determine consistency with State and local health and sanitation regulations.

(4) The City of Covington Fire Marshal shall review and evaluate applications for the construction of waterworks to determine consistency with applicable standards for water mains and fire hydrants.

(5) All applications for the construction of sewer or water facilities must be certified by the Community Development Department as consistent with a sewer or water comprehensive plan approved by the City Council. 

(6) In any case, the Community Development Department shall make recommendations on critical area issues and shall be responsible for assuring that any application meets the requirements of the critical areas code. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.090))


12.70.100 Financial guarantee requirements. 

Prior to final approval of all permits, the Department responsible for the management of the property to be affected shall determine the amount of the performance guarantee necessary to assure compliance with approved construction plans, applicable State and local health and sanitation regulations, applicable standards for water mains and fire hydrants, and to assure proper restoration of the property and the health and safety of the users of the property. The applicant shall submit the financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14. The financial guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the City property to original condition or complying with conditions of any permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 20-07 §§ 35, 83; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.100))


12.70.110 Notice of proposed use and commencement – Departmental coordination of permit approval. 

(1) The applicant, at the time of submitting an application for a permit, shall notify all public and private utility entities known to be using or proposing to use the same public place of the applicant’s proposed use and the proposed timing of any construction. Any such entity notified may, within seven days of such notification, request a delay in the commencement of any proposed construction for the purpose of coordinating other construction work on the property with that proposed by the applicant. The Community Development Department may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s construction work on the property for 90 days or less if it finds that such delay will reduce the inconvenience to the public from construction activities, and it finds that such delay will not create undue economic hardship on the applicant.

(2) The Community Development Department shall also coordinate the approval of permits with the Department responsible for the management of the property to be affected and may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s construction work for 90 days or less upon making the findings described in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The Community Development Department shall inform the Department of Public Health of permits for construction of waterworks (except domestic service connections), and the City of Covington Fire Marshal of permits for waterworks. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.110))


12.70.120 Notice to agencies of construction date. 

The permittee is required to give written notice of the date construction will begin to the following agencies: the Department responsible for the management of the property to be affected; Department of Public Health for construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections); City of Covington Fire Marshal for construction of waterworks. Failure to give such notice is grounds for the revocation or suspension of the permit. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.120))


12.70.130 Permit revocation. 

Any permit issued by the authority of this chapter shall be revocable at any time that the Department responsible for the management of the property affected shall determine that the public health, safety, general welfare, or public use requires such revocation, and the right to revoke is expressly reserved to City of Covington. At a reasonable time prior to action upon such revocation or proposed revocation, opportunity shall be afforded to the permittee to present for consideration action or actions alternative to the revocation of such permit. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.130))


12.70.140 Termination of privileges – Assessment. 

All privileges granted by the permits shall automatically terminate at such time as the permittee ceases to use the property and any facilities authorized by the permit. The permittee may terminate the agreement by written notice to the Public Works Department. Upon revocation, termination or abandonment of any permit, the permittee shall remove at his expense all facilities placed on such property by the permittee and restore the premises to a condition which is equivalent in all respects to the condition existing prior to installation of the facilities or to a condition which is satisfactory to the City. If the permittee has not accomplished removal and restoration at the end of a 90-day period following the effective date of revocation, termination or abandonment, the City may accomplish all of the necessary work and charge all of the costs to the permittee. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.140))


12.70.150 Enforcement. 

The City is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 1.30.060, 1.30.070 and 1.30.080. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.150))


12.70.160 Rights reserved to City – Conformance and payment of cost required. 

The City reserves the right to use, occupy and enjoy its property for such purposes as it shall desire including, but not limited to, constructing or installing structures and facilities on the property, or developing, improving, repairing or altering the property. The permittee upon written notice will at his own cost and expense, remove, repair, relocate, change or reconstruct such installations to conform with the plans of work contemplated or ordered by the County according to a time schedule contained in the written notice. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.160))


12.70.170 Rule and regulation promulgation. 

The Community Development Director may promulgate any rules and regulations necessary for the operation of this chapter. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.46.170))


Chapter 12.75 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES

Sections:

12.75.010    Designation.

12.75.020    Publication.

12.75.030    Snow emergency – Declaration authority – News bulletin.

12.75.040    Coordination of snow removal activities with other jurisdictions.


12.75.010 Designation. 

Certain arterial highways and school bus routes in the City of Covington, to be identified and so designated by the Director of Public Works, are declared snow emergency routes. Such snow emergency routes shall be the first roads and streets to be sanded and/or cleared of snow. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.48.010))


12.75.020 Publication. 

The Director of Public Works shall issue a news bulletin to all newspapers of general circulation serving City of Covington, a listing of all such snow emergency routes. Such listing of snow emergency routes shall be prepared and a news bulletin issued annually, prior to the second Monday in November. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.48.020))


12.75.030 Snow emergency – Declaration authority – News bulletin. 

The Director of Public Works, or authorized representative, is empowered to declare a snow emergency. The Director shall establish guidelines for conditions which will warrant the declaring of a snow emergency. When a snow emergency is declared, the City public information officer shall issue an emergency news bulletin to all radio and television stations and newspapers serving the City of Covington, and to the police, fire and emergency medical services agencies, so that there may be coordination for the deployment of personnel and equipment. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.48.030))


12.75.040 Coordination of snow removal activities with other jurisdictions. 

The Director of Public Works shall coordinate the City of Covington snow removal activities with Federal, State, County, and other applicable local jurisdictions located within or adjacent to City of Covington for the purpose of continuity in clearing snow emergency routes. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.48.040))


Chapter 12.80 SIDEWALKS, PLANTING STRIPS AND STREET TREES

Sections:

12.80.010    Definitions.

12.80.020    Sidewalk – Repair determination – Responsibility and costs.

12.80.030    Sidewalk – Notice to repair – Cost assessment.

12.80.040    Planting strip maintenance.

12.80.050    Sidewalk – Snow, ice and trash removal required when.

12.80.060    Sidewalk – Violation of CMC 12.80.050 deemed misdemeanor.

12.80.070    Exemption from CMC 12.80.040 and 12.80.050 permitted when.

12.80.080    Street trees and plantings – Trimming limitations – Removal prohibited.


12.80.010 Definitions. 

Terms used in this chapter with relation to sidewalks, planting strips, street trees and curbs shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:

(1) “Curb” means a cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete raised structure designed to delineate the edge of the roadway and to separate the vehicular portion from that provided for pedestrians and to control surface drainage.

(2) “Planting strip” means that portion of the right-of-way behind the curb line and between the curb line and the sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the right-of-way line used for the planting of trees, grass, shrubs or ground cover.

(3) “Sidewalk” means that property between the curb line and the adjacent property, set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians, improved by paving with cement concrete or asphaltic concrete. 

(4) “Street tree” means a tree planted within the public right-of-way or landscape/streetscape easement. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.010))


12.80.020 Sidewalk – Repair determination – Responsibility and costs.

Whenever a portion of any street is improved by a sidewalk thereon, and the sidewalk shall have become unfit or unsafe for public travel, the Department of Public Works may determine that the repair of that portion of sidewalk is necessary for the public safety and convenience. If the Department does so find, the duty, burden and expense of repair shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner; provided, that the abutting property owner shall not be charged with any costs of repair in excess of 25 percent of the valuation of the abutting property, exclusive of improvements. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.020))


12.80.030 Sidewalk – Notice to repair – Cost assessment. 

Whenever the Department of Public Works has determined that a portion of a sidewalk has become unfit or unsafe for public travel, the Department shall serve a written notice on the owner of the abutting property instructing the owner to repair the sidewalk in accordance with standard plans and specifications which shall be attached to the notice. The City shall process all notices and enforcement of this section pursuant to Chapter 35.69 RCW. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.030))


12.80.040 Planting strip maintenance. 

Maintenance of planting strips including trees, shrubbery, grass or other ground cover shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. Should the Director of Public Works find that such property is not being properly maintained, a notice shall be forwarded as provided in CMC 12.80.030, specifying a reasonable time within which such maintenance shall be accomplished. If the owner fails to proceed, the Public Works Department will have the maintenance performed, and the cost will be assessed against the property owner as provided in CMC 12.80.030. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.040))


12.80.050 Sidewalk – Snow, ice and trash removal required when. 

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning real property within the City of Covington to permit the accumulation of snow, ice, trash or any other matter on an existing sidewalk which impedes the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. In the event the property is owned by a person not a resident of the City of Covington, a reasonable period of time shall be provided for the owner or his agent to remove the material. If such removal is not accomplished within a reasonable period of time, the Director of Public Works may have the sidewalk cleaned and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the property. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.050))


12.80.060 Sidewalk – Violation of CMC 12.80.050 deemed misdemeanor.

Each day any sidewalk, or driveway portion thereof, is permitted to remain in a hazardous condition as specified in CMC 12.80.050 shall be considered and shall constitute a separate violation. Violation of CMC 12.80.050 shall constitute a Class II civil infraction which shall be punished according to the provisions of CMC 9.180.005 through 9.180.130. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.060))


12.80.070 Exemption from CMC 12.80.040 and 12.80.050 permitted when.

Residents whose property is substantially higher or lower in elevation than the street who do not have street access from one or more sides of their property may apply for an exemption from the provisions of CMC 12.80.040 and 12.80.050. Exemptions may be granted by the City based upon standards which shall be established by the Department. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.070))


12.80.080 Street trees and plantings – Trimming limitations – Removal prohibited. 

(1) Notwithstanding any provision of franchise agreements, street trees planted within the public right-of-way or easements along roads under the jurisdiction of the City of Covington shall not be removed or cut back so as to generally damage the aesthetic quality of the tree. Such trimming, when required by utility companies to safeguard their wires, shall be done in a manner that preserves the general appearance of the tree. The same provisions shall be applicable to others in that trees, shrubs and other plantings shall not be removed or otherwise trimmed so as to damage the general appearance of the planting areas.

(2) Judicious trimming is permitted in such areas that will provide proper sight distance for intersections and such traffic warning or regulatory signs that are in place. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.52.080))


Chapter 12.85 NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE PROGRAM

Sections:

12.85.010    Findings and declaration of purpose.

12.85.020    Program established.


12.85.010 Findings and declaration of purpose. 

Nonmotorized transportation, in the form of pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian travel in the City of Covington, should be safe. The prevention of accidents is a paramount element in the design and operation of all City transportation facilities as well as in developed and newly developing neighborhoods in the City. This policy is consistent with the the City of Covington comprehensive plan and the plans and programs for City parks and recreation. Therefore, it is the intent of the City of Covington Council to seek a coordinated administration of these nonmotorized transportation goals and policies through the development of a functional plan which defines service levels, facility standards, funding mechanisms, project engineering, and design and operation to be conducted through a public review process. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.56.010))


12.85.020 Program established. 

There is established a nonmotorized vehicle program to meet the following goals and objectives:

(1) TRG 8.0. To develop facilities to provide safe pedestrian and bicycle travel to promote alternative transportation modes and to support recreational activity, access to transit, and access to schools.

(2) TRG 8.1. To provide a safe and convenient transportation system that is supported and enhances walking and bicycling.

(3) TRG 8.2. To recognize the significance of equestrian activities in Covington and seek to contribute towards promoting appropriate facilities for these uses.

(4) TRG 8.3. To provide a local and regionally integrated nonmotorized transportation system of sidewalks, parks, schools and activity centers, trails, and bicycle lanes to link neighborhoods, businesses. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.56.020))


Chapter 12.90 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION

Sections:

12.90.010    Definitions.

12.90.020    Commute trip reduction plan, base year values and zones.

12.90.030    Applicability.

12.90.040    Employer program requirements.

12.90.050    Schedule for submittal, review and implementation.

12.90.060    Criteria for goal attainment.

12.90.070    Credits, goal and program modifications and exemptions.

12.90.080    Appeals.

12.90.090    Enforcement.

12.90.100    Administrative rules and procedures.


12.90.010 Definitions. 

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

(1) “Affected employee” means a full-time employee who begins his or her regular work day at a single work site between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays.

(2) “Affected employer” means a public or private employer that, for 12 consecutive months, employs 100 or more affected employees at a single work site who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays. 

The intent is to include any employer that has 100 or more full-time employees on-site between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), even if the individual employees vary over time. Construction work sites are excluded from this definition when the expected duration of the construction is less than two years.

(3) “Alternative mode” means any means of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including telecommuting and compressed work weeks if they result in reducing commute trips.

(4) “Alternative work schedules” mean programs such as compressed work weeks that eliminate work trips for affected employees.

(5) “Base year” means the period from January 1, 1992, through December 31, 1992, on which goals for vehicle miles traveled per employee and proportion of single-occupant vehicle trips are based.

(6) “Carpool” means a motor vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together for their commute trip that results in the reduction of at least one motor vehicle commute trip.

(7) “Commute trips” mean trips made from a worker’s home to a work site for a regularly scheduled work day beginning between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on weekdays.

(8) “Commute Trip Reduction Task Force Guidelines, July 1992” means the guidelines adopted by the State Commute Trip Reduction Task Force as established by RCW 70.94.537.

(9) “Compliance” means fully implementing all provisions in an approved CTR program within the deadlines established in this chapter and meeting or exceeding VMT and SOV goals of this chapter.

(10) “Compressed work week” means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one work day every two weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and biweekly arrangements, the most typical being four 10-hour working days or 80 hours in nine working days, but may also include other arrangements. Compressed work weeks are understood to be an ongoing arrangement.

(11) “CTR plan” means the King County commute trip reduction plan, as adopted by King County Ordinance 10733 and subsequent amendments, to regulate and administer the CTR programs of affected employers within its jurisdiction.

(12) “CTR program” means an employer’s strategies to reduce affected employees’ SOV use and VMT per employee.

(13) “CTR zone” means an area, such as a census tract or combination of census tracts, within the City of Covington characterized by similar employment density, population density, level of transit service, parking availability, access to high occupancy vehicle facilities and other factors that are determined to affect the level of SOV commuting.

(14) “Director” means the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her authorized designee.

(15) “Employee” means anyone who receives financial or other compensation in exchange for work provided to an employer, including owners and partners of the employer.

(16) “Employer” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit or private, that employs workers.

(17) “Exemption” means a waiver from CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the City based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.

(18) “Flex-time” is an employer policy allowing individual employees some flexibility in choosing the time, but not the number, of their working hours to facilitate the use of alternative modes.

(19) “Full-time employee” means a person, other than an independent contractor, scheduled to be employed on a continuous basis for 52 weeks for an average of at least 35 hours per week.

(20) “Good faith effort” means that an employer has met the minimum requirement identified in RCW 70.94.531 and this chapter, and is working collaboratively with the City to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed upon length of time.

(21) “Implementation” means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of a transportation coordinator, distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to SOV commuting and commencement of other measures according to their CTR program and schedule.

(22) “Mode” means the means of transportation used by employees, such as single-occupant motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool, vanpool), transit, ferry, bicycle and walking.

(23) “Peak period” means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(24) “Peak period trip” means any employee trip that delivers the employee to a work site to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(25) “Proportion of single-occupant vehicle trips” or “SOV rate” means the number of commute trips over a set period made by affected employees in single-occupant vehicles divided by the number of affected employees working during that period.

(26) “Single-occupant vehicle (SOV)” means a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.

(27) “Single-occupant vehicle (SOV) trips” means trips made by affected employees in single-occupant vehicles.

(28) “Single work site” means a building or group of buildings occupied by one or more major employers which are on physically contiguous parcels of land or on parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way.

(29) “Telecommuting” means the use of telephones, computers or other similar technology to permit an employee to work from home, eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a work place closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.

(30) “Transit” means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, ferry, rail, shared-ride taxi, shuttle bus or vanpool.

(31) “Transportation demand management (TDM)” means a program designed to reduce SOV commute travel during the peak commute traffic period between 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday.

(32) “Transportation management organization (TMO)” means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMO may represent employers within specific City limits, or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond City limits.

(33) “Vanpool” means a vehicle occupied by seven to 15 people traveling together for their commute trip that results in the reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle trip. A vanpool trip counts as zero vehicle trips.

(34) “Variable work schedule” means a work schedule that includes rotating shifts in which the employee is assigned different start times during the year, noncontinuous schedules in which an employee reports to the work site only during specified periods of a continuous 12 month period or other work schedule arrangements outside of a regularly scheduled continuous work period.

(35) “Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee” means the sum of the distance in miles of individual vehicle commute trips made by affected employees over a set period divided by the number of affected employees during that period.

(36) “Week” means a seven-day calendar period, starting on Monday and continuing through Sunday.

(37) “Weekday” means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.

(38) “Writing,” “written,” or “in writing” means original signed and dated documents. Facsimile (fax) transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed by the original signed and dated document via mail or delivery. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.010))


12.90.020 Commute trip reduction plan, base year values and zones. 

(1) The 1998 King County Commute Trip Reduction Plan is hereby adopted. 

(2) The goals for reducing vehicle miles traveled per employee and the SOV rate for all major employers shall not be less than a 15 percent reduction from the work site base year value or the base year value for the commute trip reduction zone in which their work site is located by January 1, 1995, 20 percent reduction from the base year values by January 1, 1997, 25 percent reduction from the base year values by January 1, 1999, and 35 percent reduction from the base year values by January 1, 2005. 

Employers which become affected employers after February 16, 1993, shall have two years to meet the first goal of 15 percent, four years to meet the second goal of 25 percent, six years to meet the third goal of 25 percent, and 12 years to meet the final goal of 35 percent reduction from the time they begin their commute trip reduction program.

(3) Commute trip reduction zones shall be the zones in Attachment B to King County Ordinance 10733. The base year values for affected employers shall be the base year values for SOV and VMT in Attachment C to King County Ordinance 10733. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.020))


12.90.030 Applicability. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer at any single work site within the City of Covington. Employees will be counted only at their primary work site. Seasonal agricultural employees, including seasonal employees of processors of agricultural products are excluded from the count of affected employees. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify the City of a change in status as an affected employer.

(1) Employers that meet the definition of an affected employer when the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective and that do not submit a CTR program description within 180 calendar days from approval of this chapter are in violation.

(2) An employer that meets the definition of affected employer after the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective must submit a CTR program description within 180 calendar days of the due date of the first quarterly submittal of Washington Employment Security Employer’s Quarterly Report of Employee’s Wages after having achieved affected employer status. An employer whose number of employees increases to 100 or more affected employees shall be considered an affected employer beginning with the due date of the next quarterly submittal of the Washington Employment Security Employer’s Quarterly Report of Employee’s Wages.

(3) If an affected employer no longer employs 100 or more affected employees and expects not to employ 100 or more affected employees for the next 12 months, that employer is no longer an affected employer beginning with the next quarterly submittal of the Washington Employment Security Employment Security Employers’ Quarterly Report of Employee’s Wages. It is the responsibility of the employer to provide documentation to the City that it is no longer an affected employer. If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees within the same 12-month period, that employer will be considered an affected employer for the entire 12-month period and will be subject to the same program requirements as other affected employers.

If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees more than 12 months after its change in status to an “unaffected” employer, that employer shall be treated as a new affected employer beginning with the due date of the next quarterly submittal of the Washington Employment Security Employer’s Quarterly Report of Employee’s Wages, and will be subject to the same program requirements as other new affected employers.

(4) An affected employer that has a work site located in both the City of Covington and an adjacent City or unincorporated area of King County may jointly, with one of those jurisdictions, petition the City in writing at least 60 calendar days prior to submittal of the employer’s CTR program description or annual report to request that the employer be allowed to report to, and be governed by, the applicable commute trip reduction laws and regulations of that jurisdiction. If such request is granted, it shall be in effect for as long as the City receives copies of the employer’s CTR program, annual reports and any administrative decisions or actions taken by the jurisdiction or its agents in regard to the employer. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.030))


12.90.040 Employer program requirements. 

An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and CMC 12.90.010(20), to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and SOV commute trips. The employer’s CTR program description shall be prepared according to a format provided by the City.

(1) The employer’s CTR program is to contain the following required elements:

(a) At a minimum, the employer’s CTR program description must include:

(i) A general description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, and surrounding services, including unique conditions experienced by the employer or its employees that affect commute mode choice;

(ii) Total number of employees at the work site and the number of employees affected by the CTR program;

(iii) Documentation of compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements, as described in subsection (1)(b) of this section;

(iv) Description of the additional elements included in the CTR program, as described in subsection (1)(c) of this section;

(v) Schedule of implementation, assignment of responsibilities and commitment to provide appropriate resources.

(b) The employer’s CTR program shall include the following mandatory elements:

(i) The employer shall designate a transportation coordinator to administer the CTR program. An affected employer with multiple sites may have one transportation coordinator for all sites. The coordinator’s name, location and telephone number must be displayed prominently at each affected work site. The coordinator shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program.

(ii) The employer shall provide information about alternatives to SOV commuting to employees at least once a year. This information shall consist of, at a minimum, a summary of the employer’s program, including the name and telephone number of the employee transportation coordinator. Employers must also provide a summary of their program to all new employees at the time of hire. Each employer’s program description and annual report must report the information to be distributed and the method of distribution.

(iii) The CTR program must include an annual review of affected employee commuting and of progress and good faith efforts toward meeting the SOV and VMT reduction goals as established in CMC 12.90.020.

(iv) The CTR program shall list all records to be maintained to document the employer’s program and progress toward meeting SOV and VMT goals. Records shall be retained for a minimum of 24 months.

(c) The employer’s CTR program shall include at least one additional element needed to meet CTR goals. Such additional elements may include, but are not limited to, the following options:

(i) Provision of preferential parking or reduced parking charges, or both, for high occupancy vehicles;

(ii) Instituting or increasing parking charges for single-occupant vehicles;

(iii) Provision of commuter ride matching services to facilitate employee ridesharing for commute trips;

(iv) Provision of subsidies for transit fares;

(v) Provision of vans for vanpools;

(vi) Provision of subsidies for carpools or vanpools;

(vii) Permitting the use of the employer’s vehicles for carpooling or vanpooling;

(viii) Permitting flexible work schedules to facilitate employees’ use of transit, carpools or vanpools;

(ix) Cooperation with transportation providers to provide additional regular or express service to the work site;

(x) Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit, carpool and vanpool users;

(xi) Provision of bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas and showers for employees who bicycle or walk to work;

(xii) Provision of a program of parking incentives such as a rebate for employees who do not use the parking facilities;

(xiii) Establishment of a program to permit employees to work part- or full-time at home or at an alternative work site closer to their homes;

(xiv) Establishment of a program of alternative work schedules, such as a compressed work week, which reduce commuting; and

(xv) Implementation of other measures designed to facilitate the use of high occupancy vehicles, such as on-site day care facilities and emergency taxi services.

(2) Transportation management organizations or other business partnerships may submit a single program description that describes common program elements among two or more affected employers. The program should also describe specific program elements at each individual employer’s work site. The transportation management organization, as an agent for its members, should provide individual performance data for each company as well as combined measurements to the County. Program modifications shall be specific to an employer. Each employer shall remain responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.040))


12.90.050 Schedule for submittal, review and implementation. 

(1) Not more than 180 calendar days after an employer achieves status as an affected employer as provided in CMC 12.90.030, an affected employer shall submit to the City for review a CTR program description as provided in CMC 12.90.040. CTR program review shall be subject to payment of a review fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. The employer shall implement a CTR program not more than 180 days after the CTR program description submittal. The employer shall implement approved program modifications within 30 calendar days of the final administrative decision on such modifications.

(2) Upon review of an employer’s CTR program description, the City shall establish the employer’s annual reporting date. Each year on the employer’s reporting date, the employer shall submit an annual CTR program report to the City. The City shall provide the format for the annual report. At least 30 calendar days prior to the date an annual report is due or program modifications are to be implemented, an employer may make written request for an extension of up to 90 calendar days to complete this action, upon payment of the fee for a request for extension as set forth in the current fee resolution. The City shall grant all or part of the extension request or shall deny the request within 10 working days of receipt. If the City fails to respond within 10 working days, the extension is automatically granted for 30 calendar days.

(3) The City shall complete review of the employer’s program description, annual report, or exemption request within 90 calendar days of receipt. The City shall provide the employer with written notification of the decision to approve required program modifications or to disapprove the employer’s CTR program, annual report or exemption request including the cause for disapproval. If the employer does not receive written notification of the acceptance or rejection of the employer’s CTR program description, annual report, revised CTR program or exemption within the deadlines established in this subsection, they shall be deemed accepted. An affected employer shall implement a CTR program within 180 calendar days of submitting its initial CTR program description regardless of the status of decisions concerning its approval. Thereafter the employer shall implement required program revisions within 30 calendar days of the final administrative decision on program requirements.

(4) In response to recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within 30 days of receipt. The City shall review revisions made in response to recommended modifications and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, the City will send written notice to that effect to the employer within 30 days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with City staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by the City within 10 working days of the conference.

(5) Employers may request exemptions, goal modifications or credit for TDM programs that existed prior to 1992 at least two months prior to the due date for the employer’s initial CTR program description submittal. Employers may request exemptions, goal modifications, program modifications and program exemption credit as part of the annual report. Employers may request exemptions and program modifications at any time.

(6) At least one year after its initial CTR program implementation, an affected employer may request a modification of the applicable CTR goals, subject to payment of a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. Such requests shall be filed in writing at least 60 days prior to the date the work site is required to submit its program description and annual report. (Ord. 20-07 § 36; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.050))


12.90.060 Criteria for goal attainment. 

A CTR survey supplied by the State Department of Transportation to determine progress toward goal attainment shall be conducted at affected work sites in odd numbered years through 2005. The following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips shall be applied in determining requirements for employer CTR program modifications:

(1) If an employer meets either or both goals, the employer has satisfied the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to modify the CTR program;

(2) If an employer makes a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and CMC 12.90.010 (20), but has not met or is not likely to meet the applicable SOV nor VMT goal, the City shall work collaboratively with the employer to make modifications to the CTR program. After agreeing on modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description to the City for approval within 30 days;

(3) If an employer fails to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and CMC 12.90.010(20), and fails to meet the applicable SOV or VMT reduction goal, the City shall work collaboratively with the employer to identify modifications to the CTR program and shall direct the employer to revise its program within 30 days to incorporate the modifications. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.060))


12.90.070 Credits, goal and program modifications and exemptions.

(1) Employers that have implemented TDM programs to reduce SOV commute travel by employees prior to the 1992 base year may apply for TDM program exemption credit at least two months prior to the due date for the employer’s initial CTR program description submittal. Such employers shall be considered to have met their 1995 CTR goals if their VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips are equivalent to a 12 percent or greater reduction from the employers’ base year zone values. This three-percentage-point credit applies only to the 1995 CTR goals. Application shall include results from a survey of employees or equivalent information that establishes the applicant’s VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips. The survey or equivalent information shall conform to all applicable standards established in the commute trip reduction task force guidelines (July 1992).

(2) Affected employers that have rates of VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips that are equal to or less than goals for one or more future goal years may apply to be exempted from CTR program requirements at least two months prior to the due date for their initial in their CTR program description submittal or as part of an annual progress report. Application shall include results from a survey of employees or equivalent information that establishes the applicant’s VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips. The survey or equivalent information shall conform to all applicable standards established in the commute trip reduction task force guidelines (July 1992).

Employers that apply for an exemption and whose rates of VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips are determined by the County to be equal to or less than goals for one or more future goal years, and commit in writing to continue their current level of effort, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter except for the requirement to report performance in annual reports for their goal years as specified in CMC 12.90.020(1). If any of these reports indicate the employer does not satisfy the next applicable goal, the employer shall immediately become subject to all requirements of this chapter.

(3) Adjustments to SOV and VMT Rates.

(a) For purposes of counting commute vehicle trips, telecommuting, alternative work schedules (excluding flex-time), bicycling and walking shall count as one and two-tenths vehicle commute trips eliminated. This also applies to VMT per employee. A transit trip counts as zero vehicle trips. A vanpool trip counts as zero vehicle trips.

(b) For purposes of counting commute vehicle trips, employers that have modified their employees’ work schedules out of the 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. window in response to the CTR law or for impacts associated with the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW, may apply for credit toward calculating SOV trips and VMT per employee. Such credit shall be two-tenths of a trip reduced per employee whose work schedule has been shifted out of the 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. window. Credit will be calculated automatically beginning with program reports submitted after 1997. The following information should be submitted in support of this credit:

(i) An explanation of how the schedule change is related to provisions of the Growth Management Act of 1990;

(ii) The number of employees whose schedules were changed;

(iii) The date on which the schedule change became effective; and

(iv) The previous schedule for those employees for which the credit is being claimed.

(4) An employer may request a modification of CTR program goals under the following conditions:

(a) The employer demonstrates that it requires employees to use the vehicles they drive to work during the work day for work purposes. Under this condition, the applicable goals will not be changed, but those employees who need daily access to the vehicles they drive to work will not be included in the calculations of proportion of SOV trips and VMT per employee used to determine the employer’s progress toward program goals. The employer shall provide documentation indicating how many employees meet this condition and must demonstrate that no reasonable alternative commute mode exists for these employees and that the vehicles cannot reasonably be used for carpools or vanpools.

(b) The employer demonstrates that its work site is contiguous with a CTR zone boundary and that the work site conditions affecting alternative commute options are similar to those for employers in the adjoining CTR zone. Under this condition, the employer’s work site may be made subject to the same goals for VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips as employers in the adjoining CTR zone. The employer’s request for a modification based on these conditions must be made to the County at least 90 days prior to the due date for submittal of the employer’s CTR program description.

(c) The employer demonstrates that it has significant numbers of its employees assigned to variable work schedules which makes it unreasonable to expect that such employees regularly participate in CTR programs. The employer shall provide documentation indicating how many employees meet this condition and must demonstrate that no reasonable alternative commute mode program can be developed for these employees. Under this condition, the applicable goals will not be changed, but those employees who are assigned to variable work schedules will not be included in the calculations of the proportion of SOV trips and VMT per employee used to determine the employer’s progress toward program goals.

(d) Beginning with the employer’s first goal year, goal modifications may be requested due to unanticipated conditions:

(i) The employer demonstrates that opportunities for alternative commute modes do not exist due to factors related to the work site, its work force or characteristics of the business that are beyond the employer’s control;

(ii) The employer clearly demonstrates why the work site is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The work site must also demonstrate that it has implemented all of the elements contained in its approved CTR program. The County will review and grant or deny requests for goal modifications as follows:

(A) A site-specific goal set by survey;

(B) Five percent lower than applicable goal for minor modification requests meeting the standards set forth in the State CTR task force guidelines; or

(C) Ten percent lower than applicable goal for major modification requests meeting the standards set forth in the State CTR task force guidelines.

(5) An affected employer may request modification of CTR program elements, other than the mandatory elements specified in CMC 12.90.040. Such request may be granted if one of the following conditions exist:

(a) The employer demonstrates that it would be unable to comply with one or more of the additional CTR program elements for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or

(b) The employer demonstrates that compliance with one or more of the additional program elements would constitute an undue hardship; or

(c) The employer demonstrates that another program element would be as effective or more effective than an approved additional program element. Modifications granted for the first two conditions must be reapproved as part of the annual program review.

(6) An affected employer may request an exemption from all CTR program requirements for a particular work site in the CTR program description or annual reports. An exemption may be granted if and only if the employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstance, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement any measures that could reduce the proportion of SOV trips and VMT per employee. The County shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions and shall determine whether the exemptions will be in effect during the following program year. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.070))


12.90.080 Appeals. 

Any affected employer may request reconsideration of the decision by the Public Works Director, who shall issue the final appealable decision on CTR exemptions, modification of goals, or modification of CTR program elements and of finding of violation pursuant to CMC 12.90.090. A written appeal must be filed within 14 calendar days of the employer’s receipt of the City’s final administrative decision with the City of Covington Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC. The appeal must state the decision being appealed and the grounds for the request. Appeals will be evaluated to determine if the administrative decisions were consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 01-09 § 8; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.080))


12.90.090 Enforcement. 

(1) The City is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 1.30.060, 1.30.070 and 1.30.080.

(a) By the deadlines established in this chapter, implement an approved CTR program including the submittal of a complete CTR program description upon which the approval shall be based.

(b) By the deadlines established in this chapter, modify an unacceptable CTR program after 1995 and to submit annual reports by which the need for program modifications will be determined.

(c) Make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and CMC 12.90.010(20), to implement its approved program.

(d) Revise a CTR program as required in RCW 70.94.534(4) and CMC 12.90.060. 

(2) Submission of fraudulent data shall be a violation and may be subject the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 1.30.060, 1.30.070 and 1.30.080. Each day from the date of receipt of such information by the City shall constitute a separate violation.

(3) An employer shall not be liable for civil penalties if failure to achieve a CTR program goal or to implement an element of an approved CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. Unionized employers shall be presumed to act in good faith compliance if they propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the national Labor Relations Act and advise the union of the existence of the statute and the mandates of the employer’s approved CTR program and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with State law.

(4) No affected employer may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable SOV or MVT goal.

(5) Affected employers shall be given 15 days’ written notice of the City’s intent to seek civil penalties. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.090))


12.90.100 Administrative rules and procedures. 

The Public Works Director is hereby instructed and authorized to adopt such administrative rules and procedures as are necessary to implement the provisions of this Act. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.60.100))


Chapter 12.95 INTEGRATED TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM

Sections:

12.95.010    Components of the integrated transportation program.

12.95.020    Relationships among three components of the integrated transportation program.

12.95.030    Administrative rules.

12.95.040    Filing appeals – Concurrency, MPS, IS.

12.95.050    Grounds for appeal – Concurrency, MPS, IS.


12.95.010 Components of the integrated transportation program. 

There are three components of the integrated transportation program (ITP). These components are as follows:

(1) Transportation concurrency management (TCM), by which City of Covington will regulate new development based on adequate transportation improvements needed to maintain level of service standards, in accordance with RCW 36.70A.070(6) and the City of Covington comprehensive plan.

(2) Mitigation payment system (MPS), by which City of Covington will apply transportation impact fees to new development for collecting a fair and equitable share of transportation improvement costs that are needed in accordance with Chapter 82.02 RCW and the City of Covington comprehensive plan.

(3) Intersection standards (IS) by which City of Covington will evaluate intersections affected by new development to assure safe and efficient operation and that improvements to mitigate the adverse impacts of such developments are completed, in accordance with the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), and the City of Covington comprehensive plan. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.65.010))


12.95.020 Relationships among three components of the integrated transportation program. 

(1) Permit Processes.

(a) Certificate of Concurrency. Prior to submission of a development application, a request for a certificate of concurrency shall be initiated by a submittal to the Community Development Department on a prescribed form containing information describing the location, uses, intensities, trip generation characteristics and pertinent information for the intended development. The certificate is a prerequisite for a complete development application. The Community Development Department shall use the submitted information to determine the net trips to be generated, taking into account commute trip reduction strategies, internal travel for mixed-use development, and pass-by trips from existing traffic flows, and shall determine whether the development passes the concurrency test prescribed in Chapter 12.100 CMC, Transportation Concurrency Management.

(b) Development Application. Following the submission of a development application, the Community Development Department shall determine the transportation impact fee to be paid under CMC Title 19, Impact Fees, and shall determine the traffic impacts of the proposed development on roadway intersections that will be adversely impacted and which must be mitigated using the Chapter 12.110 CMC, Intersection Standards.

(2) Calculation of Trips Generated by a Development.

(a) The vehicular trips expected to be generated by a proposed development shall be calculated as of the time of application for a certificate of concurrency, using standard generation rates published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, other standard references, or from other documented information and surveys approved by the Community Development Department.

(b) The Community Development Department may approve a reduction in generated vehicle trips calculated pursuant to the preceding subsection based on the types of land uses that are to be developed, on the expected amount of travel internal to the development, on the expected pass-by trips from existing traffic, or on the expected reduction of vehicle traffic volumes.

Such reduction shall be used when calculating TAM, MPS and IS, including any impact and mitigation fees and costs for which the development shall be liable.

The calculation of vehicular trip reductions as described in this section shall be based in all cases upon sound and recognized technical information and analytical process that represent current engineering practice. In all cases, the Public Works Department shall have final approval of all such data, information, and technical procedures used to calculate trip reductions.

(3) Calculations.

(a) TAM Calculations. The City of Covington shall determine the transportation adequacy measure (TAM) for any zone according to policies in the transportation element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan. The TAM is a two-part analysis, involving the average weighted volume to capacity (v/c) ratio of arterials and highways serving the zone (TAM value) and the existence of roadways critical to the zone’s access not funded for improvement in the committed network (unfunded critical links and arterial links of significance). If an unfunded critical link exists, then any proposed development which sends at least 50 percent of its peak direction (inbound or outbound) trips to that critical link shall be deemed to fail the concurrency test until the critical link is improved.

Administrative rules issued under the authority of this chapter shall contain a detailed technical description of the calculation of TAM and the list of potential unfunded critical links to be monitored.

(b) IS Calculations. Intersection level of service shall be calculated according to the “2000 Highway Capacity Manual” or an alternative method approved by the Community Development Department.

(4) Standards.

(a) The standard for the TAM value of a zone shall be those maximum average v/c zonal scores listed in City of Covington comprehensive plan policies for level of service (LOS) standards, and displayed in CMC 12.100.060. This allows a maximum area-wide average v/c of 0.89.

(b) The unfunded critical link standard shall apply to the links identified by administrative rule, which have a volume to capacity ratio of 1.1 or more, and which would carry at least 50 percent of the peak direction (inbound) zone traffic from a residential development or at least 50 percent of the peak direction (inbound or outbound) zone traffic from a commercial development. Unfunded critical links shall be applied only on those roadways in the City of Covington unless they are identified in an adjacent jurisdiction according to an interlocal agreement.

(c) The arterial links of significance test shall apply to all arterial segments designated by the Public Works Director. An arterial segment may be considered for addition to the list of arterial links of significance when the v/c ratio as indicated in the City’s current traffic model exceeds 0.80 and it is not already designated as an unfunded critical link. The Department of Public Works shall evaluate arterial segments in the current traffic model semiannually to determine which arterial segments are eligible for consideration to be added to the list. The traffic threshold for development activity triggering the analysis shall be five peak-hour trips in the peak direction passing through an arterial segment designated as an arterial link of significance. If the v/c ratio of an arterial segment listed as an arterial link of significance is determined to be 0.90 or greater (i.e., LOS E) when the project’s anticipated traffic is added to the model, then the project shall be deemed to have failed the arterial links of significance standard.

(d) The intersection standard for all intersections shall be “LOS D” as required by Chapter 12.110 CMC, Intersection Standards, and calculated according to the “2000 Highway Capacity Manual,” or approved alternative method. Level of service for traffic movements from unsignalized nonarterial side streets may be allowed to operate at LOS E or F, if the City Engineer determines that no significant operations or safety hazard will result. This exemption is needed since mitigation through installation of a traffic signal may not be warranted (per the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices”) or desirable due to the proximity of other existing or planned traffic control devices. Appropriate mitigation will be determined on a case-by-case basis for these situations. 

(5) Application of Standards. The standards set forth above shall be used in the ITP as follows:

(a) In Chapter 12.100 CMC, Transportation Concurrency Management, zone evaluation of concurrency shall be calculated using the TAM value, the TAM standard for the zone, and unfunded critical links analysis.

(b) In the identification of improvement needs for the annual update of the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, the TAM and critical link standards will be used to determine needed improvements, together with safety, operational, multimodal, traffic congestion, and other criteria. These improvement needs shall be the source of projects included in the transportation element, six-year transportation improvement plan (six-year TIP), capital improvement program (CIP), and MPS list.

(c) For the determination of traffic impacts for the SEPA evaluation of a proposed development, the intersection standards will be used, as well as other criteria for bicycle/pedestrian, traffic congestion, safety, and road design.

(6) Relationship to SEPA. The need for the environmental assessment of a proposed development must be determined by the Community Development Department, following the filing of a completed permit application. Impacts on the street system will be mitigated through a combination of project specific SEPA based mitigation measures and MPS fees.

Impacts on intersections will be mitigated through the provisions of Chapter 12.110 CMC. Nothing in this chapter shall cause a developer to pay mitigation and impact fees more than once for the same impact. Improvements and mitigation measures shall be coordinated by the Director with other such improvements and measures attributable to other proposed developments, and with the City street improvement program so that the City street system is improved efficiently and effectively, with minimum costs to be incurred by public and private entities.

The provisions of this title do not supersede or replace the provisions of the City SEPA authority as enacted in Chapter 16.10 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 §§ 37, 38; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.65.020))


12.95.030 Administrative rules. 

The Director is hereby instructed and authorized to adopt such administrative rules and procedures as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.65.025))


12.95.040 Filing appeals – Concurrency, MPS, IS. 

(1) Appeals of the Department’s final decisions relative to this chapter shall be filed with the Director or the Director’s designee.

(2) Such appeals shall be in written form, stating the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed within 10 calendar days of the receipt of notification of the Department’s final appealable decision in the matter being appealed. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.65.030))


12.95.050 Grounds for appeal – Concurrency, MPS, IS. 

(1) For appeals of denial or conditional approval of a certificate of concurrency, the appellant must show that:

(a) The Department committed a technical error;

(b) Alternative data or a traffic mitigation plan, which may include transportation strategies such as demand management or vanpools, submitted to the Department was inadequately considered;

(c) The action of the Department would substantially deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the property;

(d) Conditions required by the Department for concurrency are not related to the concurrency requirement; or 

(e) The action of the Department was arbitrary and capricious.

(2) For appeals of the MPS fee, the appellant must show that the Department:

(a) Committed an error in:

(i) Calculating the development’s proportionate share, as determined by an individual fee calculation, or if relevant, as set forth in the fee schedule; or

(ii) Granting credit for benefit factors; or

(b) Based the final decision upon incorrect data; or

(c) Gave inadequate consideration to alternative data or mitigations submitted to the Department.

(3) For appeals of IS improvements, the appellant must show that:

(a) The Department committed a technical error;

(b) Alternative data or a traffic mitigation plan submitted to the Department was inadequately considered; or

(c) Conditions required by the Department are not related to improvements needed to serve the proposed development. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.65.040))


Chapter 12.100 TRANSPORTATION CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:

12.100.010    Authority and purpose.

12.100.020    Definitions.

12.100.030    Requirement for certificate of concurrency.

12.100.040    Concurrency test.

12.100.050    Exemptions from concurrency.

12.100.060    TAM standards.

12.100.070    Update of TAM.

12.100.080    Certificate of concurrency.

12.100.090    Fees.

12.100.100    Applicability.

12.100.110    Provision of needed transportation facilities.

12.100.120    Intergovernmental coordination.

12.100.130    Relationship to SEPA.


12.100.010 Authority and purpose. 

(1) This chapter is enacted pursuant to City of Covington’s powers as a noncharter code city, RCW Title 35 and the Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.070.

(2) It is the purpose of this chapter to:

(a) Provide adequate levels of service on transportation facilities for existing use as well as new development in the City of Covington;

(b) Provide adequate transportation facilities that achieve and maintain City standards for levels of service as provided in the comprehensive plan, as amended; and

(c) Ensure that City level of service standards are achieved “concurrently” with development (as required by the Growth Management Act) by denying approval of development that would cause the level of service on transportation facilities to decline below City standards. Applicants for development may propose mitigation measures that will achieve and maintain the City’s standard for level of service. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.010))


12.100.020 Definitions.

(1) “Capital improvement program (CIP)” means the expenditures programmed by the City of Covington for capital purposes over the next six-year period in the CIP most recently adopted by the City Council.

(2) “Certificate of concurrency” means the document issued by the City indicating:

(a) The location or other description of the property on which the development is proposed;

(b) The number of development units and specific uses, densities, and intensities that were tested for concurrency and approved;

(c) The type of development approval for which the certificate of concurrency is issued;

(d) An effective date; and

(e) An expiration date.

Certificates may be conditional, unconditional, or extended, according to Department administrative practices described in the public rules for the program.

(3) “Committed network for the transportation adequacy measure” means the system of transportation facilities used to calculate the transportation adequacy measure to determine the level of service to transportation for a zone. The network includes transportation facilities that are needed to provide the level of service standard, including existing facilities and proposed facilities which are fully funded for construction in the most currently adopted six-year roads CIP or for which voluntary financial commitments have been secured. Projects to be provided by the State, cities or other jurisdictions may become part of the committed network upon decision of the Director.

(4) “Concurrency” means transportation improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years needed to maintain the City level of service standards, according to RCW 36.70A.070(6).

(5) “Concurrency test” means the determination of an applicant’s impact on transportation facilities by the comparison of the level of service of the concurrency zone which includes the proposed development to the level of service standard for that zone. A concurrency test must be passed in order to obtain a certificate of concurrency.

(6) “Concurrency zone” means one of the zones depicted in the City of Covington mitigation payment and concurrency zone map as adopted and is on file with the City Clerk. The Public Works Director may change the boundaries of such zones by including such changes in the administrative rules for this title, filing such changes with the City Clerk, and giving public notice of such changes.

(7) “Department” means the City of Covington Department of Community Development or its successor agency.

(8) “Development” means specified improvements or changes in use designed or intended to permit a use of land which will contain more dwelling units or buildings than the existing use of the land, or to otherwise change the use of the land or buildings/improvements on the land in a manner that increases the amount of vehicle traffic generated by the existing use of the land, and that requires a development permit from the City of Covington. This definition shall not pertain to the rezoning of land or a UPD permit or a fully contained community.

(9) “Development approval” means any order, permit or other official action of the City granting, or granting with conditions an application for development, but not pertaining to the rezoning of land or a UPD permit or a fully contained community.

(10) “Development units” means the proposed quantity of development measured by dwelling units for residential development and square feet for nonresidential development, upon which are based the calculations of TAM for the determination of concurrency.

(11) “Financial commitment” consists of the following:

(a) Revenue designated in the most currently adopted CIP for transportation facilities or strategies needed in the committed network for the transportation adequacy measure to test for concurrency. The financial plan underlying the adopted CIP identifies all applicable and available revenue sources and forecasts these revenues through the six-year period with reasonable assurance that such funds will be timely put to such ends. Projects to be used in defining the committed network shall represent those projects which are fully funded for construction in the six years of the CIP. This commitment is annually reviewed through the annual budget process;

(b) Unanticipated revenue from Federal or State grants for which the City has received notice of approval; or

(c) Revenue that is assured by an applicant in a form approved by the City in a voluntary agreement.

(12) “Peak period” means the one-hour weekday period during which the greatest volume of traffic uses the street system identified separately for each roadway section. For concurrency purposes, this period shall be in the afternoon of a typical weekday. At the Director’s discretion, a different time period may be analyzed for intersection standards evaluation purposes.

(13) A “preapplication meeting” is a meeting between the applicant for a transportation concurrency certificate or its extension and the staff of the Community Development Department and others, according to that Department’s rules and administrative procedures held for the purpose of determining the requirements to file a development permit application.

(14) “Reservation” and “reserve” means development units are set aside in the City’s concurrency records in a manner that assigns the units to the applicant and prevents the same units being assigned to any other applicant.

(15) “Transportation facilities” means principal, minor and collector arterial roads, streets, State highways, freeways, intersections, transit and high occupancy vehicle facilities, and nonmotorized facilities (i.e., for bicycles or pedestrians). Transportation facilities include any such facility owned, operated or administered by the State of Washington and its political subdivisions, including the County and cities.

(16) “Transportation strategies” means transportation demand management strategies and other techniques or programs that reduce single-occupant vehicle commute travel and that are approved by the Department. Strategies may include but are not limited to vanpooling, carpooling, shuttle transportation, and public transit. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.020))


12.100.030 Requirement for certificate of concurrency. 

Each applicant for a development approval, except as provided in CMC 12.100.050(1), shall present a certificate of concurrency. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.030))


12.100.040 Concurrency test. 

(1) Applications for certificates of concurrency, and the resulting concurrency test, shall be completed prior to application for development approval. For a UPD permit or a fully contained community, applications for certificates of concurrency, and the resulting concurrency test, shall be completed prior to issuance of a UPD permit or a permit for a fully contained community and their certificates shall not need extensions; provided, that the subject developments are progressing towards completion and have not been terminated.

(2) Applications for certificates of concurrency shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on forms provided by the Department. 

(3) The City shall perform a concurrency test for each application for a certificate of concurrency.

(4) The City shall conduct the concurrency test first for the earliest completed application received. Subsequent applicants will be tested in the same order as the City receives completed applications.

(5) The City shall not issue a certificate of concurrency unless there are adequate transportation facilities to meet the level of service standards for existing and approved uses and the impacts of the proposed development.

(6) In conducting the concurrency test, the City shall use standard trip generation rates, such as those reported by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. An applicant may submit as a part of the application for certification of concurrency a calculation of alternative trip generation rates for the proposed development. The Director shall review the alternate calculations and make a written determination within 10 business days of submittal as to whether such calculation will be used in lieu of the standard trip generation rates. The Director shall adjust the trip generation forecast of proposed development to account for allowances determined pursuant to the mitigation payment system’s procedures for transportation strategies, including transportation demand management reductions.

(7) If the level of service is equal to or better than the adopted standards, the concurrency test is passed, and the applicant shall receive a certificate of concurrency.

(8) If the level of service is worse than the adopted standards, the concurrency test is not passed, and the applicant shall select one of the following options:

(a) Accept a 90-day reservation of transportation facilities that are available, and within the same 90-day period amend the application to reduce the need for transportation facilities to the units that are available, or voluntarily arrange for the transportation facilities or strategies needed to achieve concurrency. The 90-day period shall begin no later than 14 days after receipt of the notification of denial. Reduction of the need for transportation facilities may be achieved through one or a combination of the following: reducing the size of the development (so long as minimum density requirements continue to be met); reducing trip generation by the original proposed development; phasing of the development to match future transportation facility construction; providing transportation strategies, when the Department determines that such strategies will be reasonably sufficient as to reduce traffic to a level which meets the concurrency standard or threshold; or

(b) Accept the denial of an application for a certificate of concurrency; or

(c) Appeal the denial of the application for a certificate of concurrency, pursuant to the provisions of CMC 12.95.040 and 12.95.050. The City shall reserve any available development units during the appeal.

Acceptance of the 90-day period shall not impair the applicant’s future right to a formal appeal at a later time.

(9) The concurrency test shall be performed only for the specific property, uses, densities and intensities based on information provided by the applicant and included in the certificate of concurrency. Changes to the uses, densities, and intensities that create additional impacts on transportation facilities shall be subject to an additional concurrency test. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.040))


12.100.050 Exemptions from concurrency. 

(1) The following applications for development approval are exempt from the concurrency test, and may commence development without a certificate of concurrency:

(a) Any development that is categorically exempt from environmental review, except short plats;

(b) Renewals of previously issued, unexpired permits; 

(c) Expansions or phases of projects that were disclosed by the applicant and subject to a concurrency test as part of the original application (i.e., phased development); provided, that a certificate of concurrency was issued for the expansion or subsequent phase;

(d) Any development that will have no transportation impact, and that will not change the traffic volumes and flow patterns in the p.m. peak travel period, as determined by the Director.

(2) In order to monitor the cumulative effect of exempt development approvals on the level of service of transportation facilities, the City shall add the impacts of exempt development approvals to the transportation adequacy measure and all other relevant concurrency monitoring records. Development units shall be allocated to vested development based on the amount such vested developments are likely to need on an annual basis. The allocation shall be based on each vested development’s historical building patterns over recent years. If no such historical record or pattern can be determined for a vested development, then the allocation to each year of the first six years shall be one-sixth of the construction activity remaining to be built in the development. All allocations of facility capacity to vested development shall be subtracted from the remaining capacity available for development that is not vested. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.050))


12.100.060 TAM standards. 

(1) The following are the TAM standards for each transportation service area, as adopted in the the City of Covington comprehensive plan, provided there are no unfunded critical links affecting the concurrency zone:

Transportation Service Area 3    0.89 D

(Full service area) 

In the event that a concurrency zone is affected by one or more unfunded critical links, the concurrency zone shall be considered to fail the standard for the zone.

(2) A certificate of concurrency shall not be issued to any proposed development if the standards in this section are not achieved and maintained for the development as a whole, or the portion of the development in each transportation service area in which the development is proposed. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.060))


12.100.070 Update of TAM. 

Levels of service shall be monitored and the traffic model for the transportation adequacy measure shall be updated at least once per year. The monitoring and update process shall include traffic volumes, approval of additional development, completion of previously approved development, improvements to transportation facilities, and the effect of transportation strategies. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.070))


12.100.080 Certificate of concurrency. 

(1) A certificate of concurrency shall be issued by the Director or the Director’s designee. Issuance of a certificate creates a rebuttable presumption that the proposed development satisfies the concurrency requirements of this chapter. The determination of concurrency shall be final at the time of development approval. The issue of concurrency may be raised as part of the review process for the development application for which the certificate of concurrency was issued.

(2) Upon issuance of a certificate of concurrency, the City shall reserve development units on behalf of the applicant, and indicate the reservation on the certificate of concurrency.

(3) A certificate of concurrency shall expire if the development permit for which the concurrency is reserved is not applied for within 180 days of issuance or extension of the certificate of concurrency. A certificate of concurrency shall be required in application for a formal subdivision plat and for a nonresidential short plat and for a commercial building permit.

(4) A certificate of concurrency shall be valid for the development permit application period and subsequently for the same period of time as the development approval which is issued pursuant to the certificate of concurrency. If the development approval does not have an expiration date, the certificate of concurrency shall be valid for five years from the date of issuance.

(5) A certificate of concurrency shall be valid for an initial 180-day period and may be extended one time for an additional 180 days by the Director; provided, that the holder of the original certificate or his agent has, before the time of expiration of the original certificate, scheduled a preapplication meeting with the Community Development Department, has requested such extension in writing to the Director and has paid the extension fee. A further 90-day extension of a certificate of concurrency by the Director shall be made only under extraordinary circumstances, and shall require the receipt of a current certificate of water availability.

(6) A certificate of concurrency can be extended to remain in effect for the life of each subsequent development approval for the same parcel, as long as the applicant obtains the subsequent development approval prior to the expiration of the earlier development approval. No development shall be required to hold more than one valid certificate of concurrency, unless the applicant or subsequent owner proposes changes or modifications to the property location, density, intensity or land use that creates additional impacts on transportation facilities.

(7) A certificate of concurrency runs with the land and is valid only for subsequent development approvals for the same parcel, and to new owners of the original parcel for which it was issued. A certificate of concurrency cannot be transferred to a different parcel and shall be limited to uses and intensities for which it was originally issued.

(8) Upon subdivision of a parcel that has obtained a certificate of concurrency, the City may replace the certificate of concurrency by issuing a separate certificate of concurrency to each subdivided parcel, assigning to each a pro rata portion of the development units of the original certificate. The Director may modify such assignment upon petition of the owner.

(9) A certificate of concurrency shall expire if the underlying development approval expires or is revoked or denied by the City.

(10) All development approvals that voluntarily provide funding for one or more transportation facilities by the development or entities other than the City shall be conditioned to require that prior to the issuance of any final development approval the availability of such transportation facilities or financial arrangements has been confirmed.

(11) Upon annexation of any development, the provisions for the certificate of concurrency shall be enforced by interlocal agreement with the County. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.080))


12.100.090 Fees. 

(1) The City shall charge an administrative fee to help defray costs associated with the review and determinations to a traffic concurrency application for conducting the concurrency test in accordance with CMC 12.95.020(6), and an additional fee for the one-time extension of a valid certificate. Such fees shall be set forth in the current fee resolution and shall not be refundable.

(2) The following types of development are exempt from the concurrency test fee:

(a) All applications that are exempt from the concurrency test pursuant to CMC 12.100.050; and

(b) Development by municipal, County, State, and Federal governments, and special districts (as that term is defined by State law). (Ord. 20-07 § 39; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.090))


12.100.100 Applicability. 

The provisions and fees of this chapter shall apply to every application for a transportation concurrency certificate and to every request for the extension of a valid certificate received by the Department. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.092))


12.100.110 Provision of needed transportation facilities. 

(1) The City shall determine that transportation facilities are available to support development at adopted TAM standards within six years of the impacts of such development. The City shall require at the time the certificate of concurrency is issued that:

(a) The necessary facilities and services are in place at the time a development approval is issued; or

(b) The necessary facilities will be complete within six years of development approval:

(i) The necessary facilities are under construction at the time a development approval is issued, and financial commitment is in place to complete the necessary facilities within six years of issuance of development approval; or

(ii) The necessary facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract of development agreement which provides for the actual construction or financial commitment of the required facilities, guarantees that the necessary facilities will be in place within six years of issuance of development approval, and provides that the capital project is included in, or will be added to, the committed network for the transportation adequacy measure, the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, and the six-year capital improvements program; or

(iii) The City has in place financial commitments to complete the necessary public facilities or strategies within six years of issuance of development approval; or

(c) Development approvals are issued subject to a binding executed contract, development agreement or other binding condition which provides that any facilities and strategies necessary to meet concurrency requirements after issuance of development approval will be in place within six years of occupancy and use of the development.

(2) The certificate of concurrency shall be binding on the City at such time as the applicant provides assurances, acceptable to the City in form and amount, to guarantee the applicant’s pro rata share of the cost of capital improvements needed for concurrency as determined by the mitigation payment system, CMC Title 19.

(3) The Director may make adjustments to the committed network for TAM for corrections, updates, and modifications concerning costs, revenue sources, acceptance of facilities pursuant to dedications which are consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan, or the date of construction (so long as it is completed within the six-year period) of any facility enumerated in the capital improvements program.

(4) The City shall identify projects in the adopted six-year CIP required for the committed network for the transportation adequacy measure and any capital improvements for which a binding agreement has been executed with another party. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.100))


12.100.120 Intergovernmental coordination. 

The City may enter into agreements and continue existing agreements with other local governments and the State of Washington to coordinate the imposition of TAM standards, impact fees and other mitigation for transportation concurrency. Existing agreements shall continue in force until modified or completed.

(1) The City may apply transportation standards, fees and mitigations to development in the City that impacts other local governments and the State of Washington. Development approvals by the City may include conditions and mitigations that will be imposed on behalf of, and implemented by other local governments and the State of Washington.

(2) The City may receive impact fees or other mitigations based on or as a result of development proposed in other jurisdictions that impacts the City. The City may agree to accept and implement conditions and mitigations that are imposed by other jurisdictions on development in their jurisdiction.

(3) No fees or mitigations for transportation facilities of other agencies will be required by the City unless an agreement has been executed between the City and the affected agency. The agreement shall specify the fee schedule and level of service standards to be used by the City and the affected agency, which standards shall be consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan and, if different than the standards adopted pursuant to this title, shall be adopted by ordinance. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.110))


12.100.130 Relationship to SEPA. 

A determination of concurrency shall be an administrative action of the City of Covington that is categorically exempt from the State Environmental Policy Act. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.70.120))


Chapter 12.105 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 16-16)




Chapter 12.110 INTERSECTION STANDARDS

Sections:

12.110.010    Authority and purpose.

12.110.020    Definitions.

12.110.030    Significant adverse impacts.

12.110.040    Mitigation and payment of costs.

12.110.050    Interjurisdictional agreements.

12.110.060    Relation to other permit authority.


12.110.010 Authority and purpose. 

(1) This chapter is enacted pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act and Chapter 58.17 RCW, and per RCW Title 35A.

(2) The purpose of this chapter is to:

(a) Assure adequate levels of service, safety, and operating efficiency on the City of Covington street system, at intersections serving and directly impacted by proposed new development;

(b) Establish standards for intersection operation and define the relationship between new developments on road intersection function; 

(c) Identify development conditions to assure intersection capacity, safety and operational efficiency; and

(d) Require that owners of new developments pay the proportionate costs of required intersection improvements. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.010))


12.110.020 Definitions.

(1) “Highway capacity manual (HCM)” means the “2000 Highway Capacity Manual” published by the Transportation Research Board of the National Research Council.

(2) “Street standards” shall have the same meaning as the “City of Covington Design and Construction Standards,” as adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC. (Ord. 27-16 § 10; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.020))


12.110.030 Significant adverse impacts. 

For the purposes of SEPA and this chapter, a significant adverse impact is defined as any traffic condition directly caused by proposed development that would reasonably result in one or more of the following conditions at the time any part of the development is completed and able to generate traffic:

(1) A roadway intersection that provides access to a proposed development, and that will function at a level of service worse than “D,” and that will carry five or more added vehicles in any one-hour period as a direct impact of the proposed development, and that will be impacted by at least 10 percent of the new traffic generated from the proposed development in that same one hour period; or

(2) A roadway intersection or approach lane where the Director determines that a hazard to safety could reasonably result. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.030))


12.110.040 Mitigation and payment of costs. 

(1) Based on the identification of intersection standards being exceeded using analytical techniques and information acceptable to the Director, the owner of a proposed development shall be required to provide improvements which bring the intersection into compliance with intersection standards, or that return it to its pre-project condition, or pay a proportionate share of the costs to improve the intersection as may be required by the Director. 

(2) Approval to construct the proposed development shall not be granted until the owner has agreed to build or pay fair and equitable costs to build the improvements required by the Director within the time schedule set by the Director.

(3) At the discretion of the Director, and based on technical information regarding traffic conditions and expected traffic impacts, the City may require that the owner of a proposed development pay the full costs of required intersection standards improvements required under this title. 

(4) No administrative fees shall be charged for IS review; however, the owner of a proposed development is responsible for the costs of any traffic study needed to determine traffic impacts and mitigation measures at intersections, as determined by the Director. (Ord. 20-07 § 41; Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.040))


12.110.050 Interjurisdictional agreements.

(1) Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from entering into agreements with the WSDOT or other local jurisdictions for the collection of fees and the mitigation of traffic on State highways and/or County and/or City arterials that may be caused by developments proposed in the City of Covington. The level of service standards used in such agreements shall be those of the City, the WSDOT, the applicable local jurisdiction, or some combination of them, as provided in the agreement.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuation, modification, or fulfillment of existing City agreements with the WSDOT and local jurisdictions that were in force at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.050))


12.110.060 Relation to other permit authority. 

The procedures set forth in this chapter do not limit the authority of the City of Covington to deny or to approve with conditions the following:

(1) Any zone reclassification request, based on its expected traffic impacts;

(2) Any proposed development or zone reclassification if the City of Covington determines that a hazard to safety would result from its direct traffic impacts without roadway or intersection improvements, regardless of level of service standards; or

(3) Any proposed development reviewed under the authority of the Washington State Environmental Policy Act. (Ord. 38-02 § 2 (12.80.060))




Chapter 12.115 EXCAVATION IN CITY STREETS

Sections:

12.115.010    Excavation in City streets within five years of street paving prohibited.

12.115.020    Notification of intent to pave.

12.115.030    Deadline for work.

12.115.040    Exceptions.

12.115.050    Excavation by City departments.

12.115.060    Appeals.


12.115.010 Excavation in City streets within five years of street paving prohibited.

No permit shall be issued for any openings, cuts or excavations in any City street for a period of five years after the date of notification from the City or a designated City contractor that the said street is being paved or repaved with the final lift of asphalt except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


12.115.020 Notification of intent to pave.

(1) Prior to a street being paved or repaved with the final lift of asphalt, the Director of Public Works or designated City contractor shall mail written notice thereof to the following:

(a) Each person or entity owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any real property, whether improved or unimproved, abutting said street;

(b) The occupants of all houses, buildings and other structures abutting said street;

(c) Any applicable state agencies;

(d) Holders of franchise agreements with the City allowing utilities in any public right-of-way within the City;

(e) City departments that may need to perform work within the affected street;

(f) All other persons who register with the City Clerk to receive such notice.

(2) The notice shall state that no excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in said street for a period of five years after the date of said notice. The notice shall also state that applications for permits to excavate prior to such paving or repaving shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the permit may be complete by the deadline established for such work by the Director of Public Works or designated City contractor. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 20-07 § 42; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


12.115.030 Deadline for work.

All utility work accomplished prior to repaving shall be completed by the deadline established by the Director of Public Works or designated City contractor. That deadline shall be at least 45 days after the date of the written notification advising of the paving (final lift of asphalt) or repaving of the street, but the Director or designated City contractor may establish a deadline that is more than 45 days from the date of the written notification if the Director or designated City contractor determines that allowing more time will not interfere with the planned work. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


12.115.040 Exceptions.

No permit for excavation shall be issued within the five-year period after expiration of the deadline, unless the Director of Public Works determines that:

(1) Denying the permit would work an undue hardship on the person or entity applying for the permit and the need for the excavation could not have been reasonably anticipated before expiration of the deadline; or

(2) An emergency exists that requires such an excavation to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or

(3) The permit applicant overlays the full width, from intersection to intersection, of the excavated area. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


12.115.050 Excavation by City departments.

Every City department or official responsible for any work that may require any opening, cut or excavation in said street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such excavation work within the set deadline. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


12.115.060 Appeals.

In the event that the Director of Public Works denies an application, the applicant’s remedy shall be to appeal to the City Council. The applicant shall file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days from the date of receipt of the denial of the excavation permit application. The appeal notice shall state the specific reasons for objection to the decision of the Director. At the next regular City Council meeting following receipt by the City Clerk of the applicant’s notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a date to hear the applicant’s appeal. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the applicant’s appeal within 45 days of the date the City Clerk received the notice of appeal. A majority vote of the City Council shall be required to reverse the decision of the Director. (Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1)


Chapter 12.120 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE FUNDING SOURCE ADJUSTMENT

Sections:

12.120.010    Purpose.

12.120.020    Traffic impact fee funding source adjustment established.

12.120.030    Application for traffic impact fee funding source adjustment.

12.120.040    Funding source adjustment criteria.

12.120.050    Administration of traffic impact fee funding source adjustment.

12.120.060    Payments to applicants that qualify for adjustment.

12.120.070    Appeals.

12.120.080    Requirement of applicant to stay in business.

12.120.090    Limit on applications.


12.120.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public health, safety and welfare will be preserved by having safe and efficient roads serving new and existing developments by creating an economic development incentive that will attract certain types of retail development to the City and using a portion of the sales tax revenues generated by such development to provide additional Citywide services.

(2) The requirements of this chapter apply to all new, large, commercial retail business developments meeting the definitions of CMC 12.120.040(1). This chapter, if applicable, is intended to apply in addition to all other requirements imposed by state, local or federal law. (Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.020 Traffic impact fee funding source adjustment established. 

There is hereby established a process for new, large, retail establishments to achieve a funding source adjustment for up to 50 percent of the traffic impact fees paid pursuant to CMC Title 19 for development activity which meets the criteria of CMC 12.120.040; provided, however, that the amount of impact fees eligible for a funding source adjustment shall not exceed the total sales tax received by the City from the applicant during the three-year period commencing from the date of certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.030 Application for traffic impact fee funding source adjustment. 

Any developer applying for a building permit for a new, large, commercial retail business which meets the criteria set forth in CMC 12.120.040 may apply to the Director of Finance or his/her designee for a funding source adjustment of the traffic impact fee requirement established pursuant to CMC Title 19. Said application must be submitted at the time the building permit is applied for, shall be on forms provided by the City, and shall be accompanied by all information and data the City deems necessary to process the application. To the extent it is authorized by law, the City shall endeavor to keep all proprietary information submitted with said application confidential; provided, however, this chapter shall not create or establish a special duty to do so. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.040 Funding source adjustment criteria. 

To be eligible for the traffic impact fee funding source adjustment established by this chapter, the applicant shall meet each of the following criteria:

(1) The applicant must be a new, large, commercial retail business in the Covington City limits. For purposes of this chapter, “new, large, commercial retail business” shall mean any business that (a) is not already located in the City of Covington at the time a building permit is applied for, (b) will be contained in at least one building exceeding 150,000 square feet, (c) sells retail goods and services which are subject to the retail sales tax provisions of Chapter 3.10 CMC, (d) applies for a building permit, and (e) is subject to payment of traffic impact fees pursuant to CMC Title 19.

(2) Based on similar store sales, or other reliable data, as determined by the City, the applicant must demonstrate that it is likely to generate to the City of Covington average annual City of Covington portion of sales and use tax revenue of at least $500,000 based upon the three-year period commencing from the date of certificate of occupancy.

(3) The applicant must be a new, large, retail business located within one of the following prescribed land use zones: downtown commercial 3 (DN 3); downtown commercial 4 (DN 4); downtown commercial 5 (DN 5); and downtown commercial 6 (DN 6). (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.050 Administration of traffic impact fee funding source adjustment. 

(1) Upon acceptance of an application for a funding source adjustment pursuant to CMC 12.120.040, the applicant shall pay to the City the full amount of the traffic impact fees required pursuant to CMC Title 19. The impact fees collected shall belong to the City and shall be available for use by the City upon receipt of the traffic impact fees. At the expiration of a three-year period commencing from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Finance Director shall determine if the average annual City of Covington portion of sales and use tax revenue received by the City meets the minimum amount stated in CMC 12.120.040(2). The determination shall be based upon the sales tax reporting requirements of Chapter 3.10 CMC as it now reads or is hereafter amended.

(2) In the event the three-year average annual City of Covington portion of sales and use tax revenue criteria of CMC 12.120.040(2) has been met as determined by the Finance Director, there shall be an adjustment of the funding source allowed for up to 50 percent of the traffic impact fees paid pursuant to CMC Title 19. In such case, an amount equal to 50 percent of the impact fees previously paid to the City shall be returned to the applicant conditioned upon the requirement that the amount returned will be funded by the sales tax revenue generated by the new retail business.

(3) In the event that the three-year average annual City of Covington portion sales and use tax revenue criteria of CMC 12.120.040(2) has not been met as determined by the Finance Director, a funding source adjustment will not be granted, and the City shall not be required to pay an amount equal to 50 percent of the traffic impact fee collected; provided, however, in cases where the applicant has met at least 75 percent of the amount set forth in CMC 12.120.040(2), the applicant shall be allowed to adjust the funding source for a smaller portion of the impact fees paid, which shall result in the City paying back an amount equal to 25 percent of the impact fees collected conditioned upon the requirement that the amount returned will be funded by the sales tax generated by the new retail business.

(4) In cases where the Finance Director has determined that the applicant has not met either the three-year annual sales and use tax revenue criteria of CMC 12.120.040(2) or 75 percent thereof, the applicant shall not be entitled to any adjustment to the funding source of the traffic impact fees paid pursuant to CMC Title 19. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.060 Payments to applicants that qualify for adjustment. 

All payments made to applicants that are entitled to a funding source adjustment shall be paid by the City in 16 equal quarterly payments. The first payment shall be paid to the applicant within 90 days following the three-year period following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Each subsequent payment will be made three months after the previous quarter’s payment. (Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.070 Appeals.

Any developer that has applied for this funding source adjustment and is aggrieved by the determination of the Director of Finance as to whether the criteria of CMC 12.120.040(2) have been met; the eligibility for a funding source adjustment for the fees required by CMC Title 19 pursuant to CMC 12.120.040(1); or the amount of fees that are eligible for the funding source adjustment to which an applicant is entitled pursuant to CMC 12.120.040 may file a written appeal to the City’s Hearing Examiner as established in Chapter 14.45 CMC. The City Examiner is hereby specifically authorized to hear and decide such appeals and the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final action of the City and subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 2; Ord. 01-09 § 9; Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.080 Requirement of applicant to stay in business.

Any new, large, retail development applying for and receiving a traffic impact fee funding source adjustment pursuant to this chapter is required to stay in business a minimum of 10 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy. If the applicant closes the retail business within 10 years of the certificate of occupancy, an amount equal to 50 percent of the traffic impact fees paid back pursuant to a funding source adjustment made pursuant to this chapter must be repaid to the City within 60 days of the retail business closing. If the closure occurs within the four-year pay back period, any payment not yet made by the City will not be required to be made, and any payments made must be repaid to the City within 60 days of the retail business closing. (Ord. 09-07 § 1)


12.120.090 Limit on applications.

Applications for a traffic impact fee funding source adjustment pursuant to this chapter must be received within three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 09-07 § 1)


Chapter 12.125 TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:

12.125.010    Establishing transportation benefit district.

12.125.020    Repealed.

12.125.030    Powers.

12.125.040    Transportation improvements funded.

12.125.045    Annual vehicle license fee.

12.125.050    Dissolution.

12.125.060    Liberal construction.


12.125.010 Establishing transportation benefit district.

There is created a transportation benefit district to be known as the Covington transportation benefit district (the “TBD”) with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the City as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations. (Ord. 02-13 § 3)


12.125.020 Governing board.

Repealed by Ord. 07-15. (Ord. 02-13 § 3)


12.125.030 Powers.

The City is vested with all rights, powers, immunities, functions, and obligations otherwise vested by law in a transportation benefit district under Chapter 36.73 RCW and the City Council may exercise any powers provided by law to fulfill the purpose of the TBD. (Ord. 07-15 § 3; Ord. 02-13 § 3)


12.125.040 Transportation improvements funded.

The funds generated by the TBD may be used for any purpose allowed by law and to make transportation improvements that are consistent with existing State, regional, and local transportation plans and necessitated by existing or reasonably foreseeable congestion levels pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, as the same may be amended from time to time. The transportation improvements funded shall be made in an effort to protect the City’s long-term investments in its infrastructure, to reduce the risk of transportation facility failure, to improve safety, to continue optimal performance of the infrastructure over time, to avoid more expensive infrastructure replacements in the future, and to improve modal connectivity within the City of Covington. Additional transportation improvement projects of the TBD may be funded only after compliance with the provisions of Chapter 36.73 RCW. (Ord. 07-15 § 4; Ord. 02-13 § 3)


12.125.045 Annual vehicle license fee.

(1) Annual Vehicle License Fee Established. An annual vehicle license fee of $20.00 is hereby established. Consistent with RCW 36.73.065(4)(a)(i), as written or hereafter amended, to be collected by the Washington Department of Licensing on qualifying vehicles as set forth in RCW 82.80.140, as written or hereafter amended.

(2) Revenue Restrictions. The revenues received from the $20.00 vehicle license fee shall only be expended on TBD projects approved by the City Council pursuant to Ordinance No. 02-13 and State law.

(3) Vehicle License Fee Collection Effective Date. The annual vehicle license fee shall take effect for notices mailed in 2016 for vehicle license renewals due on or after May 8, 2016, or as soon thereafter as the Washington Department of Licensing is reasonably able to incorporate collection of the $20.00 fee; but in no event shall the vehicle license fee be collected sooner than 180 days after approval of the ordinance codified in this section, pursuant to RCW 36.73.065 and 82.80.140(4). The vehicle license fee shall be collected during the term of the existence of the district and shall cease to be collected upon dissolution of the district. (Ord. 12-15 §§ 1 – 3)


12.125.050 Dissolution.

The TBD shall be automatically dissolved, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW, when all indebtedness of the TBD has been retired and when the entire TBD’s anticipated responsibilities have been satisfied. (Ord. 02-13 § 3)


12.125.060 Liberal construction.

As authorized pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter shall be liberally construed to permit the accomplishment of its purposes. (Ord. 02-13 § 3)


Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES

Chapters:

13.05    Repealed

13.10    Sewer and Water Service

13.15    Repealed

13.20    Repealed

13.25    Surface and Stormwater

13.30    Surface Water Management Program

13.35    Repealed

13.37    Repealed

13.39    Repealed

13.40    Energy Management

13.45    Latecomer’s Agreements


Chapter 13.05 DEFINITIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 12-17)


Chapter 13.10 SEWER AND WATER SERVICE

Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.015    Definitions.

13.10.040    Development proposals – Sewer connections required.

13.10.045    Approved on-site sewage systems.

13.10.050    Development proposals – Water connection required.

13.10.060    Certificates of water and sewer availability required.

13.10.070    Connection to public water and sewer – Right-of-way permit required.

13.10.080    Use of the public sewers.

13.10.090    Protection from damage.


13.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Ensure that adequate public facilities for potable water and wastewater treatment are provided in an efficient and coordinated manner with applicable water-sewer district(s) comprehensive plans, as referenced or amended.

(2) Provide information to assist in the review of development proposals. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.015 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Unless otherwise defined below the definitions in Chapter 18.20 CMC apply.

(1) “Designated City official” means the City employee(s) designated by the City Manager to be responsible for enforcing the terms of this chapter.

(2) “Group A water system” means a public water system with 15 or more service connections, regardless of the number of people served, or a system serving an average of 25 or more people per day for 60 or more days within a calendar year, regardless of the number of service connections.

(3) “Group B water system” means a public water system that is not a Group A water system, with less than 15 service connections and:

(a) Fewer than 25 people per day; or

(b) Twenty-five or more people per day for fewer than 60 days per year, provided the system does not serve 1,000 or more people for two or more consecutive days.

(4) “Public sewer” means any sewer or appurtenant facility other than a side sewer, either owned or operated by a water-sewer district within the jurisdiction of the City of Covington and approved by or under permit from the Washington State Department of Ecology, the Washington State Department of Health, and/or a local health officer at Public Health – Seattle & King County.

(5) “On-site sewage system” (OSS) means an integrated system of components, located on or nearby the property it serves, that conveys, stores, treats, and/or provides subsurface soil treatment and dispersal of sewage. It consists of a collection system, a treatment component or treatment sequence, and a soil dispersal component. An on-site sewage system also refers to a holding tank sewage system or other system that does not have a soil dispersal component.

(6) “Sewage” means liquid-carried waste discharged from the sanitary facilities of buildings occupied or used by people.

(7) “Side sewer” means any sewer line used or installed by any person to conduct waste from any property to a public sewer. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.040 Development proposals – Sewer connections required.

(1) All development proposals, including but not limited to multifamily and single-family development proposals, commercial site plans, subdivisions and short subdivisions within the City shall be served by public sewer facilities.

(2) Exemptions from Connecting to a Public Sewer System. The following are exempt from providing a sewer connection as follows. An exemption does not eliminate the requirement for the applicant to obtain approval from other agencies with jurisdiction.

(a) Nonresidential developments that are located more than 300 feet from public sewer may be approved without connection to the public sewer system provided the following criteria are met prior to the issuance of the underlying land use decision associated with the development type:

(i) The applicant has received approval for an on-site sewage system design from Public Health – Seattle & King County (PHSKC) in accordance with the codes of the King County Board of Health. Any approval and preliminary design for an on-site sewage system shall be submitted with the underlying land use application in accordance with the City’s application completeness requirements; and

(ii) Proposed on-site sewage systems shall be located on the same lot as the buildings they are designed to serve. An off-site sewage system may be considered if an easement is obtained and recorded against the subject properties and if the off-site system is designed in accordance with the determination of the King County Board of Health and PHSKC; and

(iii) The applicant shall provide the City a certificate of future connection from the sewer district that certifies that an irrevocable agreement has been entered into with the sewer district requiring that the property shall be connected to public sewers upon availability of such sewers and that the property owner shall pay all costs of connection to the sewer and report the septic tank abandonment to the health officer on a form obtained from the PHSKC to the City and the PHSKC. The certificate of future connection shall stipulate that the applicant and the applicant’s successors in interest agree to participate in and not protest the formation of a utility local improvement district or local improvement district or sewer district project that is designed to provide public sewer services to the property. This certificate shall be recorded in the real property records of King County and shall be a permanent condition on the property running with the land until such time as the costs for connection are fully paid to the sewer district. The applicant cannot receive any development permits for the site until said agreement is executed, unless otherwise determined by the sewer district and designated City official.

(b) A new single-family home or an expansion or a remodel of a single-family home on a preexisting lot is not required to connect to the public sewer system if the availability of such sewer connection is greater than 300 feet from the property and the applicant has obtained approval for an on-site sewage system design from PHSKC in accordance with the codes of the King County Board of Health. Any approval and preliminary design for an on-site sewage system shall be submitted with the building permit application in accordance with the City’s application completeness requirements.

(c) A new accessory dwelling unit (ADU) permitted pursuant to Chapter 18.25 CMC is allowed on lots with an approved on-site sewage system, provided approval from PHSKC demonstrates that the existing on-site sewage system has adequate capacity for the ADU. If the existing on-site sewage system is inadequate to accommodate the ADU, then the applicant should obtain approval for an upgraded on-site sewage system design from the PHSKC in accordance with the codes of the King County Board of Health. Any approval and preliminary design for an improved on-site sewage system, associated with an ADU, shall be submitted with the building permit application in accordance with the City’s application completeness requirements.

(d) The development proposal does not require sewer service for its operations in accordance with Chapter 15.05 CMC, International Codes Adoption, and as determined by the PHSKC or sewer district.

(e) Repair, Modification, or Replacement of an Existing On-Site Sewage System. If the on-site sewage system has failed and a new system conforming to the PHSKC cannot be designed and installed, then the applicant shall be required to connect to the public sewer system, unless otherwise determined by the sewer district.

(3) If the applicant fails to obtain approval from PHSKC for the use of an on-site sewage system, then the applicant shall coordinate with the sewer district to provide an appropriate connection or other method of sewer disposal as determined by the sewer district. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.045 Approved on-site sewage systems.

On-site sewage systems approved consistent with CMC 13.10.040 shall also meet the following:

(1) Any proposed on-site sewage system shall not impact any stormwater facility pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC; and

(2) No on-site sewage system shall be used that directly or indirectly discharges upon the surface of the ground or into any critical areas as defined in Chapter 18.65 CMC within the City; and

(3) All on-site sewage systems shall be maintained in accordance with state and local codes and at the sole expense of the owner and occupant. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.050 Development proposals – Water connection required.

All development proposals including but not limited to multifamily and single-family development proposals, commercial site plans, subdivisions and short subdivisions within the City shall be served by the appropriate water district unless service cannot be provided in a timely and reasonable manner as provided in RCW 43.20.260 and 70.116.060 and the local water district’s adopted policies and codes. Alternative water service should be permitted on an interim basis only, as follows:

(1) For development proposals on existing individual lots, the designated City official may authorize interim water service from an existing Group B water system or the development of an individual well given the following findings:

(a) The applicant has submitted a certificate of water availability from the appropriate Group A water system that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the designated City official that the requirement to receive water service from the appropriate Group A water system cannot be provided in a timely and reasonable manner in accordance with RCW 43.20.260 and 70.116.060(3)(b) and the local water district’s adopted policies and codes; and

(b) The applicant has provided a certificate of future connection from the appropriate Group A water system that certifies an irrevocable agreement has been entered into with the appropriate existing Group A water system providing that the property shall be connected to the water system upon availability of such water service and that the property owner shall pay all costs of connection. This certificate shall state the applicant and his grantees agree to participate in and not protest the formation of a utility local improvement district or local improvement district or water district project that is designed to provide public water services to the property. This certificate shall be recorded in the real property records of King County and shall be a permanent condition on the property running with the land until such time as the connection is made to the public water system. The applicant cannot receive any development permits for the site until said agreement is executed, unless otherwise determined by the appropriate Group A water system and designated City official; and

(c) The applicant has provided documentation that a Group B water system is approved for use by PHSKC or the Washington State Department of Health and the property is included in the recorded water use agreement.

(2) For subdivisions and short subdivisions, interim water service from a new or existing Group B water system may be approved as follows:

(a) The applicant has received approval from PHSKC or the Washington State Department of Health for the creation of a new Group B water system in accordance with the coordinated water system plan, or the property is included in the recorded water use agreement; and

(b) The designated City official makes the following findings:

(i) The applicant has provided a certificate of future connection from the appropriate Group A water system that certifies an irrevocable agreement has been entered into with the district providing that the property shall be connected to the Group A water system upon availability of such water service and that the property owner shall pay all costs of connection. This certificate shall state the applicant and his/her grantees agree to participate in and not protest the formation of a utility local improvement district or local improvement district or water district project that is designed to provide public water service to the property. This certificate shall be recorded in the real property records of King County and shall be a permanent condition on the property running with the land until such time as the costs for connection are fully paid to the district; and

(ii) A new Group B water system formed in the planning area of an existing water district as identified in a coordinated water system plan shall be operated through satellite system management; and

(iii) Any new Group B water system shall be built to the design standards of the appropriate Group A water system to which it will eventually be connected.

(3) Either existing wells or Group B water systems, or both, may serve the lots that the systems are ultimately designed to serve and shall be managed in compliance with applicable codes.

(4) Exemptions from Connecting to a Public Water System. The following are exempt from providing a certificate of water availability and connecting to a public water system. An exemption does not eliminate the requirement for the applicant to obtain approval from other agencies with jurisdiction.

(a) Any expansion and remodeling of an existing structure that does not involve the drilling of a new well; provided, that the expansion or remodeling project does not place a higher demand on the appropriate Group A water system. A change in use or a change in the service line that increases demand on the Group A water system will need to be approved through the issuance of a certificate of water availability, pursuant to all applicable State and local laws and regulations and the local water district’s adopted policies and codes.

(b) The development proposal does not require potable water service for its operations in accordance with Chapter 15.05 CMC, International Codes Adoption, and as determined by PHSKC.

(5) If the applicant fails to obtain approval from the PHSKC for the use of an alternative water service, then the applicant shall coordinate with the appropriate water district to obtain an appropriate connection. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.060 Certificates of water and sewer availability required.

The issuance of a certificate of water availability by a water district or sewer availability by a sewer district shall be submitted to the City at the time of the development proposal’s application to document that adequate water and sewer service is available.

(1) Water Availability. Certificates of water availability shall document that the water district’s service capability is adequate for the proposed development consistent with criteria or standards of the Washington State Department of Health, Washington State Department of Ecology, and PHSKC, or local water district as appropriate to the development. The City will not accept a certificate of water availability if information provided on the certificate is not complete or not consistent with this title.

(2) Sewer Availability. Certificates of sewer availability shall document that the sewer district’s service capability is adequate for the proposed development consistent with criteria or standards of the Washington State Department of Ecology and PHSKC, or local sewer district, as appropriate to the development. The City will not accept a certificate of sewer availability if information provided on the certificate is not complete or consistent with this title.

(a) The applicant is required to obtain certificates of sewer availability or other approval as determined by the sewer district to ensure that the applicant has met the requirements of this title.

(b) Where a development has obtained approval for an on-site sewage system or other wastewater treatment method, if service is not provided by a local sewer district, PHSKC approval shall be submitted with the development application. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.070 Connection to public water and sewer – Right-of-way permit required.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to make any opening for the installation of public water or sewer within a public right-of-way or other public place without complying with the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Right-of-Way Use Permit Requirement. A right-of-way use permit is required for any use of the City rights-of-way in accordance with Chapter 12.35 CMC.

(3) Financial Guarantee Required. The City may request a financial guarantee for any work within the City rights-of-way in accordance with Chapter 14.105 CMC.

(4) Restoration. Excavating for the purpose of connecting to public water or sewer within any public right-of-way or other public place shall be restored pursuant to Chapter 12.115 CMC. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.080 Use of the public sewers.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following into any public sewer or into any side sewer discharging into any public sewer: subsoil, foundation, footing, window-well, door-well, yard, or unroofed basement floor drains, unpolluted industrial process water, roof drains or downspouts from areas exposed to rainfall or other precipitation, or surface or underground water from any source.

(2) Use of the public sewer shall be in accordance with Chapter 13.25 CMC and other local and state regulations and requirements pertaining to surface and stormwater design and management. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


13.10.090 Protection from damage.

It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the public sewer system or water system. (Ord. 12-17 § 3)


Chapter 13.15 SEWER AND WATER COMPREHENSIVE PLANS

(Repealed by Ord. 12-17)


Chapter 13.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-09)


Chapter 13.25 SURFACE AND STORMWATER

Sections:

13.25.010    Purpose.

13.25.020    Surface and stormwater management regulations and guidelines adopted – Modifications.

13.25.025    Definitions.

13.25.030    Scope.

13.25.040    Drainage review – When required – Type.

13.25.045    Drainage design and low impact development – Required.

13.25.047    Low impact development – Optional.

13.25.050    Drainage review design deviations and design variances.

13.25.060    Repealed.

13.25.070    Engineering plans.

13.25.080    Construction timing and final approval.

13.25.090    Repealed.

13.25.100    Liability insurance and financial guarantee requirements.

13.25.110    Stormwater management facilities accepted by the City of Covington for maintenance.

13.25.120    Stormwater management facilities not accepted by the City of Covington for maintenance.

13.25.121    Connections or modifications to the existing stormwater system.

13.25.122    Illicit connections prohibited.

13.25.123    Illicit discharges prohibited – Exceptions.

13.25.124    Nonstormwater discharges prohibited unless conditions met.

13.25.125    Allowable discharges.

13.25.126    Activities prohibited at stormwater management facilities.

13.25.127    Stormwater pollution prevention.

13.25.130    Critical drainage and/or erosion hazards.

13.25.140    Administration.

13.25.150    Enforcement.

13.25.155    Criminal penalty.

13.25.156    Civil penalties.

13.25.160    Liberal construction.

13.25.170    Repealed.


13.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is:

(1) To promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the comprehensive management of surface water and stormwater, and erosion control, especially that which preserves and utilizes the many values of the City’s natural drainage system including open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education and urban separation;

(2) To reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation; 

(3) To prevent and mitigate habitat loss; 

(4) To enhance groundwater recharge; 

(5) To prevent water quality degradation through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review, construction inspection, enforcement, and maintenance;

(6) To protect the City’s surface and groundwater quality by providing minimum requirements for reducing and controlling the discharge of contaminants;

(7) To avoid or reduce water quality degradation, prohibit the discharge of contaminants into surface, storm, and groundwater, and outline preventive measures to restrict contaminants from entering such waters;

(8) To minimize or eliminate water quality degradation;

(9) To preserve and enhance the suitability of waters for recreation, fishing, and other beneficial uses;

(10) To preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality and biotic integrity of the water; 

(11) To comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit program; and

(12) To maintain economic viability while providing necessary environmental protection. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.010). Formerly 13.25.020)


13.25.020 Surface and stormwater management regulations and guidelines adopted – Modifications.

(1) The following State and local regulations and guidelines pertaining to surface and stormwater design and management, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted by reference, and shall be collectively referred to throughout this title as the “stormwater manuals”:

(a) Washington State Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (“Ecology Stormwater Manual”);

(b) Puget Sound Partnership Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound;

(c) Washington State Department of Transportation Hydraulics Manual;

(d) City of Covington Design and Construction Standards, adopted by Chapter 12.60 CMC; and

(e) The definitions, minimum requirements, adjustment, and variance criteria found in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, except that the erosivity waiver is not adopted.

(2) Where there are differences between the Ecology Stormwater Manual and Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, the most stringent criteria shall apply.

(3) The adopted regulations and guidelines may be modified for projects located within specific areas for which a basin plan has been prepared, and which has been approved by the City and the Washington State Department of Ecology.

(4) Any additional documents and/or manuals formally adopted by rule, which implement the policies promulgated in this chapter, are governed by the City of Covington Municipal Code. 

(5) Any inconsistencies will be controlled by the City of Covington Municipal Code. (Ord. 26-16 § 3; Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.025 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Terms applicable to this chapter are defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC, adopted stormwater manuals and the Design and Construction Standards. If there is conflict, the definitions in the Design and Construction Standards shall govern.

(1) Repealed by Ord. 06-17.

(2) “Director” for the purpose of this chapter shall mean the Director of the Public Works Department or his/her designee unless otherwise explicitly designated.

(3) “Discharge” means to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit or pour forth any matter, or cause or allow any matter to flow, run, or seep from land or be thrown, drained, released, dumped, spilled, emptied, emitted, or poured into any system regulated under this title.

(4) “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

(5) “Hyperchlorinated” means water that contains more than 10 milligrams per liter of chlorine.

(6) “Illicit connection” means any manmade conveyance that is connected to the stormwater system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the stormwater system. Illicit connections for discharges to the sanitary sewer system are defined by the sewer district.

(7) “Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the stormwater drainage system that causes or contributes to a violation of State water quality, sediment quality, or groundwater quality standards including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer connections, industrial process water, interior floor drains, fuel islands, car washing, and gray water systems. Discharges from fire-fighting activities are not included in this definition. Illicit discharges for the sanitary sewer system are defined by the sewer district.

(8) “Minimum requirements” means the minimum requirements for stormwater management described in the adopted stormwater manuals.

(9) “Nonstormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

(10) “NPDES Phase II Permit” means the Western Washington Phase II stormwater permit issued by the Washington State Department of Ecology in accordance with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System as promulgated under the Clean Water Act.

(11) “Pervious surface” means a native vegetated surface converted to a nonnative pervious surface, including, but not limited to, pasture land, grassland, cultivated land, lawn, landscaping or bare soil or any alteration of existing nonnative pervious surface that results in increased surface and stormwater runoff as defined in the adopted stormwater manuals.

(12) “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

(13) “Redevelopment project” means a project that proposes one or more of the following modifications to a site that is already substantially developed (35 percent or more existing impervious surface coverage):

(a) The creation or addition of impervious surfaces;

(b) The expansion of a building footprint or addition or replacement of a structure;

(c) Structural development including construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other structure;

(d) Replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity;

(e) Land development activity; or

(f) Improvements to a previously developed site, regardless of existing impervious surface coverage, that cost $100,000 or more.

(14) “Source control BMP” means a BMP intended to prevent contaminants from entering surface and stormwater or groundwater including the modification of processes to eliminate the production or use of contaminants. Source control BMPs may be either structural or nonstructural. Structural source control BMPs involve the construction of a physical structure on site or other type of physical modification to a site. An example of a structural source control BMP involves the modification or addition of managerial or behavioral practices. Nonstructural source control BMPs involve the modification of or addition of managerial or behavioral practices. An example of a nonstructural source control BMP is using less toxic alternatives to current products or sweeping parking lots.

(15) “Stormwater manuals” means the manuals, regulations, and standards adopted in CMC 13.25.020.

(16) “Stormwater pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a document that describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by the property owner to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a premises, and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.

(17) “Treatment BMP” means a BMP intended to remove contaminants once they are already contained in stormwater. Examples of treatment BMPs include but are not limited to oil/water separators, biofiltration swales, and wet settling facilities. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 26-16 § 4)


13.25.030 Scope.

Compliance with the standards in this chapter and the stormwater manuals does not necessarily mitigate all probable and significant environmental impacts to aquatic biota. Fishery resources and other living components of aquatic systems are affected by a complex set of factors. While employing a specific flow control standard may prevent stream channel erosion or instability, other factors affecting fish and other biotic resources (such as increases in stream flow velocities) are not directly addressed by the stormwater manuals. Thus, compliance with this manual should not be construed as mitigating all probable and significant stormwater impacts, and additional mitigation may be required to protect aquatic biota in streams and wetlands. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.005). Formerly 13.25.010)


13.25.040 Drainage review – When required – Type. 

(1) Drainage review is required when any proposed project is subject to a City of Covington building or fill and grade permit, development permit or approval and:

(a) Would result in 2,000 square feet or more of new, replaced, or new plus replaced impervious surface; or

(b) Would involve 7,000 square feet or more of land-disturbing activity; or

(c) Would construct or modify a drainage pipe or ditch that is 12 inches or more in size or depth or receives surface and stormwater runoff from a drainage pipe or ditch that is 12 inches or more in size or depth; or

(d) Contains or is adjacent to a floodplain, stream, lake, wetland or closed depression, or a critical area as defined in Chapter 18.65 CMC excluding a volcanic hazard area; or

(e) Is located within a critical drainage area; or

(f) Is a redevelopment project proposing $100,000 or more of improvements to a previously developed site.

(2) The drainage review for any proposed project will be scaled to the scope of the project’s size, type of development and potential for impacts to the regional surface water system to facilitate preparation and review of project applications. If drainage review for a proposed project is required under subsection (1) of this section, the Department of Community Development will determine which drainage reviews apply as specified in the stormwater manuals and Design and Construction Standards adopted in CMC Title 12.

(3) The drainage review for any proposed project within the downtown zone, subject to zoning regulations in Chapter 18.31 CMC, shall implement additional stormwater management requirements outlined in Chapter 18.31 CMC and the Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards in addition to the regulations in this chapter. If a conflict exists, the more restrictive provision controls.

(4) Fees for drainage plan review shall be subject to the fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 26-16 § 5; Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 44; Ord. 14-05 § 1; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.030))


13.25.045 Drainage design and low impact development – Required.

(1) All development proposals shall conduct a low impact development site analysis in accordance with the minimum requirements outlined in Chapter 7 of the Design and Construction Standards. The site analysis shall be submitted with a request for a preapplication meeting in accordance with Chapter 14.35 CMC. Site analysis findings shall be a component of the development project submittal requirements.

(2) Projects that exceed the thresholds provided in CMC 13.25.040 shall submit a drainage report together with the required calculations, plans, and details. The drainage report and supporting plan documents shall address the applicable minimum requirements and include the proposed BMPs to mitigate stormwater impacts.

(3) Projects that are below the threshold for submitting a drainage report but are above the threshold requiring stormwater review shall submit plans that document the proposed BMPs to mitigate stormwater impacts. The proposed BMPs shall address the applicable minimum requirements.

(4) Projects that propose $100,000 or more of improvements to a previously developed site are subject to the minimum requirements for redevelopment projects. The Director of Public Works will determine the minimum requirements applicable to the project that shall be addressed in the drainage report.

(5) Stormwater generated on site from all new impervious surfaces shall be managed through a combination of LID BMPs, in accordance with this chapter and the Design and Construction Standards, or other LID best management practices approved by the city through the design deviation process in CMC 13.25.050, unless site and soil conditions make LID infeasible as determined by the Public Works Director.

(6) If the Public Works Director determines that LID is not feasible due to site and soil conditions, the applicant shall evaluate LID alternatives provided in CMC 13.25.047.

(7) The following low impact development stormwater management BMPs are permitted outright and shall be designed in accordance with the adopted stormwater manuals:

(a) Bioretention Areas. All bioretention areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the adopted stormwater manual. Bioretention areas shall be used instead of a conventional stormwater vault, or wet pond or permanent pool ponds.

(b) Amending construction site soils in accordance with Chapter 14.60 CMC.

(c) Permeable Pavements Not Subject to Vehicular Use. Pervious surfacing for areas of a site that are typically impervious, not subject to vehicular use, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the adopted stormwater manual and the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(d) Disperse Stormwater into a Critical Area, Where Outright Permitted in Accordance with Chapter 18.65 CMC. Stormwater dispersion shall comply with the design standards set forth in the adopted stormwater manual and pursuant to City biologist approval. (Ord. 26-16 § 6)


13.25.047 Low impact development – Optional.

(1) Projects that propose the following low impact development BMPs shall be subject to the design deviation process in accordance with CMC 13.25.050. Any approved design deviation for the following shall be designed in accordance with the adopted stormwater manuals:

(a) Minimally invasive stormwater BMPs, such as, but not limited to, sediment traps, filter vaults and infiltration galleries, or other proprietary BMPs, as determined by the Director and based on a site analysis.

(b) Permeable pavements subject to vehicular use or within new or existing right-of-way.

(c) Vegetated roofs.

(d) Minimal excavation foundation systems.

(e) Roof rainwater collection systems that are within the minimum designation established by Washington State Department of Ecology.

(2) The City may require a three-year financial guarantee for performance for the use of optional low impact development stormwater facilities. The financial guarantee shall be posted in accordance with Chapter 14.105 CMC. This does not preclude the City from requiring the standard two-year maintenance financial guarantee in addition to the required performance financial guarantee.

(3) The City may require a maintenance program for the use of optional low impact development stormwater facilities that addresses the following:

(a) How all of the elements of the LID system will be maintained.

(b) The schedule for ongoing maintenance of all LID project facilities.

(c) The responsible party for ongoing maintenance of all LID project facilities. (Ord. 26-16 § 7)


13.25.050 Drainage review design deviations and design variances.

(1) Any applicant requesting to modify or deviate from any of the standards outlined in this chapter shall be subject to the design deviation and variance process as outlined in the Design and Construction Standards as a Type 2 decision pursuant to the process established by Chapter 12.60 CMC.

(a) Additional information shall be submitted if required by the Director. The permit applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with analyses, documentation and additional review time of the design deviation or variance, in accordance with the process established by the Director.

(b) Requests for a design deviation or variance from the minimum requirements may be considered for permits that have not yet expired; provided, that the design deviation or variance request is submitted a minimum of 90 calendar days prior to the permit expiration date. The 90-day requirement may be increased by the Director depending on the complexity of the design deviation or variance. The permit applicant is responsible for fully meeting the minimum requirements if the design deviation or variance is not approved prior to the permit expiration.

(c) Requests for a design deviation or variance from the minimum requirements will not be accepted within 90 days prior to the expiration date of the NPDES Phase II Permit.

(2) Any request for the following stormwater facilities shall be subject to a Type 3 variance land use decision in accordance with Chapter 18.125 CMC. The applicant shall evaluate LID alternatives provided in CMC 13.25.047 and identify that soil and site conditions cannot accommodate LID BMPs prior to submitting a Type 3 variance request.

(a) Stormwater detention vault;

(b) Wet pond; or

(c) Permanent pool ponds. (Ord. 26-16 § 8)


13.25.060 Critical drainage and/or erosion areas. 

Repealed by Ord. 13-09. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.060))


13.25.070 Engineering plans.

(1) All engineering plans shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development for review in accordance with the stormwater manuals. 

(2) All drainage plans shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development for review in accordance with the stormwater manuals and in accordance with the underlying permit application requirements. A drainage plan shall be submitted with any land use proposal that meets the thresholds in CMC 13.25.040.

(3) The expiration time frames are as specified by the City for the permit application for which the plans were prepared.

(4) All plans shall be processed in accordance with the review procedures specified by the City for the permit application for which the plans were prepared. (Ord. 26-16 § 9; Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 14-05 § 1; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.070))


13.25.080 Construction timing and final approval.

(1) No work related to permanent or temporary storm drainage control for a permitted development may proceed without the approval of the Director of Community Development. 

(2) Erosion and sediment control measures associated with both the interim and permanent drainage systems shall be:

(a) Constructed in accordance with the approved plan prior to any grading or land clearing other than that associated with an approved erosion and sediment control plan; and 

(b) Satisfactorily sequenced and maintained until all improvements, restoration, and landscaping associated with the permit and approvals for the project are completed and the potential for on-site erosion has passed.

(3) Prior to the construction of any improvements or buildings on the site, or to final recording of a plat or short plat, those portions of the drainage facilities necessary to accommodate the control of surface and stormwater runoff discharging from the site shall be constructed and in operation, but, after receipt of a written request, the Development Review Engineer may authorize recording to minimize impacts that may result from construction during inappropriate times of the year. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.090))


13.25.090 Liability insurance required. 

Repealed by Ord. 13-09. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.100))


13.25.100 Liability insurance and financial guarantee requirements. 

The Department of Community Development is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to maintain liability insurance and post financial guarantees pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 14.105 CMC. Financial guarantees for drainage improvements pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost of any:

(1) Monitoring required by approved plans and conditions;

(2) Department review of monitoring results and reports; and

(3) Corrective work on or off the project site which is necessary to provide drainage control consistent with approved plans and conditions, stabilize and restore disturbed areas and remove sources of any hazard associated with work which is in progress but is not completed. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 §§ 46, 82; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.020); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.105). Partially from former 14.110.020)


13.25.110 Stormwater management facilities accepted by the City of Covington for maintenance.

(1) The City is responsible for the maintenance, including performance and operation, of stormwater management facilities which have formally been accepted for maintenance by the Director.

(2) The City may assume maintenance of privately maintained stormwater management facilities only if the following conditions have been met: 

(a) All necessary easements or dedications entitling the City to properly maintain the drainage facility have been conveyed to the City;

(b) The Director has determined that the facility is in the dedicated public road right-of-way or that maintenance of the facility will contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(i) Flooding;

(ii) Downstream erosion;

(iii) Property damage due to improper function of the facility;

(iv) Safety hazard associated with the facility;

(v) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

(vi) Degradation to the general welfare of the community; and

(c) The Director has declared in writing acceptance of maintenance responsibility by the City or subsequent service provider. Copies of this document will be kept on file in the Department or subsequent service provider. 

(3) The Director may terminate the Department’s assumption of maintenance responsibilities in writing after determining that continued maintenance will not significantly contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

(a) Flooding;

(b) Downstream erosion;

(c) Property damage due to improper function of the facility;

(d) Safety hazard associated with the facility;

(e) Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

(f) Degradation to the general welfare of the community.

Copies of this document will be kept on file in the Department of Public Works.

(4) A stormwater management facility that does not meet the criteria of this section shall remain the responsibility of the applicant that is required to construct the facility and the persons holding title to the property for which the facility was required. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.115))


13.25.120 Stormwater management facilities not accepted by the City of Covington for maintenance. 

(1) The person or persons holding title to the property and the applicant required to construct a stormwater management facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Department and shall remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. This responsibility includes maintenance of a stormwater management facility which is: 

(a) Under a maintenance guarantee or defect guarantee;

(b) A private road conveyance system;

(c) Located within and serving only one single-family residential lot;

(d) Located within and serving a multifamily or commercial site unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(e) Located within or associated with an administrative or formal subdivision which handles runoff from an area of which less than two-thirds is designated for detached or townhouse dwelling units located on individual lots unless the facility is part of an approved shared facility plan;

(f) Previously terminated for assumption of maintenance responsibilities by the Department; 

(g) Not otherwise accepted by the City for maintenance.

(2) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or for any multifamily or commercial project required to have a flow control or water quality treatment facility, the applicant shall record a declaration of covenant as specified by the Director. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for notice to the persons holding title to the property of a City of Covington determination that maintenance and/or repairs are necessary to the facility and a reasonable time limit in which such work is to be completed.

(a) In the event that the titleholders do not effect such maintenance and/or repairs, the City may perform such work upon due notice. The titleholders are required to reimburse the City of Covington for any such work. The restrictions set forth in such covenant shall be included in any instrument of conveyance of the subject property and shall be recorded with the King County Records Division. 

(b) The City of Covington may enforce the restrictions set forth in the declaration of covenant as specified by the Director.

(3) Prior to the issuance of any of the permits and/or approvals for the project or the release of financial guarantees posted to guarantee satisfactory completion, the person or persons holding title to the subject property for which a stormwater management facility was required shall pay a fee established by the Director, or his or her designee, to reasonably compensate the City for costs relating to inspection of the facility to ensure that it has been constructed according to plan and applicable specifications and standards. Such fee shall be set forth in the current fee resolution.

(4) The duties specified in this section with regard to payment of inspection fees and reimbursement of maintenance costs shall be enforced against the person or persons holding title to the property for which the stormwater management facility was required. 

(5) Where not specifically defined in this section, the responsibility for performance, operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and conveyance systems, both natural and constructed, shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 20-07 § 47; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.120))


13.25.121 Connections or modifications to the existing stormwater system.

Connections to or modifications of the stormwater system, including but not limited to modifying existing stormwater discharge patterns or constructing or relocating facilities for the treatment, detention, or conveyance of stormwater, for the purpose of development, shall be allowed only if:

(1) Prior to submitting a development proposal for the use of an existing stormwater facility, the applicant shall submit a formal request to the Public Works Director. The request should include an overview of existing conditions and proposed modifications to the stormwater facility.

(2) All applicable requirements of this chapter, including upgrading the system to meet current stormwater design standards, including LID BMPs, to the maximum extent feasible, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be met or alternative standards have been approved by the city as substantially equal.

(3) The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any system upgrades, including feasibility and design assessment and construction. Any stormwater system modification shall be subject to the maintenance and bonding requirements in this chapter. (Ord. 26-16 § 10)


13.25.122 Illicit connections prohibited.

(1) Any connection identified by the Director that could convey anything not composed entirely of surface and stormwater directly to surface and stormwater or groundwater is considered an illicit connection. 

(2) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.

(3) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applying or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.123 Illicit discharges prohibited – Exceptions.

(1) The discharge of any contaminants to stormwater drainage systems, natural conveyance systems, surface water or groundwater is considered an illicit discharge and is prohibited. Sites are subject to inspection for illicit discharges in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this chapter. Contaminants include but are not limited to the following:

(a) Trash or debris;

(b) Construction materials;

(c) Petroleum products, including but not limited to: oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and heating oil;

(d) Antifreeze and other automotive products;

(e) Metals in either particulate or dissolved form;

(f) Flammable and explosive materials;

(g) Radioactive material;

(h) Batteries;

(i) Acids, alkalis, and bases;

(j) Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, and varnishes;

(k) Degreasers and solvents;

(l) Drain cleaners;

(m) Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;

(n) Steam cleaning wastes;

(o) Soaps, detergents, and ammonia;

(p) Swimming pool backwash;

(q) Chlorine, bromine and other disinfectants;

(r) Heated water;

(s) Domestic animal wastes;

(t) Sewage;

(u) Recreational vehicle waste;

(v) Animal carcasses;

(w) Food wastes;

(x) Bark and other fibrous materials;

(y) Collected lawn clippings, leaves, and branches;

(z) Silt, sediment, and gravel;

(aa) Dyes, except as stated in subsection (2)(a) of this section;

(bb) Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water;

(cc) Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.

(2) Exceptions.

(a) Dye testing is allowable but requires verbal notification to the City of Covington Public Works Department at least one day prior to the date of test. The Health Department is exempt from this requirement.

(b) A person does not violate subsection (1) of this section if that person has an NPDES Permit for the site and has properly designed, constructed, implemented and is maintaining BMPs, and is carrying out AKART as required by this chapter, but contaminants continue to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater, or that person can demonstrate that there are no additional contaminants being discharged from the site above the background conditions of the water entering the site. A person who, under this subsection, is not in violation of subsection (1) of this section is liable for any prohibited discharges through illicit connections, dumping, spills, improper maintenance of 



BMPs, or other discharges that allow contaminants to enter surface and stormwater or groundwater.

(c) Emergency response activities or other actions that must be undertaken immediately or within a time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter, in order to avoid an imminent threat to public health or safety, shall be exempt from this section. The Director of Public Works may specify actions that qualify for this exception in City procedures. A person undertaking emergency response activities shall take steps to ensure that the discharges resulting from such activities are minimized. In addition, this person shall evaluate BMPs and the site plan, where applicable, to restrict recurrence. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.124 Nonstormwater discharges prohibited unless conditions met.

Nonstormwater discharges into surface and stormwater or groundwater are prohibited, unless certain conditions are met as indicated. Nonstormwater discharges and conditions include, but are not limited to:

(1) Potable Water. Potable water discharges include water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Such discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the receiving stormwater facility.

(2) Lawn Watering and Irrigation Water. Runoff from lawn watering and irrigation shall be minimized.

(3) Swimming Pool Water. Swimming pool discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted and reoxygenized if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the receiving stormwater facility. Swimming pool cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer system.

(4) Wash Water/Dust Control Water. Such discharges include street and sidewalk wash water, external building wash down water that does not include detergents, and water used to control dust. Discharges shall be minimized, and street-sweeping shall be performed prior to street-washing at active construction sites. 

(5) Nonstormwater Discharges Covered by Another NPDES Permit. Such discharges are prohibited unless the permittee is in full compliance with all permit requirements, waiver, or order, and other applicable laws and regulations and that written approval by the Director has been granted for the discharge.

(6) Other Nonstormwater Discharges. All other nonstormwater discharges not specifically listed in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall comply with the requirements of the stormwater pollution prevention plan approved by the Director, which addresses control of construction site de-watering discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface water or groundwaters. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.125 Allowable discharges.

The following types of discharges shall not be considered prohibited discharges for the purpose of this chapter unless the Director of Public Works determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing significant contamination of surface and stormwater or groundwater:

(1) Discharges that contain stormwater only after said discharge has been routed through a treatment and/or flow control facility, where required in accordance with this title;

(2) Diverted stream flows;

(3) Rising groundwaters;

(4) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20);

(5) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 

(6) Foundation or footing drains;

(7) Air conditioning condensation;

(8) Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater;

(9) Springs;

(10) Water from crawl space pumps;

(11) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

(12) Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit;

(13) Discharges from emergency fire fighting activities in accordance with Section S2 of the NPDES Phase II permit;

(14) Discharges that are not illicit discharges. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.126 Activities prohibited at stormwater management facilities.

(1) Stormwater management facilities are required for compliance with stormwater management regulations in effect at the time of facility construction. In addition, stormwater management facilities may be publicly or privately owned. Activities that disturb such facilities may lead to violations of the NPDES permit or Federal or State water quality regulations, degradation to ground or surface waters, or other environmental or safety hazards. The following activities are prohibited within stormwater facilities and adjacent to such facilities where such activities may result in functional degradation of the facility:

(a) Damage to pipe, whether exposed or underground;

(b) Damage to ditches or swales;

(c) Damage to pond liners whether of natural or synthetic materials;

(d) Removal or damage of vegetation;

(e) Removal of or damage to any structural component, such as gates, fences, access lids, access grates, access steps, weirs, orifices, valves, debris barriers, or other components; and

(f) Operating a nonauthorized motor vehicle.

(2) Any activity that removes or disturbs existing stormwater facilities for the purposes of maintenance or replacement, which is authorized in writing by the City, is not in violation of subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.127 Stormwater pollution prevention. 

(1) Compliance with this chapter shall be achieved through the use of the best management practices described in the stormwater manuals. In applying stormwater pollution prevention measures, the Director will first require the implementation of source control BMPs. If these are not sufficient to prevent contaminants from entering surface and stormwater or groundwater, the Director may require implementation of treatment BMPs as set forth in AKART. The Public Works Department will provide, upon reasonable request, available technical assistance materials and information, and information on outside financial assistance options to persons required to comply with this chapter.

(2) In applying stormwater pollution prevention measures to prohibited discharges from normal residential activities, the Director will use public education and warnings as the primary method of gaining compliance with this chapter and will not use citations, notice and orders, assessment of civil penalties and fines, or other compliance actions unless the Director determines:

(a) The discharge from a normal residential activity, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing a significant contribution of contaminants to surface and stormwater or groundwater; or

(b) The discharge from a normal residential activity poses a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, endangers any property or adversely affects the safety and operation of City rights-of-way, utilities or other City-owned or maintained property.

(3) Persons implementing BMPs through another Federal, State, or local program will not be required to implement the BMPs prescribed in the stormwater manuals, unless the Director determines the alternative BMPs to be ineffective at reducing the discharge or contaminants. If the other program requires the development of a best management practices plan, the person shall make the plan available to the City upon request. Persons who qualify for exemptions include, but are not limited to, persons:

(a) Required to obtain a general or individual NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from the Washington State Department of Ecology;

(b) Implementing and maintaining, as scheduled, a King County Conservation District approved farm management plan;

(c) Who have received a permit under a Washington State Department of Ecology NPDES general or individual permit for commercial dairy operations;

(d) Implementing BMPs in compliance with City of Covington Development and Design Standards and Specifications: Animals, Home Occupation, Home Industry (Chapter 18.80 CMC);

(e) Implementing BMPs in compliance with the management program of the City’s municipal NPDES permit;

(f) Engaged in forest practices, with the exception of forest practices occurring on lands platted after January 1, 1960, or on lands being converted to another use, or when regulatory authority is otherwise provided to local government by RCW 76.09.240; or 

(g) Identified by the Director of Public Works as being exempt from this section. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.130 Critical drainage and/or erosion hazards. 

(1) Special Drainage Requirements. Development in areas where the Department has determined that the existing flooding, drainage and/or erosion conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of the surrounding community shall meet special drainage requirements set by the Director until such time as the community hazard is alleviated. Such conditions may include the limitation of the volume of discharge from the subject property to predevelopment levels, preservation of wetlands or other natural drainage features, or other controls necessary to protect against community hazard. 

(2) Variance. Where alternate facility designs or methods will produce a compensating or comparable result in the public interest and which will meet this section’s objectives for special drainage requirements of safety, function, appearance, environmental protection and maintainability, based upon sound engineering judgment, a variance to the special drainage requirements in this section may be proposed; provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to all of the remaining terms and conditions of this chapter. 

(3) Best Practicable Alternative. Where application of this section will deny all reasonable use of a property, and a facility or design that produces a compensating or comparable result cannot be obtained, then a best practicable alternative may be obtained, to be determined by the Director of Community Development according to the variance process defined by the Director.

(4) Remedy of Hazardous Situation. If the Director determines that a critical drainage and/or erosion hazard (a) poses a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare, (b) endangers any property, and/or (c) adversely affects the condition or capacity of other drainage facilities, the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the City, then the applicant/person to whom the permit was issued, the owner of the property within which the drainage facility is located, the applicant/person responsible for maintenance of the facility, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Director shall within the period specified therein repair or otherwise address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

(5) Immediate Action to Protect Public Health. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if the Director determines that conditions covered by this chapter exist requiring immediate action to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the Director is authorized to enter at all times in or upon any such property, public or private, for the purpose of inspecting and investigating such conditions. The Director may without prior notice order the immediate discontinuance of any activity leading to the conditions. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(6) Liability for Costs. The owner of the property and/or the person responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater facility shall be obligated for the payment of all costs incurred. If costs are incurred and a financial guarantee pursuant to this chapter or other City requirement has been posted, the Director will have the authority to collect against the financial guarantee to cover costs incurred. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.130). Formerly 13.25.060)


13.25.140 Administration. 

(1) Administration.

(a) The Director of Public Works is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules under the procedures specified in Chapter 2.75 CMC, for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Adopted administrative rules, including but not limited to the stormwater manuals, shall be made available to the public.

(b) The Director is authorized to develop procedures for applying adopted rules and regulations during the review of permit applications for the development of land.

(2) Inspections. The Director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, monitor for proper function of drainage facilities or whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are present or operating on a subject property or portion thereof, the Director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter; provided, that if such premises or portion thereof is occupied, the Director will first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and demand entry. 

(4) Access. Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to the Director to inspect, monitor or perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter. The Director will notify the responsible party in writing of failure to comply with this access requirement. Failing to obtain a response within seven days from the receipt of notification, the Director may order the work required completed or otherwise address the cause of improper access. The obligation for the payment of all costs that may be incurred or expended by the City in causing such work to be done will thereby be imposed on the person holding title to the subject property. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.140))


13.25.150 Enforcement. 

(1) The Director of Public Works is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this section and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(2) The Director will gain compliance with this chapter by requiring the implementation of BMPs and, when necessary, AKART. The Director will initially rely on education and informational assistance as much as possible to gain compliance with this chapter, unless the Director determines a violation is a result of a flagrant act that should be addressed through immediate penalties or poses a hazard as defined in this chapter.

(3) The Director, in consultation with other City Departments, will develop and implement additional enforcement procedures. These procedures shall indicate how the City will investigate and respond to reports or instances of noncompliance with this chapter and shall identify by title the official(s) responsible for implementing the enforcement procedures. 

(4) The Director is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections will be made as follows:

(a) The Director may observe best management practices or examine or sample surface and stormwater or groundwater as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Whenever an inspection of a property is made, the findings shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection findings shall be furnished to the owner or the person in charge of the property after the conclusion of the investigation and completion of the inspection findings.

(b) When the Director has made a determination under subsection (4)(a) of this section that any person is violating this chapter, the Director may require the violator to sample and analyze any discharge, surface and stormwater, groundwater, and/or sediment, in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures or requirements determined by the Director. If the violator is required to complete this sampling and analysis, a copy of the analysis shall be provided to the City of Covington Department of Public Works. 

(5) In addition to any other penalty or method of enforcement, the prosecuting attorney may bring actions for injunctive or other relief to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.180))


13.25.155 Criminal penalty.

Any willful act of commission or omission that causes, aids, abets, or continues a violation of the provisions of this chapter, for which a criminal penalty is not prescribed by State law, is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2))


13.25.156 Civil penalties. 

These enforcement provisions are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter. To achieve this, violators shall be required to take corrective action and comply with the requirements of this chapter, and may be required to pay a civil penalty for the redress of ecological, recreational, and economic values lost or damaged due to their unlawful action.

(1) The provisions in this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty, sanction or right of action provided by law.

(2) Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties assessed as follows:

(a) An amount reasonably determined by the Director to be equivalent to the economic benefit the violator derives from the violation as measured by the greater of the resulting increase in market value of the property or business value received by the violator, or savings of construction or retrofitting costs realized by the violator performing any act in violation of this chapter; and 

(b) An amount, not to exceed $25,000, that is reasonably based upon the nature and gravity of the violation and the cost to the City of enforcing this chapter against the violator. 

(3) Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in a violation, or continues a pre-existing violation, shall be considered to have committed the violation for the purposes of the civil penalty.

(4) Each violator is jointly and severally liable for a violation of this chapter. The Director may take enforcement action, in whole or in part, against any violator. The decisions whether to take enforcement action, what type of action to take, and which person to take action against are all entirely within the Director’s discretion. Factors to be used in taking such enforcement actions shall be:

(a) Awareness of the violation;

(b) Ability to correct the violation;

(c) Cooperation with government agencies;

(d) Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment.

(5) In the event more than one person is determined to have violated the provisions of this chapter, all applicable civil penalties may be imposed against each person, and recoverable damages, costs, and expenses may be allocated among the persons on any equitable basis. Factors that may be considered in determining an equitable allocation include: 

(a) Awareness of the violation;

(b) Ability to correct the violation;

(c) Ability to pay damages, costs, and expenses;

(d) Cooperation with government agencies;

(e) Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment.

(6) Penalties may be reduced based upon one or more of the following mitigating factors:

(a) The person responded to City attempts to contact the person and cooperated with efforts to correct the violation;

(b) The person showed due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation; or

(c) An unknown person was the primary cause of the violation. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person of the duty to correct the violation.

(7) All civil penalties recovered during the enforcement of this chapter under subsection (2) of this section shall be deposited into a fund of the Department taking the enforcement action and shall be used for the protection of surface and stormwater or groundwater as set forth in this chapter, through education or enhanced implementation.

(8) Triple Penalties. Penalties may be trebled for:

 (a) A repeat violation, which means an additional violation of a requirement of this chapter for which the responsible party has previously received a notice of violation and failed to correct the violation by the compliance date;

 (b) A violation resulting in physical harm to persons or to private or public property;

 (c) A knowing or deliberate violation; or

 (d) A violation resulting from gross negligence or reckless conduct. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.180))


13.25.160 Liberal construction. 

This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the City’s power to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provision shall be exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. This chapter is not enacted to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter. The primary obligation of compliance with this chapter is placed upon the person holding title to the property. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form a basis for liability for the City, Department, its officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the person holding title to the property to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter by the City, Department, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 13-09 § 10 (Exh. 2); Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.192))


13.25.170 Agency rules. 

Repealed by Ord. 13-09. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.04.196))


Chapter 13.30 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Sections:

13.30.010    Definitions.

13.30.020    Authority.

13.30.030    Purpose.

13.30.040    Applicability.

13.30.050    Policy.

13.30.060    Rate structure.

13.30.070    Rate adjustments and appeals.

13.30.080    Billing procedure.

13.30.090    Delinquencies and foreclosures.

13.30.100    Surface Water Management Fund.

13.30.110    Administrative procedures.


13.30.010 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Unless otherwise defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC, the terms defined in the Design and Construction Standards are applicable. If there is conflict, the definitions in the Design and Construction Standards shall govern.

(1) “Rate category” means the classification given to a parcel in the service area based upon the type of land use on the parcel and the percentage of impervious surface area contained on the parcel.

(2) “Surface and stormwater management services” means the services provided by the Public Works Department, including, but not limited to, basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations and facility design and construction. (Ord. 26-16 § 11)


13.30.020 Authority. 

(1) This chapter establishes the surface water management program of the City of Covington. 

(2) The program will be administered by the Department of Public Works.

(3) Whenever necessary to examine the property characteristics of a particular parcel for the purposes of implementing this chapter, the Director may enter any property or portion thereof at reasonable times in compliance with the following procedures:

(a) If the property or portion thereof is occupied, the Director shall present identification credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry;

(b) If the property or portion thereof is unoccupied, the Director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry; and

(c) Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person in control of any property or portion thereof, the Director, before entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the State of Washington.

(4) The Director is authorized to enforce this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(5) The program may provide services related to surface and stormwater management, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations, and facility design and construction. The program may contract for services with interested municipalities or special districts including but not limited to sewer and water districts, school districts, port districts or other governmental agencies. (Ord. 13-09 § 12; Ord. 10-07 § 3; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.020))


13.30.030 Purpose. 

It is the finding of the City that the surface water management program is necessary in order to promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing and operating a comprehensive approach to surface and stormwater problems which would reduce flooding, erosion and sedimentation, prevent and mitigate habitat loss, enhance groundwater recharge and prevent water quality degradation. This comprehensive approach includes the following elements: basin planning, land use regulation, construction of facilities, maintenance, public education, and provision of surface and stormwater management services. It is the finding of the City that the most cost effective and beneficial approach to surface and stormwater management is through preventative actions and protection of the natural drainage system. In approaching surface and stormwater problems the surface water management program shall give priority to methods, which provide protection or enhancement of the natural surface water drainage system, over means, which primarily involve construction of new drainage facilities or systems. The purpose of the rates and charges established herein is to provide a method for payment of all or any part of the cost and expense of surface and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for such services. These rates and charges are necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing uncontrolled surface and stormwater, erosion, and water pollution, to preserve and utilize the many values of the City’s natural drainage system including water quality, open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education, urban separation and drainage facilities, and to provide for the comprehensive management and administration of surface and stormwater. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.040))


13.30.040 Applicability. 

Developed parcels within the service area shall be billed each year for surface and stormwater management services pursuant to RCW 35.67.025. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.050))


13.30.050 Policy. 

(1) Many of the difficulties found in the management of surface and stormwater problems are contributed to by the general lack of public knowledge about the relationship between human actions and surface and stormwater management. In order to achieve a comprehensive approach to surface and stormwater management the City should provide general information to the public about land use and human activities which impact surface and stormwater management. School districts can provide significant benefits to the City regarding surface and stormwater management through educational programs and community activities related to protection and enhancement of the surface and stormwater management system. These programs and activities can provide students with an understanding of human activities and land use practices that create surface and stormwater problems and involve students by learning from first hand exposure, the difficulties of resolving surface and stormwater management problems after they occur.

(2) It is the finding of the City that developed parcels contribute to an increase in surface and stormwater runoff to the surface and stormwater management system. This increase in surface and stormwater runoff results in the need to establish rates and charges to finance the City’s activities in surface and stormwater management. Developed parcels shall be subject to the rates and charges of the surface water management program based on their contribution to increased runoff. The factors to be used to determine the degree of increased surface and stormwater runoff to the surface and stormwater management system from a particular parcel shall be the percentage of impervious surface coverage on the parcel and the total acreage of the parcel.

(3) It is the finding of the City of Covington that undeveloped parcels do not contribute as much as developed parcels to an increase in surface and stormwater runoff into the surface and stormwater management system. Undeveloped properties shall be exempt from the rates and charges of the surface water management program.

(4) It is the finding of the City that maintained drainage facilities mitigates the increased runoff contribution of developed parcels by providing on-site drainage control. Parcels served by retention/detention facilities which were required for development of the parcel or can be demonstrated as required by the property owner to provide detention/retention of surface and stormwater to the standards in Chapter 13.25 CMC shall receive a discount as provided in the rates and charges of the surface water management program, if the facility is maintained at the parcel owner’s expense to the standard established by the Department. That portion of the rates or charges allocated for payment of debt service on revenue or general obligation bonds issued to finance stormwater control facilities will not be discounted for retention/detention facilities.

(5) Open space properties provide a benefit to the surface and stormwater management system by the retention of property in an undeveloped state. Open space properties shall receive a discount from the rates and charges to encourage the retention of property as open space.

(6) The majority of the parcels in the service area are residential. The variance between residential parcels in impervious surface coverage is relatively minor and reflect only minor differences in increased runoff contributions. The administrative cost of calculating the service charge individually for each residential parcel and maintaining accurate information would be very high. A flat charge for residential parcels is less costly to administer than calculating a separate charge for each parcel and is equitable because of the similarities in impervious surface coverage between residential parcels. Therefore, residential parcels shall be charged a flat charge based upon an average amount of impervious surface.

(7) Very lightly developed nonresidential parcels which have an impervious surface coverage of 10 percent or less of the total parcel acreage are characterized by a very low intensity of development and generally encompass a large number of acres. A greater number of acres of undeveloped land associated with an impervious surface results in significantly less impact to the surface and stormwater management system. These parcels shall be charged a flat rate, which will encourage the retention of large areas of very lightly developed land. 

(8) Lightly to very heavily developed nonresidential parcels which have an impervious surface coverage of more than 10 percent have a substantial impact on the surface and stormwater management system. The impact of these parcels on the surface and stormwater management system increases with the size of the parcels. Therefore, lightly to very heavily developed properties shall be charged a rate determined by the percent of impervious surface coverage multiplied by the parcel acreage.

(9) The City roads and State highway programs provide substantial annual programs for the construction and maintenance of drainage facilities, and the roads systems and their associated drainage facilities serve as an integral part of the surface and stormwater management system. City and State road drainage systems unlike the drainage systems on other properties are continually being upgraded to increase both conveyance capacity and control. It is envisioned that the roads program will work cooperatively with the surface water management program to improve regional surface and stormwater management services, as new information is available from basin plans and other sources. City roads and State highways shall not be charged a rate in recognition of the benefit to the stormwater management services provided by the drainage facilities associated with the City roads and State highway programs; provided, that those drainage facilities are constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with this chapter.

(10) Comprehensive management of surface and stormwater runoff must include anticipation of future growth and development in the design and improvement of the surface and stormwater management system. Service charge revenue needs shall be based upon the present and future requirements of the surface and stormwater management system, and these needs shall be considered when determining the rates and charges of the program. 

(11) Basin plans are essential to establishing a comprehensive approach to a capital improvement program, maintenance of facilities and regulation of new developments. A plan should analyze the measures needed to control surface and stormwater runoff, which results from existing and anticipated development within the basin. A plan also should recommend the quantity and water quality runoff control measures required to further the purposes set forth in this chapter, and community goals. The institutional requirements and regulations, including but not limited to land use management, funding needs, and incentives for preserving the natural surface water drainage system should be identified in the plan. The proposed ordinances and regulations necessary to implement the plan shall be transmitted to the City Council simultaneously with the plan.

(12) Areas with development related surface and stormwater problems require comprehensive management of surface and stormwater.

(13) Additional surface and stormwater runoff problems may be caused by new land use development if not properly mitigated both through protection of natural systems and through constructed improvements. The stormwater manuals and this chapter have been adopted by the City of Covington to mitigate the impact of land use development. Further mitigation of these impacts is based on expertise, which continues to evolve as new information on our natural systems is obtained and new techniques are discovered. The surface water management program, through reconnaissance studies, basin plans, and other special studies, will continuously provide valuable information on the existing problems and areas of the natural drainage system that need special protection. The City has researched through its comprehensive plan development process methods to protect the natural drainage system through zoning, buffering and setbacks to alleviate existing problems. Setback and buffering measures allow natural preservation of wetlands and stream corridors to occur, alleviate erosion and water pollution and provide a safe environment for the small mammals and fish, which inhabit sensitive areas. Based upon the findings in this subsection, and as information and methods become available, the Director, as appropriate, will draft and submit to the Council regulations and development standards to allow protection of the surface and stormwater management system including natural drainage systems.

(14) The program will maintain long-term fiscal viability and fund solvency for all of its related funds. The program’s approach to financial reporting and disclosure will be comprehensive, open, and accessible.

(15) The program shall prepare an annual, multi-year capital improvement program which encompasses all of the program’s activities related to the acquisition, construction, replacement, or renovation of capital facilities or equipment. The program’s capital facilities will be planned and financed to ensure that the benefits of the facilities and the costs for them are balanced over time.

(16) Long-term debt will not be used to support operating expenses. (Ord. 13-09 § 13; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.060))


13.30.060 Rate structure. 

(1) The service charges shall be based on the relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from a given parcel to the surface and stormwater management system. The percentage of impervious surfaces on the parcel and the total parcel acreage will be used to indicate the relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from the parcel to the surface and stormwater management system. The relative contribution of increased surface and stormwater runoff from each parcel will determine that parcel’s share of the service charge revenue needs. The service charge revenue needs of the program are based upon all or any part, as determined by the City Council, of the cost of surface and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of bonds issued for that purpose.

(2) The Public Works Department shall determine the service charge for each parcel within the service area by the following methodology: residential and very lightly developed nonresidential parcels shall receive a flat rate service charge for the reasons set forth in CMC 13.30.050(7). Light to very heavily developed parcels shall be classified into the appropriate rate category by their percentage of impervious surface coverage. Land use codes or data collected from parcel investigations, or both, will be used to determine each parcel’s percentage of impervious surface coverage. After a parcel has been assigned to the appropriate rate category, the service charge for the parcel will be calculated by multiplying the total acreage of the parcel times the rate for that category.

(3) There are hereby imposed upon all developed properties in the service area annual service charges as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(4) The City Council will review the surface water management service charges annually to ensure the long-term fiscal viability of the program and to guarantee that debt covenants are met. The program will use equitable and efficient methods to determine service charges. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 48; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.070))


13.30.070 Rate adjustments and appeals. 

(1) Any person billed for service charges may file a “request for rate adjustment” with the Department of Public Works within three years of the date from which the bill was sent. However, filing of such a request does not extend the period for payment of the charge.

(2) Requests for rate adjustment may be granted or approved by the Director only when one of the following conditions exists:

(a) The parcel is owned and is the personal residence of a person or persons determined by the County Assessor as qualified for a low-income senior citizen property tax exemption authorized under RCW 84.36.381. Parcels qualifying under this subsection (2)(a) shall be exempt from all charges imposed in CMC 13.30.060(3);

(b) The acreage of the parcel charged is in error;

(c) The parcel is nonresidential and the actual impervious surface coverage of the parcel charged places it in a different rate category than the rate category assigned by the Department; 

(d) The parcel is nonresidential and the parcel meets the definition of open space in CMC 13.05.295. Parcels qualifying under this subsection (2)(d) will be charged only for the area of impervious surface and at the rate which the parcel is classified under using the total parcel acreage; 

(e) The parcel is served by one or more retention/detention facilities required pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC, or can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide detention/retention of surface and stormwater to the standards in Chapter 13.25 CMC, and is maintained at the expense of the parcel owner to the standards required by the Department. Nonresidential parcels except in the light category qualifying under this subsection (2)(e) shall be charged at the rate of one lower rate category than it is classified by its percentage of impervious surface coverage. Nonresidential parcels in the light rate category qualifying under this subsection (2)(e) shall be charged at the rate as outlined in the current fee resolution. Residential parcels and parcels in the very light category qualifying under this subsection (2)(e) shall be charged a rate as outlined in the current fee resolution;

(f) The parcel is owned or leased by a public school district, which provides activities which directly benefit the surface water management program. The activities may include: curriculum specific to the issues and problems of surface and stormwater management, and student activities in the community to expose students to the efforts required to restore, monitor or enhance the surface and stormwater management system. The amount of the rate adjustment shall be determined by the Director based upon the cost of the activities to the school district but not to exceed the value of the activity to the surface water management program. The Department will determination which activities qualify for the surface water management service charge reduction. Reductions in surface water management service charges will only be granted to school districts, which provide programs that have been evaluated by the Department. The rate adjustment for the school district activity may be applied to any parcel in the service area which is owned or operated by the school district; or 

(g) The service charge bill was otherwise not calculated in accordance with this chapter.

(3) The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the rate adjustment sought should be granted.

(4) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the Director’s decision. If an adjustment is granted which reduces the charge for the current year or two prior years, the applicant shall be refunded the amount overpaid in the current and two prior years. 

(5) If the Director finds that a service charge bill has been undercharged, then either an amended bill shall be issued which reflects the increase in the service charge or the undercharged amount will be added to the next year’s bill. This amended bill shall be due and payable under CMC 13.30.090. The Director may include in the bill the amount undercharged for two previous billing years in addition to the current bill.

(6) Decisions of the Director on requests for rate adjustments shall be final unless within 30 days of the date the decision was mailed the applicant submits in writing to the Director a notice of appeal setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for appeal and requesting a hearing before the City of Covington Hearing Examiner. The Examiner’s decision shall be a final decision pursuant to CMC 14.35.080. (Ord. 13-09 § 14; Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 49; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.080))


13.30.080 Billing procedure. 

(1) All property subject to charges of the program shall be billed based on the property characteristics existing on November 1st of the year prior to the billing year and at the rate as set forth in the current fee resolution. Billing year is the year that the bills are sent. The service charge shall be displayed and billed on the annual property tax statement for the parcel and shall be mailed to the name and address shown on the real property tax roll at the time annual property tax bills are prepared. Parcels which are exempt from property taxes and do not receive an annual property tax statement will receive a bill only for the service charge. If a payment less than the sum of the total property tax plus service charge or less than the sum of one-half of the property tax plus one-half of the service charge is received for a combined property tax and service charge, and the parcel owner has not otherwise specified, the Finance Director shall first apply the payment to the annual property tax of the parcel pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 84.56 RCW and then apply any remaining amount to the service charge.

(2) The total amount of the service charge shall be due and payable to the Finance Director on or before the 30th day of April and shall be delinquent after that date; however, if one-half of such service charge is paid on or before the said 30th day of April, the remainder shall be due and payable on or before the 31st day of October and shall be delinquent after that date.

(3) Parcel characteristics affecting the service charge, which are altered after November 1st of any year, shall not be a basis for calculation of the service charge until after December 31st of the following year. The service charge for the billing year during which incorporation or annexation occurs may:

(a) Be subject to a prorated formula included in an interlocal agreement between King County and the City of Covington; or 

(b) If the incorporation or annexation interlocal agreement does not address the surface water management charge, then incorporated or annexed properties will be subject to a surface water management charge of one-quarter of the annual service charge for each quarter of the billing year during which the property was in unincorporated King County for one or more days. For purposes of determining this modified service charge, the billing quarters will be for January 1st through March 31st; April 1st through June 30th; July 1st through September 30th; and October 1st through December 31st;

(c) The debt service portion of the service charge will not be prorated. (Ord. 20-07 § 50; Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.090))


13.30.090 Delinquencies and foreclosures. 

(1) Delinquent service charges shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum, or such rate as may hereafter be authorized by law, computed on a monthly basis from the date of delinquency until paid. Interest shall be calculated at the rate in effect at the time of payment of the charges regardless of when the charges were first delinquent.

(2) The City shall have a lien for delinquent service charges, including interest thereon, against any property subject to service charges. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments. Such lien shall be effective and shall be enforced and foreclosed in the same manner as the foreclosure of real property tax liens. The County may commence to foreclose a surface water management service charge lien after three years from the date surface water management charges become delinquent. Collections shall include costs of foreclosure in addition to service charges and interest. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.100))


13.30.100 Surface Water Management Fund. 

All service charges shall be deposited in the Surface Water Management Fund which fund is hereby created to be used only for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost and expense of providing surface water management services, or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bond issued for that purpose. Monies in the fund not needed for immediate expenditure shall be invested for the benefit of the Surface Water Management Fund but sufficient funds shall be transferred no later than the end of the fiscal year in which they were first appropriated for capital projects appropriated in the surface and stormwater management construction fund. The program’s funds balances and other financial resources will be invested conservatively to match strong security of principal with market rates of return. For investment purposes, the Finance Director is hereby designated the Fund Manager. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.110))


13.30.110 Administrative procedures. 

Pursuant to Chapter 2.75 CMC, the Director shall develop administrative procedures: 

(1) For the imposition and collection of service charges and/or for filing of liens and initiation of foreclosure on delinquent accounts and the collection of the debt service portion of the service charge. (Ord. 37-02 § 2 (9.08.120))


Chapter 13.35 WATER QUALITY

(Repealed by Ord. 13-09)


Chapter 13.37 CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS

(Repealed by Ord. 06-17)


Chapter 13.39 BASIN PLANS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-09)


Chapter 13.40 ENERGY MANAGEMENT

Sections:

13.40.010    Authority to adopt interim energy management code.

13.40.020    Adoption of administrative rules.

13.40.030    Adoption of certain other laws.

13.40.040    Reference to hearing bodies.


13.40.010 Authority to adopt interim energy management code.

Pursuant to RCW 19.27.031, 35.21.180, 35A.11.020, and 35A.21.160, the City adopts by reference Title 18, Energy Management, of the King County Code (Exhibit A*), as presently constituted or hereinafter amended, as the interim energy management plan. Exhibit A* is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 21-97 § 1)

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. 21-97, may be found on file in the City Clerk’s Office.


13.40.020 Adoption of administrative rules.

Hereby further adopted by reference are any and all implementing administrative rules now in effect regarding KCC Title 18, Energy Management, that have been adopted either pursuant to Chapter 2.98 KCC, Rules of County Agencies, or KCC Title 23, Enforcement (adopted by Chapter 1.30 CMC), or elsewhere in the King County Code except that, unless the context requires otherwise, any reference to the “County” or to “King County” shall refer to the City of Covington, and any reference to County staff shall refer to the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 10-07 § 5; Ord. 21-97 § 2)


13.40.030 Adoption of certain other laws.

To the extent that any provision of the King County Code, or any other law, rule or regulation referenced in the energy management code, is necessary or convenient to establish the validity, enforceability or interpretation of the energy management code, then such provision of the King County Code, or other law, rule or regulation, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 21-97 § 3)


13.40.040 Reference to hearing bodies.

To the extent that the energy management code refers to Planning Commissions, Board of Appeals, Hearing Examiner, or any other similar body, the City Council shall serve in all such roles, but retains the right to establish any one or more of such bodies, at any time and without regard to whether any quasi-judicial or other matter is then pending. (Ord. 21-97 § 4)


Chapter 13.45 LATECOMER’S AGREEMENTS

Sections:

13.45.010    Authority.

13.45.020    Application.

13.45.030    Preliminary approval of latecomer’s agreement.

13.45.040    Final agreement.

13.45.050    Implementation of agreement.

13.45.060    Segregation and relief of latecomer fees.

13.45.070    Repealed.


13.45.010 Authority.

The City Council is vested with the discretion to grant latecomer’s agreements that provide for the reimbursement of a pro rata portion of stormwater drainage system and street improvement expenditures by developers. Reimbursement agreements relating to water or sewer facilities constructed by developers may be available from the applicable water-sewer district in accordance with Chapter 57.22 RCW. (Ord. 12-17 § 4; Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.020 Application.

(1) Requirement. An owner or developer who desires a latecomer’s agreement shall make application in accordance with this section, at the same time that application for a development permit is made. Application shall be made upon forms prepared by the Public Works Department. The application shall contain the following information:

(a) Complete legal description of applicant’s property;

(b) Complete legal descriptions of the proposed benefited properties;

(c) Vicinity maps of applicant’s property, proposed benefited properties, and the location of the proposed improvements;

(d) Estimated cost data and inventory for the improvements;

(e) Proposed pro rata share of the cost of the improvements proposed to be done by the benefited properties, and which methodology for calculation of the cost distribution the applicant proposed pursuant to CMC 13.45.040(2).

The application shall be accompanied by payment of the nonrefundable application fee, and the deposit required by subsection (2) of this section, as set forth in the current fee resolution.

No application shall be processed by the City prior to the applicant participating in a preapplication meeting with the City staff at which meeting the possible boundaries of the benefited properties and fees will be discussed.

(2) Review of Application by City Engineer. Each application shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and recommendation. The direct cost of engineering review shall be borne by the applicant, who shall pay a deposit, as set forth in the current fee resolution, at the time the application is filed with the City. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of the actual costs of the review in excess of the amount deposited. Funds remaining after payment of actual costs, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant.

(3) Notice of Application. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the fee, the City Engineer shall determine the preliminary boundaries of the area affected by the latecomer’s agreement and shall draft the legal description thereof, along with a map of the preliminary boundaries. The City Clerk shall mail a notice to all owners of record of property within the affected boundaries, and to the developer or holder of the proposed latecomer agreement by both regular and certified mail. The notice shall include the estimated pro rata assessment, a copy of the preliminary boundaries map, and a description of the property owner’s rights to appeal the inclusion of a property in the latecomer’s agreement. This notice shall not be recorded with the County Auditor.

(4) Appeal of Inclusion in Latecomer Agreement. A property owner who wishes to appeal the issue of inclusion in the latecomer’s area may request an appeal hearing before the City Council. All appeals of inclusion to the latecomer agreement must be made to the City Clerk in writing within 20 days of the date of the notice provided in subsection (3) of this section, and must be accompanied by payment of an appeal fee. Upon receipt of an appeal under this section, and the required fee, the appeal shall proceed in accordance with the procedures contained in CMC 13.45.040(5). (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 51; Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.030 Preliminary approval of latecomer’s agreement.

Additional information shall be provided by the applicant at any time upon request of either the City Council or the City Public Works Department. Subject to an appeal of inclusion, the City Council may grant preliminary approval for a latecomer’s agreement, may conditionally deny approval, or may deny the application. The denial of an application for a latecomer’s agreement is final. Improvements constructed subsequent to preliminary approval and prior to the final Council action on a proposed agreement are done at the holder’s or developer’s own risk. The approval of a preliminary latecomer’s agreement does not create or vest any right to a final latecomer’s agreement. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.040 Final agreement.

(1) Contents. The City shall prepare a final proposed latecomer’s agreement which shall include a legal description and a map of the covered properties, the method(s) of assessment used, the dollar amount(s), and the term of the agreement.

(2) Method of Assessment. The cost of the improvements will be allocated among the property owners based upon their pro rata share of the costs determined by one or more of the following methods:

(a) Front foot method;

(b) Zone front foot method;

(c) Square footage method;

(d) Trip generation (traffic) method;

(e) Other equitable method;

(f) Any combination of the aforementioned methods.

(3) Notice. Upon approval of a final latecomer agreement by the City Council, a notice which includes the final assessment per unit charge, the legal description, a map of the covered property, the description of the property owner’s rights and options to participate in the latecomer agreement, and the right to appeal shall be mailed by the City Clerk to all owners of property within the latecomer boundary and to the developer or holder of the latecomer agreement by both regular and certified mail.

(4) Appeal. An appeal of the final latecomer’s agreement shall be submitted in writing to the Covington City Council, care of the City Clerk, within 20 days of the mailing date of the notice. An appeal must include a statement of claimed errors contained in the final latecomer’s agreement and must be accompanied by a $75.00 nonrefundable fee. Only the following written errors will be considered valid grounds for appeal:

(a) A challenge to the cost of the proposed assessments supported by reliable third party evidence;

(b) A challenge to the method of assessments based upon evidence which demonstrates that the proposed method is inequitable, and which supports and justifies an alternative method of assessment;

(c) A challenge to the existence of benefit must be supported by evidence which demonstrates de minimis or no future potential benefit to the appellant property.

(5) Hearing on Appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal and the required fee, the City Clerk shall transmit said appeal and the official file to the City Council. The City Council may delegate to a Hearing Examiner the responsibility to hold a public hearing, establish the record, and provide a written report containing a recommendation to the City Council. Following the public hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall issue a written recommendation which is mailed to all parties of record.

(6) Final Council Action. If no appeal is filed, the final latecomer’s agreement may be ratified by the developer, City Manager and City Clerk. If an appeal is filed and the Hearing Examiner generates recommendations, the City Council shall then take final action to grant, amend or deny the latecomer’s agreement. Upon final action approving a latecomer’s agreement by the City Council, it shall be ratified by the developer, City Manager and City Clerk. (Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.050 Implementation of agreement.

(1) Execution, Recording and Notice. Upon final action by the City Council, the City Clerk shall promptly mail the agreement to the developer or applicant. If the latecomer’s agreement is not signed, notarized and returned within 60 days of the date of approval by the City Council, the latecomer’s agreement shall be null and void. The City Council may extend the period for return of the executed agreement only upon proof of hardship or excusable neglect. The fully executed latecomer’s agreement shall be recorded in the official property records of King County, Washington, and shall be the sole notice requirement of the City.

(2) Title to Improvements and Assignment of Benefits. Before any fees shall be collected, the holder of the latecomer’s agreement shall transfer title to all of the improvements under the latecomer’s agreement to the City of Covington. The holder shall also assign to the City the benefit and right to the latecomer’s fee, which shall be operative in the event that fees collected cannot be forwarded to the holder in accordance with subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Payment of Fees to Holder. Within 30 days of receipt, the City shall forward all latecomer’s fees received, less the processing fee, to the current holder of the latecomer’s agreement to the current mailing address provided by said holder. Funds received by negotiable instrument will be deemed received 10 days after delivery to the City. Fees not forwarded due to the sole negligence of the City shall accrue interest until payment to the holder at the rate of eight percent on the unforwarded amount. No interest shall accrue on funds not forwarded due to circumstances not within the control of the City. The City shall make a good faith attempt to locate the holder of the latecomer’s agreement to deliver fees received. All fees which the City is unable to forward to the holder shall be placed and held in the special deposit fund for two years. The holder may make application for payment at any time within two years of payment of the fees. Failure of the holder to make such application within the time period shall vest all rights to the money in the City. The holder shall assign the benefit and right to the latecomer’s fee to the City at the time title is transferred to the City.

(4) Release of Assessment. Within 30 days of receipt, payments of latecomer’s fees shall be credited on the City’s assessment data base to the real property for which such fee is paid. A certificate of payment and release of assessment shall be recorded only when all properties affected by the latecomer’s agreement have paid the assessments in full.

(5) Term. The City Council shall set the term of a latecomer’s agreement for a period not to exceed 10 years. No extension will be granted beyond the original term established by the City Council. The latecomer’s agreement shall automatically expire at the end of the designated term.

(6) Processing Fees. A processing fee as set forth in the current fee resolution shall be deducted from any and all latecomer fees paid. After deduction of the fee, the balance shall be forwarded to the current holder of the latecomer’s agreement.

(7) Enforcement Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the latecomer’s agreement to notify the City of any connections to improvements which come within the terms of the latecomer’s agreement. The City will use its best efforts to collect latecomer’s fees but will not accrue any liability for failure to collect fees due. The City has no obligation to provide notice of the latecomer’s agreement to any party other than as provided in this chapter.

(8) Interest. No interest shall be added to fees collected pursuant to private developer held latecomer agreements.

(9) Future Services. Neither preliminary nor final approval of a latecomer’s agreement shall be construed to vest or grant the right to the extension or allocation of water to properties affected by the latecomer’s agreement. (Ord. 20-07 § 52; Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.060 Segregation and relief of latecomer fees.

(1) Segregation. Segregation of latecomer fees due to legal subdivision by plat, short plat, binding site plan, or other lawful method shall be granted; provided, that the party owing the fee establishes the segregation by legal description, number of units and provision of subdivision map. The City shall collect a processing fee for such segregation, as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) Relief – Similar Facilities. The City, through its designated agency, may relieve a parcel of a latecomer’s fee if the property has a benefit from either (but not both) of two similar facilities. Relief shall be based upon sound engineering and policy justifications as to which facility(ies) benefit and/or are utilized by the parcel. Absent such justifications, the City shall give the applicant the choice of facilities to utilize. The assessment due shall be that associated with the utilized facility.

(3) Relief – Future Subdivision. As a condition for approval of a latecomer’s agreement, the City may require that the assessment against a parcel be divided so that the partial initial assessment shall be based upon the typical single-family residence lot in that area. The remainder of the cost to said site will be due at such time as the parcel develops further either by subdivision or increased density.

(4) Partial Release – Subdivision. The City, through its designated agent, may consider relief from the latecomer assessment if the subdivision of a property severs the linkage between the resulting lot and the street frontage which contains the latecomer improvements. Relief may be granted so long as a proposed lot does not have direct access to, or front footage on the street right-of-way which contains latecomer improvements, and will not and cannot benefit from such improvements. (Ord. 20-07 § 53; Ord. 93-98 § 1)


13.45.070 Latecomer fees.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 93-98 § 1)

 


Title 14 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT

Chapters:

14.05    Repealed

14.10    Definitions

14.15    Comprehensive Plan

14.20    Recodified

14.25    Comprehensive Plan Amendments

14.27    Development Regulation and Zoning Map Amendments

14.30    Permit Decision Types

14.35    Permit Application Procedures

14.40    Public Notice

14.45    Appeal Procedures

14.50    Repealed

14.55    Recodified

14.60    Clearing and Grading Regulations

14.70    Repealed

14.75    Recodified

14.80    Repealed

14.85    Repealed

14.90    Repealed

14.92    Recodified

14.95    School Impact Fees

14.100    Repealed

14.105    Financial Guarantees

14.110    Recodified


Chapter 14.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 09-16)


Chapter 14.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

14.10.001    Generally.

14.10.005    Repealed.

14.10.010    Repealed.

14.10.020    Repealed.

14.10.030    Repealed.

14.10.040    Council.

14.10.045    Default.

14.10.050    Repealed.

14.10.055    Development permits.

14.10.060    Development regulations.

14.10.070    Repealed.

14.10.080    Docket.

14.10.085    Repealed.

14.10.090    Examiner.

14.10.095    Repealed.

14.10.100    Functional plans.

14.10.102    Guarantor.

14.10.108    Permit fee.

14.10.110    Reclassification.

14.10.120    Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment.

14.10.130    Subarea plan.


14.10.001 Generally.

Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable to this title. The definitions contained in this chapter apply throughout this title, unless, from the context, another meaning is clearly intended. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A))


14.10.005 Applicant.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.040). Formerly 14.55.010)


14.10.010 Area zoning. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.030))


14.10.020 Benchmarks. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.035))


14.10.030 Comprehensive plan.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.070))


14.10.040 Council.

“Council” means the City of Covington City Council. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.090))


14.10.045 Default.

“Default” means the failure to:

(1) Comply with financial guarantee conditions;

(2) Complete, in the specified time, the required improvements in accordance with this code and with approved project plans and conditions. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.040). Formerly 14.55.020)


14.10.050 Department.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.100))


14.10.055 Development permits.

“Development permits” means all permits, reviews, and approvals administered by the Department including, but not limited to, right-of-way use permits, grading permits, building permits, fire code permits, subdivisions, short subdivisions, binding site plans, zoning permits, conditional use permits, boundary line adjustments, and environmental review and shoreline permits. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 3; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.010). Formerly 14.55.040)


14.10.060 Development regulations.

“Development regulations” means the controls placed on development or land use activities by the City including, but not limited to, zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, shoreline master programs, official controls, and subdivision ordinances together with any amendments thereto. A development regulation does not include a decision to approve a project permit application, as defined in RCW 36.70B.020, even though the decision may be expressed in an ordinance by the City. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.105))


14.10.070 Director. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.106))


14.10.080 Docket. 

“Docket” (noun) means the list of suggested changes to the comprehensive plan or development regulations maintained by the Department. “Docket” (verb) means to record with the Department a suggested change to the comprehensive plan or development regulations. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.107))


14.10.085 Environmental review.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.028). Formerly 14.55.060)


14.10.090 Examiner.

“Examiner” means the Hearing Examiner as established by Chapter 2.25 CMC, as amended. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 01-09 § 10; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.120))


14.10.095 Financial guarantee.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.015). Formerly 14.55.070)


14.10.100 Functional plans.

“Functional plans” are detailed plans for facilities and services and action plans for other governmental activities. Functional plans should be consistent with the comprehensive plan, define service levels, provide standards, specify financing methods which are adequate, stable and equitable, be the basis for scheduling facilities and services through capital improvement programs and plan for facility maintenance. Functional plans are not adopted to be part of the capital facilities plan element of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.132))


14.10.102 Guarantor.

“Guarantor” means a bank or other acceptable entity which issues the financial guarantee. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.020). Formerly 14.55.080)


14.10.108 Permit fee.

“Permit fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of application for or approval of development to cover the costs of processing applications, inspecting and reviewing plans or other information required to be submitted for purpose of evaluation of an application, or inspecting or monitoring development activity. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.040). Formerly 14.55.100)


14.10.110 Reclassification.

“Reclassification” means a change in the zoning classification by procedures initiated by an individual or a group of individuals who, during the intervals between area zoning map adoptions, wishes to petition for a change in the zoning classification which currently applies to their individual properties. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.160))


14.10.120 Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment.

“Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment” means an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map which includes one property or a small group of specific properties. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.170))


14.10.130 Subarea plan. 

“Subarea plan” means a detailed local land use plan, which implements and is consistent with and may be incorporated in whole or part into the comprehensive plan, containing specific policies, guidelines, and criteria adopted by the City Council to guide development and capital improvement decisions within specific subareas of the City. The subareas of the City will consist of distinct areas having unified interests or similar characteristics within the City. Subarea plans may include potential annexation area plans, neighborhood plans, and plans addressing multiple areas having common interests. (Ord. 09-16 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.08.060))


Chapter 14.15 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

14.15.010    Comprehensive plan adopted.

14.15.020    Repealed.

14.15.030    Repealed.

14.15.040    Repealed.

14.15.050    Repealed.

14.15.060    Repealed.

14.15.070    Repealed.

14.15.080    Repealed.

14.15.090    Repealed.

14.15.100    Repealed.


14.15.010 Comprehensive plan adopted.

Adopted pursuant to the State Constitution and the Washington State Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW, the City of Covington comprehensive plan shall be the principal planning document for the orderly physical development of the City and shall be used to guide subarea plans, functional plans, provision of public facilities and services, review of annexations, development regulations and land development decisions. A copy of the currently adopted City of Covington Comprehensive Plan is on file with the City Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 09-16 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.010))


14.15.020 Relationship of comprehensive plan to previously adopted plans, policies, and land use regulations.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.015))


14.15.030 Zoning, potential zoning, property-specific development standards, and special district overlays.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.050))


14.15.040 Park development policies.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.090))


14.15.050 Shoreline management master program.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.200))


14.15.060 Transportation plan. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.430))


14.15.070 Nonmotorized transportation plan. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.433))


14.15.080 Kent School District capital facilities plan. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.467))


14.15.090 Flood hazard reduction plan policies.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.480))


14.15.100 Potential annexation area process.

Repealed by Ord. 09-16. (Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.12.485))


Chapter 14.20 BASIN PLANS

(Recodified as Chapter 13.39 CMC by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.25 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS

Sections:

14.25.010    Purpose.

14.25.020    Applicability.

14.25.030    Annual amendment schedule.

14.25.040    Application and docketing procedures.

14.25.050    Preliminary review – Determination of final docket.

14.25.060    Selection and decision criteria.

14.25.070    Staff report – SEPA review – Public comment – Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce.

14.25.080    Final review and action.


14.25.010 Purpose.

The City of Covington comprehensive plan is a document which guides the nature and intensity of development in the City. An amendment to the comprehensive plan is a mechanism by which the City may periodically modify its land use, development or growth policies. This chapter establishes the procedures and criteria for amending the comprehensive plan, including provision for early and continuous opportunities for public participation in the amendment process. Comprehensive plan amendments are legislative decisions made by the City Council, and include public notice and public hearing requirements. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.020 Applicability.

(1) The procedures and criteria of this chapter shall apply to:

(a) Proposed changes to the text of the comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to, goals, policies, objectives, principles, and standards;

(b) Proposed area-wide changes to the comprehensive plan future land use map;

(c) Proposed site-specific changes to the comprehensive plan future land use map;

(d) Proposed changes to development regulations and the official zoning map that are necessitated by a proposed comprehensive plan.

(2) Proposed changes to development regulations and the official zoning map that are not necessitated by a proposed comprehensive plan amendment are subject to the amendment process set forth in Chapter 14.27 CMC. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.030 Annual amendment schedule.

(1) Annual Amendment Cycle – Concurrent Consideration. The comprehensive plan may be amended no more than once per year pursuant to the State of Washington Growth Management Act. Any contemplated amendments shall be considered concurrently so the cumulative effect of the various proposals can be ascertained. Proposed amendments may be considered at separate meetings or hearings, so long as the final action taken considers the cumulative effect of all the proposed amendments to the plan.

(2) Exceptions to Annual Cycle. Amendments may be considered more frequently than once per year in any of the following circumstances:

(a) Resolution of an emergency condition or situation. Council shall confirm the Director’s finding that such an emergency exists.

(b) Resolution of a decision by an administrative agency or court of competent jurisdiction.

(c) For any of the reasons specified in RCW 36.70A.130(2), as hereinafter amended.

(3) General Timeline. The annual amendment cycle shall consist of an application period of at least 60 days, a preliminary review period, and a final review period resulting in action by the City Council. The City shall establish a specific timeline and make that available to the public. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.040 Application and docketing procedures.

(1) Who May Apply.

(a) Any person may apply for an area-wide map amendment or a text amendment to the comprehensive plan.

(b) A property owner or authorized agent of a property owner may apply for a site-specific amendment to the comprehensive plan.

(c) Any person or group may informally suggest a comprehensive plan amendment to the City Council and request their sponsorship for area-wide amendments. Agreement to sponsor such an amendment is at the discretion of the City Council.

(d) Amendment proposals submitted through the formal application process by private individuals or groups shall be deemed “privately initiated.” Privately initiated proposals shall not include those sponsored by the City Council.

(e) The City Council, Planning Commission, or Community Development Director may initiate consideration of an amendment to the comprehensive plan and submit it during the designated time period for applications. Such proposals shall be deemed “City-initiated.”

(2) Application. Each year the City shall designate a period of no less than 60 days during which it will officially accept applications for proposed comprehensive plan amendments. At least 30 days prior to that period, the City will make information on the comprehensive plan amendment process available to the public through a variety of media. The City shall establish additional application procedures and make those available to the public.

(3) Three-Year Limitation. A specific property, policy topic or land use issue shall not be the subject of a comprehensive plan amendment proposal initiated by the public and reviewed by the City more frequently than once every three years, measured by three annual amendment cycles. When new property is added to a previously submitted, substantially similar amendment proposal due to geographic expansion by the City, the following shall apply:

(a) If the original proposal was not selected for the final docket, the new proposal is not subject to the three-year limitation.

(b) If the original proposal was selected for the final docket, but was not adopted pursuant to final City Council review and action, the new proposal is subject to the three-year limitation.

(4) Fees. Applications submitted by private individuals or groups are subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. Proposals for which an applicant pays a fee that are rejected in the initial review shall be subject to refund as set forth in the current fee resolution. Applicants may also be responsible for fees related to environmental analysis and review (SEPA process) if these are required by the nature of the amendment. No fees shall apply to City-initiated amendment proposals.

(5) Docketing. The City shall compile and maintain a list, known as a “docket,” of all City-initiated and privately initiated proposed comprehensive plan amendments. The list shall be organized as to amendment type and include a description of the amendment in nontechnical terms, as well as the name of the applicant and date of submission to the City. The preliminary docket shall be made available to the public for review and comment for at least 15 days prior to consideration by the Planning Commission. Written comments that are submitted by the end of the comment period shall be added to the preliminary docket. The final docket will be determined as described in CMC 14.25.050. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.050 Preliminary review – Determination of final docket.

(1) Staff Evaluation. The Community Development Director shall conduct a brief initial evaluation of all privately initiated proposed comprehensive plan amendments to ascertain whether the proposals meet the preliminary review criteria in CMC 14.25.060 and to assess the extent of review that would be required under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). The Director shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission as to which proposed amendments should be included in the final docket, along with any City-initiated proposed amendments.

(2) Joint Workshop. During each annual amendment cycle, the City Council and Planning Commission may, at the City Council’s discretion, hold a noticed joint workshop to serve as an informational meeting between the two governmental bodies.

(3) Planning Commission Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on selection of proposed amendments for the final docket.

(4) City Council Decision. The City Council shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommended final docket. Council may adopt the proposed final docket without a public hearing; however, in the event that a majority of the Council decides to add or subtract amendments, it shall first hold a public hearing. No additional amendments may be considered after Council adoption of the docket for that year, except as provided in CMC 14.25.030(2). (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.060 Selection and decision criteria.

Considering that the comprehensive plan was developed after significant study and public participation, the principles, goals, objectives, and policies contained therein shall be granted substantial weight when considering any proposed amendment. Therefore, the burden of proof for justifying a proposed amendment rests with the applicant. The City Council’s approval, modification, deferral, or denial of an amendment proposal shall be based on the following criteria:

(1) Proposed amendments that meet one of the following criteria may be included in the final docket:

(a) If the proposed amendment is site specific, the subject property is suitable for development in general conformance with adjacent land use and the surrounding development pattern, and with zoning standards under the potential zoning classifications.

(b) State law requires or a decision of a court or administrative agency has directed such a change.

(c) There exists an obvious technical error in the pertinent comprehensive plan provision.

(2) Proposed amendments that do not meet one of the criteria in subsection (1) of this section shall meet all of the following criteria:

(a) The amendment represents a matter appropriately addressed through the comprehensive plan, and the proposed amendment demonstrates a public benefit and enhances the public health, safety and welfare of the City.

(b) The amendment is in compliance with the three-year limitation rules as specified in CMC 14.25.040(3).

(c) The amendment does not raise policy or land use issues that are more appropriately addressed by an ongoing work program approved by the City Council.

(d) The proposed amendment addresses significantly changed conditions since the last time the pertinent comprehensive plan map or text was amended. “Significantly changed conditions” are those resulting from unanticipated consequences of an adopted policy, or changed conditions on the subject property or its surrounding area, or changes related to the pertinent comprehensive plan map or text, where such change has implications of a magnitude that need to be addressed for the comprehensive plan to function as an integrated whole.

(e) The proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and other goals and policies of the City, the Countywide planning policies, the Growth Management Act, other State or Federal law, and the Washington Administrative Code and other applicable law. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.070 Staff report – SEPA review – Public comment – Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce.

Following the City Council’s adoption of the comprehensive plan amendment final docket, the Community Development Department shall complete the following:

(1) Staff Report. The Director shall prepare a staff report on the proposed amendments to be presented to the Planning Commission for final review and recommendation. The staff report should contain:

(a) Findings of fact;

(b) An evaluation as to how the amendments meet the prescribed criteria;

(c) A summary of public comment on the amendments;

(d) A description of any alternatives or proposed changes to the amendments; and

(e) Any development regulations or zoning map amendments prepared in order to implement the amendments.

(2) SEPA Review. The Director or SEPA official shall review the proposed amendments and determine if there is a need for a SEPA checklist and SEPA determination. Applicants will be notified if a SEPA review is required and will be responsible for any fees associated with SEPA analysis.

(3) Public Participation. The City shall provide notice and opportunity for public comment, as deemed appropriate given the nature of the proposed amendments and consistent with RCW 36.70A.140, as hereinafter amended.

(4) Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce. The Director shall transmit the proposed amendments to the Washington State Department of Commerce at least 60 days prior to the expected date of final City Council action on the proposed amendment as consistent with Chapter 36.70A RCW, as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


14.25.080 Final review and action.

(1) Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendation. All proposed amendments on the final docket shall first be considered by the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the City Council after holding at least one open record public hearing.

(2) City Council Action. The City Council shall consider the comprehensive plan amendments as recommended by the Planning Commission using the criteria established in CMC 14.25.060. If there are substantial changes to the proposed amendment after the public hearing by the Planning Commission, a second public hearing before City Council is required. If there are not substantial changes, City Council may choose whether or not to hold another public hearing. The City shall transmit a copy of the comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments to Washington State Department of Commerce within 10 days of the City Council’s final adoption. (Ord. 24-08 § 2 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 14.27 DEVELOPMENT REGULATION AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

Sections:

14.27.010    Purpose.

14.27.020    Applicability.

14.27.030    Application procedures.

14.27.040    Decision criteria.

14.27.050    Staff report – SEPA review – Public participation – Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce.

14.27.060    Planning Commission review.

14.27.070    City Council action.

14.27.080    Minor corrections exempt.


14.27.010 Purpose.

This chapter establishes the procedures and criteria for amending the text and tables of the City’s development regulations and the City’s official zoning map. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.020 Applicability.

The procedures and criteria of this chapter shall apply to:

(1) Amendments to the text and tables of the City’s development regulations, as set forth in the Covington Municipal Code, which are not in conjunction with a comprehensive plan amendment.

(2) Amendments to the City’s official zoning map that are not in conjunction with a comprehensive plan amendment. Rezones do not include amendments to designations on the City’s future land use map, which are comprehensive plan amendments subject to the provisions of Chapter 14.25 CMC. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.030 Application procedures.

(1) Who May Initiate.

(a) Privately Initiated. Any person or group may request a development regulation amendment or area-wide zoning map amendment. Only a property owner or authorized agency of a property owner may request a site-specific zoning map amendment. Such requests are subject to the formal application process set forth in this section.

(b) City-Initiated. The City Council, and any City commission, department, or staff member, may initiate a development regulation, or area-wide or site-specific zoning map amendment. Such proposed amendments are not subject to the formal application process or fees set forth in this section.

(c) Any person or group may informally suggest a development regulation or zoning map amendment to the City Council and request their sponsorship for the amendment. Agreement to sponsor such an amendment is at the discretion of the City Council.

(2) Application. Applicants may propose amendments by submitting such requests on forms prescribed by the City. The City shall establish specific application procedures and make those available to the public. No amendment proposal shall be processed until the Community Development Director determines that the information necessary to review and decide upon the amendment is complete.

(3) Three-Year Limitation. A specific property, policy topic or land use issue shall not be the subject of a privately initiated amendment proposal and reviewed by the City more frequently than once every three years.

(4) Fees. Applications submitted by private individuals or groups are subject to application and processing fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. Applicants may also be responsible for fees related to environmental analysis and review (SEPA process) if these are required by the nature of the amendment. No fees shall apply to City-initiated amendment proposals. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.040 Decision criteria.

The City Council’s approval, modification, deferral, or denial of an amendment proposal shall be based on the following criteria:

(1) The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan;

(2) The proposed amendment is consistent with the scope and purpose of the City’s zoning ordinances and the description and purpose of the zone classification applied for;

(3) Circumstances have changed substantially since the establishment of the current zoning map or district to warrant the proposed amendment;

(4) The proposed zoning is consistent and compatible with the uses and zoning of surrounding property;

(5) The property that is the subject of the amendment is suited for the uses allowed in the proposed zoning classification;

(6) The amendment is in compliance with the three-year limitation rule as specified in CMC 14.27.030(3); and

(7) Adequate public services could be made available to serve the full range of proposed uses in that zone. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.050 Staff report – SEPA review – Public participation – Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce.

The Community Development Director shall review all applications to determine whether the information necessary to review and decide upon an amendment application is complete. The Director may reject any complete application that is clearly inconsistent with the City’s comprehensive plan, and will notify the applicant of the decision in writing. For those privately initiated applications that are complete and appear to be consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan, and for any City-initiated amendment proposals, the Director shall complete the following:

(1) Staff Report. The Director shall prepare a staff report on the proposed amendment to be presented to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The staff report should contain:

(a) Findings of fact;

(b) An evaluation as to how the amendment meets the prescribed criteria;

(c) A summary of public comment on the amendment; and

(d) A description of any alternatives or proposed changes to the amendment;

(2) SEPA Review. The Director or SEPA official shall conduct a SEPA review and notify applicants as to the need for a SEPA checklist and environmental impact statement. Applicants will be responsible for any fees associated with SEPA analysis;

(3) Public Participation. The City shall provide notice and opportunity for public comment, as deemed appropriate given the nature of the proposed amendment; and

(4) Transmission to Washington State Department of Commerce. The Director shall transmit the proposed amendment to the Washington State Department of Commerce at least 60 days prior to the expected date of final City Council action on the proposed amendment. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.060 Planning Commission review.

The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on proposed amendments and make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether each proposed amendment meets the criteria in CMC 14.27.040. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.070 City Council action.

The City Council shall consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation, and may hold an additional hearing on the amendments at its discretion. The City Council’s approval, modification, deferral, or denial of an amendment proposal shall be based on the criteria set forth in CMC 14.27.040. The City shall transmit a copy of the development regulation or zoning map amendments to Washington State Department of Commerce within 10 days of the City Council’s final adoption. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


14.27.080 Minor corrections exempt.

An amendment that does not result in any substantive change to the content or meaning of a development regulation, such as a correction to punctuation or numbering or a typographical or technical error, shall be exempt from the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter. In such cases, the Director may make a recommendation directly to the City Council. (Ord. 25-08 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 14.30 PERMIT DECISION TYPES

Sections:

14.30.010    Purpose.

14.30.020    Classification of permit decision types.

14.30.030    Determination of proper decision type.

14.30.040    Decision types.

14.30.050    Requirements by decision type.

14.30.060    Legislative actions.

14.30.070    Administrative interpretations.


14.30.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of Chapters 14.30, 14.35, 14.40 and 14.45 CMC is to establish standard procedures for land use permit applications, public notice, hearings and appeals in the City. These procedures are designed to promote timely and informed public participation in discretionary land use decisions; eliminate redundancy in the application, permit review, hearing and appeal processes; provide for uniformity in public notice procedures; minimize delay and expense; and result in development approvals that implement the policies of the comprehensive plan. These procedures also provide for an integrated and consolidated land use permit and environmental review process. (Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.020 Classification of permit decision types.

Decisions on permit applications shall be classified as either Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, based on the amount of discretion associated with each decision. Procedures for the four different types are distinguished according to who makes the decision, whether public notice is required, whether a public hearing is required before a decision is made, and whether an administrative appeal process is provided. The types of decisions are set forth in CMC 14.30.040 and the requirements for each type are set forth in CMC 14.30.050. (Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.030 Determination of proper decision type.

(1) Determination by Director. The Director shall determine the proper procedure for all permit applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate type of process, the Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher type number.

(2) Optional Consolidated Permit Processing. An application that involves two or more procedures may be processed collectively under the highest numbered procedure required for any part of the application or processed individually under each of the procedures identified by the code. The applicant may determine whether the application shall be processed collectively or individually. If the application is processed under the individual procedures option, the highest numbered type procedure must be processed prior to the subsequent lower numbered procedure. If the individual procedure option is chosen, the applicant will be eligible for any fee reduction contained in the current fee resolution. 

(3) SEPA Review. SEPA review shall be conducted concurrently with development project review. The following are exempt from concurrent review:

(a) Projects categorically exempt from SEPA; and

(b) Components of previously completed planned actions, to the extent permitted by law and consistent with the EIS for the planned action.

(4) Decisionmaker(s). Applications processed in accordance with subsection (2) of this section which have the same highest numbered procedure but are assigned different hearing bodies shall be heard collectively by the highest decisionmaker(s). The City Council is the highest, followed by the Hearing Examiner or Planning Commission, as applicable, and then the Director.

(5) Hearings. Permits are allowed only one open record hearing and one closed record appeal hearing, except for the appeal of a determination of significance. (Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.040 Decision types.1

	Type 1	Type 2	Type 3	Type 4

	Building Permit (15.05)

Grading Permit (14.60)

Boundary Line Adjustment (17.40)

Right-of-Way Use Permit (12.35)

Design and Construction Standards Deviation (12.60)

Clearing and Grading Design Deviation (14.60)

Shoreline Exemption (16.05)

Code Interpretation (14.30)

Miscellaneous Administrative Decisions

Minor Tree Removal (18.45)

WCF Collocation on a Transmission Structure or WCF Tower (18.70)

Final Subdivision4 (17.25)

Final Short Subdivision (17.25)	Short Subdivision (Including Revisions and Alterations) (17.20)

Design and Construction Standards Variance (12.60)

Clearing and Grading Design Variance (14.60)

Design Departure from the City of Covington Design Guidelines and Standards (18.31)

Downtown Permitted Use Determination (18.31)

Temporary Use (18.85)

Shoreline Substantial Development Permit2 (16.05)

SEPA Threshold Determination3

Commercial Site Development Permit (18.31 and 18.110)

Re-use of Facilities (18.85)

Critical Areas Reasonable Use Exceptions (18.65)

Binding Site Plan (17.30)

Major Tree Removal (18.45)

Stormwater Manuals Variance (13.25)

Wireless Communication Facilities Collocations (18.70)	Shoreline Conditional Use2 (16.05)

Shoreline Variance2 (16.05)

Preliminary Subdivision (17.20)

Plat Alterations (17.25)

Preliminary Subdivision Revisions (17.20)

Zoning Variance (18.125)

Conditional Use Permits (18.125)

New Wireless Communication Facility Towers and Height Modifications (18.70)	Shoreline Environment Redesignations (16.05)

Plat or Short Plat Vacations (17.25)

Street Vacations (12.55)

1 If a conflict between this chart and the text of the CMC exists, the text of the CMC controls.

2 See CMC 16.05.090(13), Appeals, for shoreline decisions and permits. Any Type 1 decision made by the Shoreline Administrator may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner. When applications for shoreline permits are combined with other permits requiring Type 3 or 4 land use decisions, the Examiner, not the Director, makes the decision. All shoreline permits, including shoreline substantial development permits, shoreline variances and conditional uses, and the upholding of a letter of exemption are appealable to the State Shorelines Hearings Board and not to the Hearing Examiner.

3 Appeal to Examiner is limited to the SEPA threshold determination for a project permit. The decision on the Type 1 permit itself is appealable to Superior Court.

4 Final subdivisions are submitted to the Department for review and are approved by City Manager or by his or her designee.

(Ord. 13-19 § 2; Ord. 09-19 § 5; Ord. 17-16 § 11; Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-09 § 17; Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.050 Requirements by decision type.1

	 	Type 1	Type 2	Type 3	Type 4

	Recommendation made by:	n/a	n/a	Director	Hearing Examiner

	Final decision made by:	Director	Director	Hearing Examiner	City Council

	Notice of permit application:	No	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Notice of final decision:	No	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Open record public hearing:	No	No	Yes, before the Hearing Examiner 	Yes, before the Hearing Examiner 

	Open record appeal hearing:	No	Yes, before the Hearing Examiner regarding project proposals	No	No

	Judicial (closed record) appeal:	King County Superior Court	King County Superior Court	King County Superior Court	King County Superior Court

1 If a conflict between this chart and the text of the CMC exists, the text of the CMC controls.

(Ord. 13-19 § 3; Ord. 07-19 § 1; Ord. 17-16 § 12; Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.060 Legislative actions.

(1) Defined. Legislative actions involve the creation, amendment, or implementation of policy or law by ordinance. In contrast to other types of actions, legislative actions apply to large geographic areas and are of interest to many property owners and citizens. Legislative actions are only taken after an open record hearing.

(2) Decisions. The following decisions are legislative, and are not subject to the procedures in this chapter, unless otherwise specified:

(a) Zoning code amendments;

(b) Adoption of development regulations and amendments;

(c) Zoning map amendments;

(d) Adoption of the comprehensive plan and any plan amendments; and

(e) Annexations.

(3) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations to the City Council on the decisions listed in subsection (2) of this section.

(4) City Council. The City Council may hold a public hearing on the decisions listed in subsection (2) of this section prior to passage of an ordinance or entry of a decision.

(5) Public Notice. Unless otherwise provided for herein, notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the public at least 14 days prior to the hearing by publishing notice as provided for in CMC 14.40.040(2). In addition to publishing notice and posting notice at City Hall, at least 14 days prior to the hearing the City shall mail notice of the public hearing to the applicant, relevant government agencies, and other interested parties who have requested in writing to be notified of the hearing. If the legislative action is for a comprehensive plan amendment, notice of the public hearing shall also be posted and mailed pursuant to CMC 14.40.040(3). The City may also provide optional methods of public notice as provided in CMC 14.40.050.

(6) Appeals. The City Council’s final legislative decision may be appealed together with any SEPA final threshold determination by filing a petition with the Growth Management Hearings Board pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.70A.290, as currently adopted and hereafter amended from time to time. (Ord. 17-16 § 13; Ord. 09-16 § 4 (Exh. C); Ord. 02-09 § 2)


14.30.070 Administrative interpretations. 

Unless otherwise specified and except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this chapter, the Director is delegated the authority to issue official interpretations of all development regulations. Requests for an official interpretation must be submitted in writing and be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution. (Ord. 02-09 § 2)


Chapter 14.35 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES

Sections:

14.35.010    Preapplication conference.

14.35.020    Permit application – Conformance with submittal requirements.

14.35.030    Application completeness.

14.35.040    Notice of application.

14.35.050    Timing of final decision.

14.35.060    Contents of Type 1 and Type 2 decisions.

14.35.070    Notice of final decision.

14.35.080    Limitations on refiling of applications.

14.35.090    Limitation on number of applications.


14.35.010 Preapplication conference.

(1) Prior to filing a permit application for a Type 2, Type 3 or Type 4 decision, the applicant shall contact the Department to schedule a preapplication conference, which shall be held prior to the applicant filing the application.

(2) The purpose of the preapplication conference is to review and discuss the application requirements with the applicant and provide comments on the development proposal. The preapplication conference shall be scheduled by the Department, upon the request of an applicant, and shall be held in a timely manner, within 45 days from the date of the applicant’s request. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the applicant from filing an application if the Department is unable to schedule a preapplication conference within 45 days following the applicant’s request.

(3) The Director shall establish procedures, reasonable schedules, and staff participation for preapplication conferences.

(4) If a fully complete land use application has not been submitted within 180 days from the date of the preapplication meeting, a new meeting must be held or an extension request must be granted before the land use application will be accepted. Requests for extension must be submitted in writing detailing the justification for the request along with the extension fee. Extension requests will be granted at the discretion of the Community Development Director.

(5) The discussions at the conference shall not bind or prohibit the City’s future application or enforcement of all applicable law since it is impractical for a preapplication conference to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues. (Ord. 11-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.020 Permit application – Conformance with submittal requirements. 

The Department shall not commence review of any application set forth in this chapter until the applicant has submitted the materials specified for complete applications along with the required fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. Applications for land use permits requiring Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 decisions shall be considered complete as of the date of submittal upon determination by the Department that the materials submitted meet the requirements of this section. The Director may eliminate certain submittal requirements where not prohibited by law and where deemed necessary. 

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, all permit applications described in CMC 14.30.040 shall include the following:

(a) The appropriate application form provided by the Department and completed by the applicant;

(b) A certificate of sewer availability from the applicable sewer purveyor or site percolation data with preliminary approval by the Seattle-King County Health Department;

(c) A current certificate of water availability from the applicable water purveyor, or the Seattle-King County Health Department if for a private water system;

(d) A fire district receipt pursuant to CMC Title 15;

(e) A site plan, prepared in a form prescribed by the Director and further outlined in Chapter 10 of the Design and Construction Standards, adopted by Chapter 12.60 CMC;

(f) Proof that the lot or lots to be developed are recognized as a lot under this title;

(g) Location of critical areas and associated buffers within 50 feet of the site or a critical areas affidavit identifying that no critical area or associated buffers exist on or are adjacent to the site;

(h) A completed environmental checklist, if applicable per Chapter 16.10 CMC; 

(i) Payment of any development permit review fees as set forth in the current fee resolution;

(j) A list of any permits or decisions applicable to the development proposal that have been obtained prior to filing the application or that are pending before the City or any other governmental entity;

(k) Certificate of transportation concurrency from the Department of Community Development, if required by Chapter 12.100 CMC;

(l) A determination if drainage review applies to the project pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC, and, if applicable, all drainage plans and documentation required by the stormwater manuals adopted pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC;

(m) Current Assessor’s maps and a list of tax parcels to which public notice must be given as provided in this chapter, for land use permits requiring a Type 2, 3 or 4 decision; 

(n) Legal description of the site; 

(o) Variances obtained or required under CMC Title 18 to the extent known at the date of application;

(p) Design deviations and design variance from the Construction and Design Standards, adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC, to the extent known at the date of application;

(q) For site development permits only, a phasing plan and a time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases or if all building permits will not be submitted within three years; and

(r) Additional complete application requirements for the following land use permits are set forth in the following sections of the CMC:

(i) Grading permits, Chapter 14.60 CMC.

(ii) Tree removal permits, Chapter 18.45 CMC.

(iii) Construction permits, Chapter 15.05 CMC.

(iv) Mobile home permits, Chapter 15.05 CMC.

(v) Subdivision applications, short subdivision applications and binding site plan applications, Chapter 17.15 CMC.

A permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the procedural submission requirements of the Department and is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the Department from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of notice of completeness or subsequently if new or additional information is required or substantial changes in the proposed action occur, as determined by the Director.

(2) The Director may specify the requirements of the site plan required to be submitted for various permits and may waive any of the specific submittal requirements listed herein that are determined to be unnecessary for review of an application. 

(3) The applicant shall attest by written oath to the accuracy of all information submitted for an application.

(4) Applications shall be accompanied by the payment of any applicable filing fees, review fees, processing fees, and other administrative fees, if any, as set forth in the current fee resolution. 

(5) An applicant and the Department may agree to have a review, inspection, or permit approval completed by a Department-approved and hired contractor. For reviews, inspections, and permit approvals completed by a City-approved contractor, the applicable Department is authorized to charge the applicant the contract amount in addition to the applicable fee required by the current fee resolution for review, inspection, or permit fee.

(6) An applicant may request to have inspections conducted outside of normal business hours by submitting a timely request in writing to the Department of Community Development. If the Department agrees to conduct an off-hour inspection, it may charge the applicant an hourly fee in addition to the inspection fees set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-09 § 18; Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.030 Application completeness.

(1) Determination of Completeness. Within 28 days after receiving a permit application, the Department shall mail or provide a written determination to the applicant which states either: (a) that the application is complete or (b) that the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

(2) Identification of Other Agencies with Jurisdiction. To the extent known by the City, other agencies with jurisdiction over the project permit application shall be identified in the City’s determination required by subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Complete Application. A project permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the submission requirements in CMC 14.35.020, as well as the submission requirements contained in the applicable section of the Covington Municipal Code. This determination of completeness shall be made when the application is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The City’s determination of completeness shall not preclude the City from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice of completeness or at some later time, if new information is required or where there are substantial changes in the proposed action.

(4) Incomplete Application Procedure. For applications deemed to be incomplete, the Department will identify, in writing, the specific requirements or information necessary to constitute a complete application. The applicant will have one 

60-day period to submit the required additional information. Upon submittal of the additional information, the Department will, within 14 days, issue a letter of completeness or identify what additional is required. If the additional information is not submitted within the 60-day period, the process will be terminated and the applicant will be required to submit a new application and fees. 

(5) City’s Failure to Provide Determination of Completeness. An application shall be deemed complete if:

(a) The Department fails to provide written notice to the applicant within the 28-day period after the City initially receives the application; or

(b) The Department fails to provide written notice to the applicant within the 14-day period after submission of additional information required under subsection (4) of this section.

(6) Date of Acceptance of Application. When the project permit application is complete, the Director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance.

(7) The applicant shall designate a single person or entity to receive determination and notices required by this chapter. The single person or entity shall also be the designee for any contact regarding permit activity. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.040 Notice of application. 

A notice of application shall be issued on all permit applications requiring a Type 2, 3, or 4 decision in accordance with the provisions of CMC 14.40.010. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.050 Timing of final decision. 

(1) Final decisions by the City on all permits and approvals subject to the procedures of this chapter shall be issued within 120 days from the date the applicant is notified by the Department pursuant to this chapter that the application is complete. The following periods shall be excluded from this 120-day period:

(a) Any period of time during which the applicant has been requested by the Director, Planning Commission, Hearing Examiner or Council to correct plans, perform required studies or provide additional information, including street standard variances and variances required under Chapter 13.25 CMC. The period shall be calculated from the date of notice to the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the Director advises the applicant that the additional information satisfies the Director’s request, or 14 days after the date the information has been provided. If the Director determines that the correction, study or other information submitted by the applicant is insufficient, the Director shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and the procedures of this section shall apply as if a new request for information had been made.

(i) There shall be a 90-day deadline for the submittal of corrections, studies or other information when requested. An extension of this deadline may be granted upon submittal by an applicant of a written request providing satisfactory justification of an extension.

(ii) Failure by the applicant to meet such deadline shall be cause for the Director to deny the application.

(iii) When granting a request for a deadline extension, the Director shall give consideration to the number of days between receipt by the Director of a written request for a deadline extension and the mailing to the applicant of the Director’s decision regarding that request.

(b) The period of time, as set forth in Chapter 16.10 CMC, during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW.

(c) A period of no more than 90 days for an open record appeal hearing by the Hearing Examiner on a Type 2 land use decision, and no more than 60 days for a closed record appeal by Superior Court on a Type 3 land use decision appealable to Superior Court, except when the parties to an appeal agree to extend these time periods.

(d) Any period of time during which an applicant fails to post the property, if required by this chapter, following the date notice is required until an affidavit of posting is provided to the Department by the applicant.

(e) Any time extension mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Director.

(2) The time limits established in this section shall not apply if a proposed development:

(a) Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation, or modification or waiver of a development regulation as part of a demonstration project;

(b) Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility as provided for in RCW 36.70A.200; or

(c) Is substantially revised by the applicant, when such revisions will result in a substantial change in a project’s review requirements, as determined by the Department, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete.

(3) If the Department is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits established by this section, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of final decision. 

(4) The Department shall require that all subdivisions, short subdivisions, building permits, grading permits, conditional use permits, site development permits, shoreline substantial development permits, and binding site plans issued for development activities on or within 500 feet of designated agricultural lands, forest lands or mineral resource lands shall contain a notice that the subject property is within or near designated agricultural lands, forest lands or mineral resource lands on which a variety of activities may occur that are not compatible with residential development for certain periods of limited duration. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.060 Contents of Type 1 and Type 2 decisions. 

(1) Type 1 and Type 2 decisions shall be based upon compliance with the required showings of the Covington Municipal Code.

(2) The written decision contained in the record shall show:

(a) Facts, findings, and conclusions supporting the decision and demonstrating compliance with the applicable decision criteria; and

(b) Any conditions and limitations imposed, if the request is granted. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.070 Notice of final decision. 

A notice of final decision shall be issued on all permit applications requiring a Type 2, 3, or 4 decision in accordance with the provisions of CMC 14.40.030. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.080 Limitations on refiling of applications. 

Upon denial of an application by the Hearing Examiner or the City Council, no new application for substantially the same proposal shall be accepted within one year from the date of denial. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


14.35.090 Limitation on number of applications.

The City shall not accept more than one application for a development proposal for each development site at any one time. (Ord. 02-09 § 3)


Chapter 14.40 PUBLIC NOTICE

Sections:

14.40.005    Notice chart.

14.40.010    Notice of permit application.

14.40.020    Notice of public hearing.

14.40.030    Notice of final decision.

14.40.040    Notice methods.

14.40.050    Optional public notice.


14.40.005 Notice chart.

	 	Types	Mailing Period	Comment Period	Method	Recipients

	Notice of complete application (NOCA)	All	28 days from submittal	None	Mail	Applicant

	Notice of permit application	1*, 2, 3, 4	14 days from NOCA	21 days	Mail, publish, post	Applicant, agencies, parties of record, 500-foot radius

	SEPA determination	When required	14 days	14 days	Mail, publish, post	Applicant, agencies, parties of record

	Notice of public hearing	3, 4	14 days prior to the hearing	None	Mail, publish, post	Applicant, agencies, parties of record

	Notice of final decision	2, 3, 4	7 days from date of decision 	None	Mail	Applicant, parties of record

* Only those Type 1 decisions that are subject to SEPA.

(Ord. 02-09 § 4)


14.40.010 Notice of permit application.

(1) A notice of application shall be provided to the public for all land use permit applications requiring Type 2, 3 or 4 decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA. The City shall provide notice of application by publishing, posting and mailing notice as provided in CMC 14.40.040.

(2) Notice of the application shall be provided by the Department within 14 days following the Department’s determination that the application is complete. A public comment period of at least 21 days shall be provided, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 90.58 RCW and RCW 58.17.215 with regards to alterations. The public comment period shall commence on the third day following the Department’s mailing of the notice of application.

(3) If the City has made a determination of significance (DS) under Chapter 43.21C RCW before the issuance of the notice of application, the notice of the DS shall be combined with the notice of application and the scoping notice.

(4) All required notices of application shall contain the following information:

(a) The file number;

(b) The name of the applicant;

(c) The date of application, the date of the notice of completeness and the date of the notice of application;

(d) A description of the project, the location, a list of the permits included in the application and the location where the application and any environmental documents or studies can be reviewed;

(e) A site plan on eight-and-one-half-inch by 14-inch paper, or as determined by the Director;

(f) The procedures and deadline for filing comments, requesting notice of any required hearings and any appeal procedure;

(g) The date, time, place and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled at the time of notice;

(h) The identification of other permits not included in the application to the extent known; 

(i) The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project; and

(j) A statement of the preliminary determination, if one has been made, of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency with applicable County plans and regulations. (Ord. 02-09 § 4)


14.40.020 Notice of public hearing.

(1) The notice of a public hearing is required for those permit applications requiring a Type 3 or 4 decision that did not include a scheduled hearing date in the notice of application. The City shall provide notice of a public hearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing by publishing and posting notice as provided in CMC 14.40.040. In addition to the publishing and posting, the City shall mail notice of the public hearing to the applicant, relevant agencies, and other interested parties who have requested in writing to be notified of the hearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing.

(2) Content of Notice of Public Hearing. The notice given of a public hearing required in this title shall contain:

(a) File number;

(b) The name and address of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;

(c) The date, time and place of the hearing;

(d) A description of the subject property reasonably sufficient to inform the public of its location, including but not limited to the use of a map or postal address and a subdivision lot and block designation;

(e) For hearings on preliminary plats, the name and total area of the proposed plat, the number of proposed lots and typical lot sizes, and the proposed use;

(f) The nature of the proposed use of development;

(g) A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony;

(h) When information may be examined, and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be admitted;

(i) The name of a local government representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

(j) A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost;

(k) A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost. (Ord. 02-09 § 4)


14.40.030 Notice of final decision.

(1) Notice of final decision is required for Type 2, 3, and 4 decisions. The City shall mail public notice of a project permit final decision to the applicant and other interested parties who have requested in writing to be notified of the final decision no later than seven days after the date of the decision.

(2) The City shall provide a notice of final decision that also includes a statement of any threshold determination made under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the procedures for administrative appeal, if any. The notice of final decision may be a copy of the report or decision on the project permit application. (Ord. 02-09 § 4)


14.40.040 Notice methods.

(1) Posted Notice. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall consist of the following:

(a) A single notice board shall be placed by the applicant:

(i) At the midpoint of the site street frontage or as otherwise directed by the City for maximum visibility;

(ii) Five feet inside the street property line, except when the board is structurally attached to an existing building; provided, that no notice board shall be placed more than five feet from the street property without approval of the department;

(iii) So that the top of the notice board is between seven to nine feet above grade; and

(iv) Where it is completely visible to pedestrians.

(b) Additional notice boards may be required by the Director when:

(i) The site does not abut a public road;

(ii) A large site abuts more than one public road; or

(iii) The Director determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.

(c) Notice boards shall be:

(i) Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period;

(ii) In place at least 14 days prior to the date of hearing, or at least 15 days prior to the end of any required comment period;

(iii) Removed within 14 days after the end of the notice period.

(d) Removal of the notice board prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of the project review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period.

(e) An affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the Director by the applicant prior to the hearing or final comment date. If the affidavits are not filed as required, any scheduled hearing or date by which the public may comment on the application will be postponed in order to allow compliance with this notice requirement.

(f) Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with specifications promulgated by the Director.

(g) Posting, including the expenses, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

(2) Published Notice. Notice of a proposed action shall be published by the City at least 14 days prior to the public hearing or the end of any required comment period in the official City newspaper or another newspaper of general circulation in the affected area.

(3) Mailed Notice. Mailed notice for proposed action shall:

(a) Be sent by the Department by first class mail to owners of property according to the records of the King County Assessor’s Office in an area within 500 feet of the development site, and at least 14 days prior to the public hearing or the end of any required comment period. For a hearing on a preliminary plat, the notice shall also be mailed to:

(i) Any city located within one-half mile of any boundary of the subject property,

(ii) Any city or district which has a utility which is proposed to serve the plat, and

(iii) The State Department of Transportation where the plat or part thereof adjoins a state right-of-way or King County where the plat or part thereof adjoins a county right-of-way;

(b) Be considered supplementary to posted or published notice;

(c) Be deemed satisfactory despite the failure of one or more owners to receive mailed notice. (Ord. 02-09 § 4)


14.40.050 Optional public notice.

As optional methods of providing public notice of any project permits, in addition to the required notice methods, the City may:

(1) Notify the public or private groups with known interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(2) Notify the news media;

(3) Place notices in appropriate regional or neighborhood newspapers or trade journals;

(4) Publish notice in agency newsletters or send notice to agency mailing lists, either general lists or lists for specific proposals or subject areas.

The City’s failure to provide the optional notice as described in this section shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision. (Ord. 02-09 § 4)


Chapter 14.45 APPEAL PROCEDURES

Sections:

14.45.010    Decisions final unless appealed.

14.45.020    Appeals of administrative decisions.

14.45.030    Procedures.

14.45.040    Judicial appeal.

14.45.050    Procedural irregularity.


14.45.010 Decisions final unless appealed. 

All administrative decisions shall be final unless the applicant or an aggrieved party files an appeal as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 02-09 § 5)


14.45.020 Appeals of administrative decisions.

The procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all appeals to the Hearing Examiner or to the City Council that are authorized by the Covington Municipal Code, unless a conflicting procedure or action is required by the code provision authorizing the appeal. (Ord. 02-09 § 5)


14.45.030 Procedures. 

(1) An administrative appeal of a Type 2, 3, or 4 project decision and of any environmental determination issued at the same time as the project decision shall be filed with the City Clerk within 14 days after the notice of the decision or after other notice that the decision has been made and is appealable. The appeal fee as set forth in the current fee resolution shall also be filed with the City within this time frame. The appeal period shall be extended for an additional seven days if public comment is allowed on a determination of nonsignificance issued as part of the appealable project permit decision.

(2) Content of Appeal. Appeals shall be in writing, be accompanied by the required appeal fee, and contain the following information:

(a) Appellant’s name, address and phone number;

(b) Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

(c) Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;

(d) Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

(e) The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent;

(f) A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

(3) Upon timely receipt of a notice of appeal and fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the Hearing Examiner.

(4) The City Clerk shall provide notice of the hearing at which the appeal shall be considered at least 14 calendar days prior to the hearing, or as otherwise provided by law. The hearing notice shall be provided by:

(a) Posting notice as provided in CMC 14.40.040(1);

(b) Publishing notice as provided in CMC 14.40.040(2);

(c) Mailing notice to the appellant, to the applicant, and to any person who requested notice of decision or submitted substantial comments on the application.

(5) The time period for considering and deciding an appeal shall not exceed 90 days for an open record appeal hearing or 60 days for a closed record appeal. The parties to an appeal may agree to extend these time periods.

(6) The Hearing Examiner shall render a decision based upon testimony presented by the parties, evidence admitted, information of which judicial notice is taken, and written and oral argument by the parties. The Hearing Examiner may affirm the decision, reverse the decision, affirm the decision with modification, or remand the decision to the decisionmaker for further consideration. The Hearing Examiner shall affirm the decision unless it is determined the decision being appealed meets one of the following criteria:

(a) The body or officer that made the decision engaged in unlawful procedure or failed to follow a prescribed process, unless the error was harmless;

(b) The decision is an erroneous interpretation of the law, after allowing for such deference as is due the construction of a law by a local jurisdiction with expertise;

(c) The decision is not supported by evidence that is substantial when viewed in light of the whole record;

(d) The decision is a clearly erroneous application of the law to the facts;

(e) The decision is outside the authority or jurisdiction of the body or officer making the decision;

(f) The decision violates the constitutional rights of the party seeking relief.

(7) The Hearing Examiner shall issue a written decision on the appeal containing: 

(a) A statement of the decision on appeal, including any conditions;

(b) A statement of the facts upon which the decision is based and the conclusions of law derived from these facts; and 

(c) A statement of the right of an affected party to appeal the decision of the Hearing Examiner.

(8) If a permit is granted, the City official administering the permit may allow the applicant to begin all or a portion of the construction or commence all or a portion of the operations during the pendency of any appeal; provided, that such construction or operation is begun at the applicant’s own risk. If the decision being appealed is reversed or modified, the applicant may be required to remove or alter any development or action inconsistent with the final decision and/or restore the environment to its pre-existing condition. (Ord. 07-19 § 2; Ord. 17-16 § 14; Ord. 02-09 § 5)


14.45.040 Judicial appeal.

An appeal from the decision of the Hearing Examiner for which no other administrative appeal is provided shall be filed and served within 21 days of the issuance of the decision in accordance with Chapter 36.70C RCW. (Ord. 02-09 § 5)


14.45.050 Procedural irregularity. 

No procedural irregularity or informality in the notice, consideration, hearing or other matter relating to the decision or the appeal shall affect the final decision, or any other action leading to the final decision, unless substantial rights of a person with demonstrable beneficial interests are adversely affected and unless objection is made to the City at the earliest possible time after discovery. (Ord. 02-09 § 5)


Chapter 14.50 PURPOSE – GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.55 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

14.55.010    Recodified.

14.55.020    Recodified.

14.55.030    Repealed.

14.55.040    Recodified.

14.55.050    Repealed.

14.55.060    Recodified.

14.55.070    Recodified.

14.55.080    Recodified.

14.55.090    Recodified.

14.55.100    Recodified.


14.55.010 Applicant.

Recodified as CMC 14.10.005 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.040))


14.55.020 Default.

Recodified as CMC 14.10.045 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.040))


14.55.030 Department. 

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.005))


14.55.040 Development permits.

Recodified as CMC 14.10.055 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 3; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.010))


14.55.050 Director.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.010))


14.55.060 Environmental review.

Recodified as CMC 14.10.085 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.028))


14.55.070 Financial guarantee. 

Recodified as CMC 14.10.095 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.015))


14.55.080 Guarantor. 

Recodified as CMC 14.10.102 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.020))


14.55.090 Impact fee.

Recodified as CMC 18.20.622 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.025))


14.55.100 Permit fee. 

Recodified as CMC 14.10.108 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.040))


Chapter 14.60 CLEARING AND GRADING REGULATIONS

Sections:

14.60.010    Purpose.

14.60.020    Definitions.

14.60.030    Applicability.

14.60.040    Related codes and regulations.

14.60.050    Administration.

14.60.060    Hazards.

14.60.070    Design variances and deviations.

14.60.075    Clearing and grading fee.

14.60.080    Clearing and grading permit required.

14.60.100    Permit requirements.

14.60.110    Expiration of permits and applications.

14.60.120    Operating conditions and standards of performance.

14.60.130    Grading – Land development projects.

14.60.135    Grading – Individual lots.

14.60.140    Drainage.

14.60.150    Slopes.

14.60.160    Fill.

14.60.170    Rock and retaining walls.

14.60.190    Driveways – Design.

14.60.200    Inspections.

14.60.210    Final approval.

14.60.240    Enforcement, violations and penalties.


14.60.010 Purpose.

(1) This chapter is intended to regulate clearing, grading and earthwork construction, including cuts and fills, within the City of Covington, in order to protect public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics by:

(a) Preventing damage to property and harm to persons caused by excavations and fills;

(b) Minimizing adverse stormwater impacts generated by the removal of vegetation and alteration of landforms;

(c) Protecting water quality from the adverse impacts associated with erosion and sedimentation;

(d) Minimizing the height, steepness, and number of graded slopes;

(e) Minimizing the amount of grading after a property is developed and prepared for building construction;

(f) Minimizing the height and number of rock and retaining walls;

(g) Protecting critical areas and associated buffers from adverse clearing and grading activities;

(h) Minimizing aquatic and terrestrial wildlife habitat loss caused by the removal of vegetation;

(i) Establishing minimum access requirements to and around buildings for safety, security, maintenance, and general use and enjoyment of property;

(j) Establishing administrative procedures for the issuance of permits, approval of plans, and inspection of clearing and grading operations; and

(k) Providing enforcement and penalties for the violation of this chapter.

(2) This chapter establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits, provides for approval of plans and inspection of clearing and grading operations, and provides for enforcement and penalties for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.020 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Unless otherwise defined in this chapter the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable.

(1) “Bench” means a relatively level step excavated or constructed into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

(2) “Best management practices (BMPs)” means the best available and reasonable physical, structural, managerial, or behavioral activities that, when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of surface and/or ground waters.

(3) “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

(4) “Clearing and grading permit” means the written permission of the Director to the applicant to proceed with the act of clearing and grading within the provisions of this chapter. The clearing and grading permit includes the associated approved plans and any conditions of approval as well as the permit form itself.

(5) “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

(6) “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill, or any combination thereof.

(7) “Excavation” means the removal of earth material. The term “cut” can also be used to describe excavation.

(8) “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical or other means.

(9) “Infrastructure improvements” means streets, drainage facilities, utilities, and associated appurtenances typically constructed as part of a development project for the purposes of serving the development.

(10) “Key” means a compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a slope.

(11) “Modular block wall” means a wall constructed of manufactured modular wall units acting as a protective facing for an exposed soil face or as a gravity retaining wall.

(12) “Reinforced fill” or “reinforced soil” means soil fill designed by a geotechnical engineer which includes reinforcement consisting of metal or synthetic materials in bars, strips, grids, or sheets.

(13) “Retaining wall” means a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.

(14) “Rockery” or “rock wall” means one or more courses of large rocks stacked near vertical in front of an exposed soil face to protect the soil face from erosion and sloughing. A rockery or rock wall is not a retaining wall.

(15) “Site restoration” means the permanent restoration of lands modified under the provisions of this code, typically in the form of the establishment of vegetation and drainage facilities to control the rate and erosive force of stormwater runoff.

(16) “Terrace” means a relatively level step excavated or constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.030 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person developing, altering, clearing, or grading land, or constructing buildings in the City of Covington. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.040 Related codes and regulations.

(1) The requirements of this chapter are in addition to other City codes, standards, and regulations. Where conflicts exist between the provisions of this chapter and other codes and standards, the most restrictive shall apply.

(2) The applicant shall comply with this chapter, the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards, as adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC, Appendix J of the International Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 15.05 CMC, Surface and Stormwater, as adopted in Chapter 13.25 CMC, CMC Titles 14 and 18, and equivalent standards approved by the Director.

(3) Requirements administered by other State and local agencies may also apply. The responsibility for determining the existence and application of other agency requirements rests solely with the applicant. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.050 Administration.

(1) The Director is authorized to develop and adopt administrative rules and procedures for the purposes of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

(a) If clearing and grading, inconsistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, has occurred on a site, the City shall not accept or grant any development permits or approvals for the site unless the applicant adequately restores the site.

(2) The Director may impose conditions on permit approval as needed to mitigate identified project impacts and shall deny permit applications that are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(3) As a condition of any permit issued for activity covered by this chapter, the property owner shall be required to consent to entry upon the land by the Director or his/her designee at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Director by this chapter. If the land is occupied, the Director shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If the land is unoccupied, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons at the site who are in apparent charge or control of the land and demand entry. If no person is located, the Director may enter said property and shall, with due diligence, make attempts to notify the owner, occupant, or other person having charge within a reasonable amount of time of the entry.

(4) Where the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that activities for which a permit is required by this chapter are being conducted without a permit on land within the City, the Director or his/her designee may seek to inspect the land and such activity. If the land is occupied, the Director shall first present proper credentials and request entry for inspection. If the land is unoccupied, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons at the site who are in apparent charge or control of the land and request entry for inspection. If no person is located, or if entry is refused, the Director may request the assistance of the City Attorney, City Prosecutor, or Police Department regarding access. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.060 Hazards.

The Director has the authority to determine whether an existing site, as a result of clearing, grading, excavation, filling, or other similar activity, has become a hazard which may endanger property or adversely affect the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.070 Design variances and deviations.

(1) A design deviation is a Type 1 decision and a design variance is a Type 2 decision, as established by CMC 14.30.040. Applicants requesting a variance from the requirements of this chapter shall provide justification for the variance in accordance with Chapter 18.125 CMC. Applicants requesting a deviation from the requirements of this chapter shall provide justification in accordance with the process outlined in the City’s Design and Construction Standards, adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC. The Director, City Engineer, and/or their designee may impose conditions upon the granting of any clearing and grading design deviations or design variance.

(2) Applications for variances shall require payment of all application fees to cover the cost of the review. Such fees are set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.075 Clearing and grading fee.

(1) Fees shall be collected to compensate the Department for the investigation, permit administration, plan review, and ongoing monitoring/inspection of grading and clearing permit applications consistent with the grading and/or clearing fees set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) Fee Reductions. Grading permit fees for projects entirely completed within one year or for permits reviewed in conjunction with other land use permits may qualify for a fee reduction. The reduction is set forth in the current fee resolution.

(3) Work without a Permit. Whenever any work for which a grading or clearing permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a valid permit, the City may double the clearing and grading fee as set forth in the grading permit fee tables in the current fee resolution. This fee increase may be imposed in addition to any other enforcement procedures pursuant to this chapter.

(4) Additional Review Fees. In addition to the grading and clearing permit fees set forth in this section, other fees required by the Covington Municipal Code may be applicable to individual grading permit applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shoreline management, SEPA, and critical areas review fees. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.080 Clearing and grading permit required.

(1) A clearing and grading permit is required for all clearing and grading activities, unless the activity is exempt as follows:

(a) An on-site excavation for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation;

(b) Routine landscape maintenance or installation of landscaping improvements involving not more than 50 cubic yards in total of excavation and fill on a single parcel of property within a 12-month period; provided, that topsoil up to a depth of six inches, regardless of quantity, may be placed on single-family residential properties without requiring a permit, provided this activity is not conducted within a critical area or associated buffer;

(c) Maintenance of existing driveways or private access roads within their existing road prisms;

(d) Any clearing or grading within a publicly owned road right-of-way or easement, for which a right-of-way use permit has been granted by the City;

(e) Clearing or grading by a public agency for the following routine maintenance activities:

(i) Routine clearing within road right-of-way;

(ii) Pavement maintenance;

(iii) Normal grading of gravel shoulders;

(iv) Roadside ditch cleaning;

(v) Maintenance of culverts;

(vi) Maintenance of flood control or other approved surface water management facilities; and

(vii) Normal and routine maintenance of parks and trails;

(f) Cemetery graves;

(g) Excavation or fill less than three feet in vertical depth not involving more than 50 cubic yards of earth or other material on a single site;

(h) Clearing associated with tree and vegetation removal as exempt in CMC 18.45.050(3);

(i) Clearing or grading activities for the purposes of gathering information required by the City for application of a development proposal, such as:

(i) Hand clearing of vegetation for surveying;

(ii) Minimal clearing and grading as required to perform geotechnical exploration to characterize geologic formations and soils;

(iii) Minimal clearing and grading to install erosion and sedimentation control devices in accordance with an approved temporary erosion and sedimentation plan; and

(iv) Removal of trees outside of critical areas; provided, that trees to be removed are not located in an area designated to be preserved as part of an approved tree retention plan in general accordance with CMC 18.45.080; and provided, that a forest practices application is not required by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources;

(j) Approved and active Washington State Department of Natural Resources surface mining reclamation permits.

(2) All clearing and grading within critical areas and their associated buffers shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(3) A clearing and grading permit may be issued as a component of a building permit, or other permit, rather than as a separate permit. The Director may require that single-family building permits and clearing and grading permits be combined.

(4) All clearing and grading activities within the City, regardless of whether a permit is required, shall meet the performance and restoration requirements of this chapter and shall include the use of best management practices to reduce erosion, protect water and air quality, and mitigate off-site impacts, such as noise, light, dust, etc. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.100 Permit requirements.

(1) Applications shall be on forms prescribed by the Director and shall include such information as deemed necessary by the Director to establish compliance with this section. A complete application shall include requirements as outlined in CMC 14.35.020 and this section, unless otherwise approved by the Director and as shown on the application form.

(a) A complete application on a form supplied by the department;

(b) Payment of any application fee set forth in the current fee resolution;

(c) Describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

(d) Indicate the estimated quantities of work involved (disturbed area in acres and cut and fill quantities in cubic yards);

(e) Be signed by the property owner or his/her authorized agent who shall be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;

(f) Complete bond quantity worksheet, associated financial guarantees, and liability insurance as set forth in CMC 14.105.150 and 14.105.170; and

(g) Other information as may be required by the Director.

(2) Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications and other supporting data, as applicable. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer registered to practice in the State of Washington. Plans and specifications for single-family residential construction shall not require preparation by a licensed engineer unless deemed necessary by the City Engineer.

(3) Plans shall be prepared in general accordance with Chapter 10 of the City’s Design and Construction Standards.

(a) Tree retention plan shall be prepared in accordance with CMC 18.45.080;

(b) A soils report shall be prepared by a licensed soils or geotechnical engineer and shall cover all portions of the project within the engineer’s expertise, including site history; geologic structures; surface conditions; subsurface conditions; recommendations for foundation support, site preparation, structural fill, slope stability, and mitigation; design parameters for retaining structures and structure backfill, surface and subsurface drainage, dewatering, excavation conditions, and hazards; seismic conditions, erosion, and sedimentation hazards and controls; use of on-site materials for structural fill and backfill; and pavement design. The soils or geotechnical engineer shall be retained as the engineer-of-record for the duration of the project; and

(c) If the clearing or grading is proposed to take place in or adjacent to a critical area as regulated in Chapter 18.65 CMC, provide information as required by that chapter.

(4) Issuing Clearing and Grading Permits.

(a) After an application has been filed and reviewed, the Director shall determine that the clearing and grading work complies with the other provisions of the municipal code or request that the application be corrected or amended to comply with this chapter.

(b) In granting a clearing and grading permit, the Director may require measures to mitigate the impacts of the clearing and grading work.

(c) No clearing and grading permit shall be issued until approved by Federal, State, and local agencies having jurisdiction by laws or regulations pertaining to the proposed work.

(d) Upon approval of the application and issuance of the clearing and grading permit, no work shall be done that is not provided for in the permit.

(e) The clearing and grading permits from the Director shall be required regardless of any other permits issued by any other department or governmental agency who may be interested in certain aspects of the proposed work. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.110 Expiration of permits and applications.

(1) An application for a clearing and grading permit may be canceled for inactivity if an applicant fails, without reasonable justification, to respond to the Department’s written request for revisions or corrections within 60 days of receipt of such request. The Director may extend the response period beyond 60 days if the applicant provides and adheres to a reasonable schedule for submitting the full revisions.

(2) Clearing and grading permits expire as follows:

(a) If a building permit is issued for the same site, the clearing and grading permit shall automatically expire or be extended when the building permit expires or is extended;

(b) If a building permit is not issued for the same site, the clearing and grading permit shall expire as follows:

(i) The permit shall expire if the authorized work has not begun within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, or if work is abandoned for over 60 consecutive days, unless an extension has been granted. The applicant shall be responsible for notifying the Director, in writing, if delays or unforeseen circumstances are impacting the start or continuation of the work.

(ii) If the authorized work is continually performed, the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless a different time frame is specified on the permit or an extension is granted. Up to two one-year extensions may be granted by the Director; provided, that conditions which were relevant to issuance of the permit have not changed substantially and no material detriment to the public welfare will result from the extension. The applicant shall be responsible for notifying the Director, in writing, if delays or unforeseen circumstances are impacting the completion of the work. An extension may be granted by the Director, provided the applicant provides the following:

(A) A written request and applicable fee. The request should be submitted no later than 60 days prior to expiration of the permit;

(B) The applicant’s project engineer submits a signed statement certifying that they have reviewed the current physical conditions of the site and such conditions have not changed to a degree as to require a revision to the design of the site in order to remain consistent with the applicable standards and requirements which were in effect at the time of the original permit approval and the associated land use approval.

(3) When a permit is ready to be issued, the applicant shall be notified and must pick up the permit within 60 days of notification. If the permit is not picked up, it may be canceled by the Director and become null and void. If the permit is canceled, the Director shall notify the applicant by mail. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.120 Operating conditions and standards of performance.

All clearing and grading activities in the City shall conform to the City’s adopted regulations as set forth in the municipal code and the provisions of this section as follows:

(1) All standards under this chapter shall be consistent with the City’s adopted stormwater and reference manuals adopted in CMC 13.25.020, herein referred to as the “City’s stormwater manual.”

(2) The site shall be operated and maintained in a neat and orderly manner, free from junk, trash, or unnecessary debris.

(3) Prior to the start of clearing and grading operations, the applicant shall identify all proposed haul routes and access points to the site for review and approval by the City.

(4) The applicant must properly handle and dispose of other pollutants that are on site during construction so as to avoid possible health risks or environmental contamination. Direct and indirect discharge of pollutants to the drainage system, critical areas, wetlands, streams, or any other adjacent properties is prohibited. Storage of fuel or other hazardous substances on site is prohibited.

(a) All pollutants, including waste materials and demolition debris, that occur on site shall be handled and disposed of in a manner that does not cause contamination of stormwater.

(b) Cover, containment, and protection from vandalism shall be provided for all chemicals, liquid products, petroleum products, and other materials that have the potential to pose a threat to human health or the environment. On-site fueling tanks shall include secondary containment.

(c) Maintenance, fueling, and repair of heavy equipment and vehicles shall be conducted using spill prevention and control measures. Contaminated surfaces shall be cleaned immediately following any spill incident.

(d) Wheel wash or tire bath wastewater shall be discharged to a separate on-site treatment system or to the sanitary sewer with local sewer district approval pursuant to State Department of Ecology standards, unless modified by the Director.

(e) Application of fertilizers and pesticides shall be conducted in a manner and at application rates that will not result in loss of chemical to stormwater runoff. Manufacturers’ label requirements for application rates and procedures shall be followed.

(f) Best management practices shall be used to prevent or treat contamination of stormwater runoff by pH modifying sources. These sources include, but are not limited to: bulk cement, cement kiln dust, fly ash, new concrete washing and curing waters, waste streams generated from concrete grinding and sawing, exposed aggregate processes, dewatering concrete vaults, concrete pumping and mixer washout waters. Construction site operators shall adjust the pH of stormwater if necessary to prevent violations of water quality standards.

(g) Construction sites with significant concrete work shall adjust the pH of stormwater if necessary to prevent violations of water quality standards. Construction site operators shall obtain written approval from the State Department of Ecology prior to using chemical treatment other than CO2 or dry ice to adjust pH.

(5) The applicant shall be responsible that the requirements found either in the City’s stormwater manual or outlined below are met for the following:

(a) Site containment;

(b) Installing sediment controls;

(c) Stabilizing disturbed areas;

(d) Stabilizing channels and outlets.

(6) Land disturbance activities shall not result in off-site physical damage, nor pose a danger or hazard to life or property. Such activities shall neither contribute to nor create landslides, accelerated soil creep, or settlement of soils.

(7) Dewatering Devices.

(a) Foundation, vault, and trench dewatering water that has similar characteristics to stormwater runoff at the site shall be discharged into a controlled conveyance system prior to discharge to a sediment pond. Channels must be stabilized according to the standards in the City’s stormwater manual.

(b) Clean, nonturbid dewatering water, such as well-point groundwater, can be discharged to systems tributary to State surface waters provided the dewatering flow does not cause erosion or flooding of receiving waters. These clean waters should not be routed through stormwater sediment ponds.

(c) Highly turbid or contaminated dewatering water shall be handled separately from stormwater.

(d) Other disposal options, depending on site constraints, may include:

(i) Infiltration.

(ii) Transport off site in a vehicle, such as a vacuum flush truck, for legal disposal in a manner that does not pollute State waters.

(iii) On-site treatment using chemical treatment or other suitable treatment technologies.

(iv) Sanitary sewer discharge with local sewer district approval.

(v) Use of a sedimentation bag with outfall to a ditch or swale for small volumes of localized dewatering.

(8) Site-Specific Requirements. Additional site-specific requirements may be established after a site visit by the City. These requirements shall be based on specific site conditions and are limited to additional temporary erosion and sedimentation control and the mitigation of hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions that pose a threat off site or to habitat preservation. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.130 Grading – Land development projects.

(1) For all land development projects such as subdivisions, short subdivisions, and commercial site developments, the applicant shall, after being issued the proper permits, clear and grade the property and install infrastructure improvements. Final grades of lots shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Individual lots shall be cleared and graded in accordance with CMC 14.60.135.

(2) Individual lots within a land development project shall be cleared and graded as part of the overall project’s mass grading and construction of infrastructure. The individual lots shall be graded to accept the expected buildings and driveways. All lots shall be designed and constructed with due regard to the natural topography.

(a) Walls and slopes proposed as a means of grade separation between lots shall be constructed as part of the mass grading phase of the project and shall be constructed entirely on the downhill lot.

(b) If lots are expected to be constructed for a daylight basement type building, the lot shall be prepared as near as possible for such a building by grading a terrace at some distance from the street. The excess material from the terrace shall be hauled off site or utilized as fill, if suitable elsewhere on the project. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.135 Grading – Individual lots.

Individual lots may be cleared and graded with the following restrictions:

(1) Excavation and fill will be allowed up to maximum depth of three feet, excluding the excavation required for the building foundations.

(2) Grading across property boundaries will only be allowed if a separate clearing and grading permit is issued for the grading activity for all affected lots.

(3) Any grading of the property and individual lots shall generally conform to the natural topography of the property and adjacent properties and all provisions of this chapter.

(4) All building lots shall be graded and prepared such that all roof, yard, wall, slope, driveway, and footing drains can be connected directly by gravity to the project’s drainage system. Discharge to an alternate location may be allowed only with prior approval of the City Engineer and appropriate easements from affected downstream property owners. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.140 Drainage.

Clearing and grading operations shall take all necessary precautions, through the use of best management practices (BMPs), to control drainage within the site and off site to avoid damage to adjoining properties and drainage facilities and prevent impacts to water quality as outlined in the City’s stormwater manual and Design and Construction Standards. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.150 Slopes.

Slopes shall be constructed with due regard for drainage, access, maintenance, impacts to adjacent property, and aesthetics. Constructed slopes shall comply with all applicable codes and standards and the following criteria:

(1) Fill slopes shall be constructed no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. Cut slopes may be constructed at a maximum slope of two horizontal to one vertical upon approval of the Director and recommendation of a geotechnical engineer for those areas lying outside the building envelope. In addition, the following standards shall apply to cut and fill slopes:

(a) Minimize clearing and grading on slopes 15 percent or greater. Clearing and grading on slopes shall meet any applicable critical areas standards set forth in Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(b) Slopes shall comply with the land use code restrictions applicable to slopes 40 percent or greater and to areas of colluvial or landslide deposit on slopes of 15 percent or greater.

(c) Do no clearing, excavation, stockpiling, or filling on the potential slide block of an unstable or potentially unstable slope unless it is demonstrated to the Director’s satisfaction that the activity would not increase the load, drainage, or erosion on the slope.

(d) Do no clearing, excavation, stockpiling, or filling on any unstable or potentially unstable areas (such as landslide deposits) unless it is demonstrated to the Director’s satisfaction that the activity would not increase the risk of damage to adjacent property or natural resources or injury to persons.

(e) Intercept any groundwater or surface water drainage encountered on a cut slope and discharge it at a location approved by the Director. Off-site stormwater (run-on) or groundwater shall be diverted away from slopes and undisturbed areas with interceptor dikes, pipes and/or swales. Off-site stormwater should be managed separately from stormwater generated on the site.

(f) Excavated material shall be placed on the uphill side of trenches, consistent with safety and space considerations.

(g) Check dams shall be placed at regular intervals within constructed channels.

(h) At the top of slopes, collect drainage in adequate pipe slope drains or armored channels to prevent erosion.

(2) Existing slopes shall not be over-steepened beyond the criteria in subsection (1) of this section by placing fill or by constructing a fill wall near the top of the slope.

(3) If building sites are prepared by constructing slopes near the property boundary, the slope shall be constructed in accordance with CMC 14.60.135.

(4) Drainage at the top and toe of any slope shall be appropriately collected and discharged.

(a) The ground surface above a slope shall be graded to direct surface runoff to an appropriate collection point. Water shall not be allowed to discharge over the top of a slope.

(b) Slopes shall not be constructed in a location or manner in which surface runoff and debris are permitted to drain onto an adjacent property.

(c) Slopes shall be designed and protected to minimize erosion.

(d) Terraces at least 10 feet in width shall be sloped away from the face of a slope and shall be established at not more than 25-foot vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a maximum gradient of five percent.

(e) The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries as far as necessary as determined by a geotechnical engineer for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage resulting from water runoff or erosion. The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures as far as is necessary as determined by a geotechnical engineer for adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.160 Fill.

All fill material shall be inspected and approved by the geotechnical engineer prior to the material arriving on site. All imported fill material received from other than a commercial borrow site shall be accompanied by a clean soil questionnaire stating that the material is free of hazardous wastes. Recycled concrete shall not be used.

(1) Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation and unsuitable soil and material such as concrete rubble, topsoil, tree stumps, and brush. Where slopes receiving fill are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical, the fill material shall be benched into sound bedrock.

(2) Fill Material. Fill shall be “clean” and free of contaminants pursuant to Chapters 173-204 and 173-340 WAC or fill shall be obtained from a Washington State Department of Ecology approved site. Only earth materials which have no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches shall be used. All on-site materials used as fill on the site shall conform to the specifications identified in the approved soils report.

(3) Compaction. All fill material shall be compacted to a firm and unyielding condition to a density of 95 percent of maximum density per ASTM D-1557, modified proctor.

(4) Special Criteria for Fill Activity during Expanded Work Hours. Any application to allow the unloading of fill material during expanded work hours as provided for in Chapter 8.20 CMC, Noise Control, must address the following:

(a) Any proposed nighttime unloading of fill material associated with an approved DNR surface mining reclamation permit shall be supported by a noise assessment, prepared by a qualified independent noise consultant, to evaluate and address potential noise impacts on surrounding residential uses and critical areas from that activity. The noise assessment should address at a minimum the following:

(i) Provide a summary of all noise regulations that would apply to the potential nighttime fill activities (i.e., City, County, State).

(ii) Provide a detailed description of the activities the applicant plans to conduct during the expanded work hours including time of day, specific equipment to be used (model numbers and power level data), and specific noise abatement technologies to be used (model numbers and vendor guaranteed attenuation data).

(iii) Conduct baseline noise monitoring, for at least a 24-hour period, at sensitive receiver locations (residences, open areas where wildlife could be impacted, and any other locations of concern).

(iv) Conduct computer noise modeling (using CADnaA or other noise modeling software) to demonstrate quantitatively that the noise levels at sensitive receivers (residences and wildlife areas) will not exceed specified decibel limits during daytime and nighttime operations.

(v) Chapter 8.20 CMC does not provide specific decibel limits; therefore, the noise assessment should refer to WAC 173-60-040 for maximum permissible environmental noise levels. The applicant shall implement noise reduction measures to the extent feasible to ensure compliance.

(b) Noise levels shall comply with Chapter 173-60 WAC. The City may condition any expanded work hour permit approval to require the applicant to ensure that noise levels are monitored by a technician with the qualifications contained in Chapter 173-58 WAC, or acceptable qualifications as determined by the City, using instruments that meet the qualifications of Chapter 173-58 WAC, at the property boundaries. Noise monitoring reports shall be provided to the City at least weekly or more frequently if the City determines more frequent monitoring is necessary. If the noise levels exceed the levels permitted by Chapter 173-60 WAC, the City may take any enforcement measures necessary to ensure compliance with Chapter 173-60 WAC.

(c) Lighting. All lighting shall be limited to the lowest intensity that allows the permitted activity to be carried out in a safe manner. The lights shall be shielded and directed so that illumination affects only the premises of the site and does not result in glare outside of the permit site.

(d) Vehicle Preparation. All vehicles leaving the site shall comply with RCW 46.61.655 (escape of load materials and cleaning of vehicles).

(e) Dust Control. The applicant shall obtain all required preconstruction approval permits from the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency and shall comply with all of the requirements of the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency. In addition, the City may require methods of dust control, such as water trucks or sprinklers, that will mitigate the dust from the site.

(f) Contact. The applicant shall visibly post his or her name, address and phone number or the name, address, and phone number of a designated person whom the public can contact during the expanded work hours, to report complaints or violations. The applicant’s designated person must be available during the expanded work hours to answer the phone and if necessary visit the site to address any reported complaints or violations. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.170 Rock and retaining walls.

Walls shall be designed and constructed with due regard for drainage, access, maintenance, impacts to adjacent property, and aesthetics. All walls shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes and standards and the following criteria:

(1) Rock walls may be used for erosion protection of cut or fill slopes. The primary function of a rock wall is to protect the slope face from soil erosion and sloughing.

(2) Any wall supporting a surcharge or an exposed wall height of greater than three feet shall require a separate building permit.

(3) All walls shall be provided with a wall drainage system. The wall drainage system shall discharge at an appropriate location:

(a) Wall drains shall be connected to the storm drainage stub provided for the lot, if possible.

(b) Wall drains shall not discharge onto an adjacent downhill property, unless downhill property is a vegetated area that has been set aside as permanent open space or critical area, with approval from the City.

(c) Wall drains shall not discharge onto a steep slope or area susceptible to erosion.

(d) The area above the wall shall be graded to channel water in a direction parallel to the face of the wall until the water can be collected in a pipe or drain, or discharged at an appropriate location.

(4) All walls parallel to a building shall be set back from the building a minimum of five feet. This setback applies to the horizontal space between the wall and the building as measured from the front face of a wall or the cut slope for a wall and the face of the building.

(5) Within the building setback, walls shall not exceed 30 inches in height as measured from the ground surface to the top of the wall.

(6) Walls existing at the time of the ordinance codified in this chapter, if constructed under a valid permit, may be repaired or replaced to their original height.

(7) Walls shall not support earth, other walls, or other structures on an adjacent property.

(8) Walls on a single-family lot may be no higher than four feet. The designer of walls shall also consider the fencing restriction on top of walls in general accordance with CMC 18.35.210.

(9) Walls shall not be located in separate tracts or public rights-of-way for the purposes of circumventing the provisions of this chapter.

(10) Walls shall not be stacked wherein a lower wall is supporting an upper wall, unless the lower wall is designed to do so. Minimum horizontal spacing between rock or retaining walls, as measured from face to face, shall be no less than the thickness of the lower wall plus the height of the lower wall.

(11) Cutting, filling, or constructing walls within storm, water, and sanitary sewer easements is prohibited, unless specific written approval from the utility owner is provided. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to obtain said approval and to provide a copy to the City.

(12) When preparing a grading plan and designing a roadway, use of a retaining wall to support the roadway shall be considered only after other design options are exhausted. When a roadway must be supported by a retaining wall, the City may require additional building setbacks, easements, or other restrictions and provisions to allow proper maintenance of the wall.

(13) Walls shall not be located or constructed so as to impede travel on a public walkway.

(14) The area above the wall shall be designed and constructed to prevent surface water and debris from flowing over the top of the wall and to allow for access and maintenance to the area above the wall.

(15) The area between the wall and the building shall be graded no steeper than five percent, perpendicular to the face of the wall, for a distance of five feet, for that area located within five feet of the building.

(16) Walls shall not be used to break up a slope or to circumvent the definition of or the restrictions for steep slope hazard areas as described in Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(17) Walls constructed between lots shall be constructed entirely on the downhill side of the property line entirely on one lot, including the wall drainage system. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.190 Driveways – Design.

Lots shall be prepared to accept a driveway meeting all applicable design and dimension standards regarding width and slope. Where a lot fronts on a steep roadway, the driveway shall be narrowed and/or lengthened in order to meet the standards regarding driveway slope. Where increased driveway lengths are required, subdivisions and short plats shall contain a note on the face of the plat indicating those lots affected and to what degree the driveways are to be lengthened. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.200 Inspections.

(1) All projects with a clearing and grading permit are subject to City inspections to ensure compliance with the permit and that adequate control is being exercised by the contractor, civil engineer, and geotechnical engineer. The Director will specify the general stages of work when City inspection is required and may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency, to be paid by the applicant.

(2) The applicant shall employ professionals to perform inspections of the site grading as follows:

(a) Geotechnical Engineer. The geotechnical engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and certification concerning the adequacy of erosion control measures, the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. The geotechnical engineer shall perform on-site geotechnical testing and observation during implementation of drainage features and while site grading is underway. Records of the geotechnical observation and testing shall be provided to the City on a regular basis.

(b) Civil Engineer. The civil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the inspection of the site grading and construction of roads and drainage facilities to verify compliance with approved plans, evaluate the need for design changes based on field conditions, including submittal of revised plans to the City for review and approval, and providing accurate as-built drawings upon completion of the clearing and grading operations.

(c) Special Inspectors. The applicant shall employ professional inspectors in the area of special concrete work, seismic hazards, or other areas as required by the project and/or the Director. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.210 Final approval.

(1) The Director shall give final approval to the clearing and grading operations once all the work is completed per the permit. The following must be completed, as a minimum, prior to final approval:

(a) All clearing and grading must be complete;

(b) The site shall be permanently stabilized, temporary erosion control measures removed, and storm drainage control facilities constructed and operational;

(c) The site shall be in a neat and orderly manner, free from junk, trash, debris, equipment, stockpiles and other construction materials;

(d) All required reports, certification letters, as-built drawings, and other documents shall be submitted and approved by the City;

(e) The site shall be free of hazards; and

(f) All disputes regarding property damage caused by the clearing and grading operations shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Director.

(2) The City shall not issue final approval for any development proposal or issue a certificate of occupancy or final building inspection for property that has not received final approval for the clearing and grading operations.

(3) Final Reports. Upon completion of the clearing and grading operations, the professionals having conducted inspections in their respective areas shall submit, in a form acceptable to the Director, final reports certifying that all portions of the project pertaining to their area of expertise have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The reports shall identify problems encountered, field changes, methods or designs utilized to correct deficiencies, and other information deemed necessary by the Director.

(a) Geotechnical Engineer. The geotechnical engineer shall submit a final soil grading report prepared by the geotechnical engineer, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, final description of the geology of the site including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same, and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendation made in the approved geotechnical report. The geotechnical engineer shall provide certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by soil and geologic factors.

(b) Civil Engineer. The civil engineer shall submit an as-built grading plan, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The civil engineer shall provide certification that the work was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan. Upon completion of the work, a reproducible as-built drawing, stamped by the civil engineer of record, of the storage, conveyance, and discharge elements of the detention system and the newly constructed downstream components of the storm drainage system shall be required. The Director may require additional information in respect to any significant deviations from the approved plans, specifications, or reports.

(c) Special Inspectors. Special inspectors shall submit final reports describing original and final conditions, changes, and methods utilized to correct deficiencies or mitigate specific conditions. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


14.60.240 Enforcement, violations and penalties.

(1) Permit Suspension/Revocation. The Director may suspend work or revoke a clearing and grading permit, as appropriate, whenever:

(a) The work is not authorized by a valid permit;

(b) The applicant requests such revocation or suspension;

(c) The work does not proceed in accordance with the plans, as approved, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or other applicable City ordinances;

(d) Entry upon the property for the purposes of investigation or inspection has been denied;

(e) The applicant has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for such permit;

(f) The progress of the work indicates that the plan is or will be inadequate to protect the public, the adjoining property, the street, critical areas, the drainage system, or other utilities, or the work endangers or will endanger the public, the adjoining property, the street, protected areas, the drainage system or other utilities;

(g) The required project security has expired or been expended to the point that it no longer provides assurance of completion of the project in compliance with the terms of the permit; or

(h) The permit has not been acted upon or extended within the time allowed pursuant to CMC 14.60.110.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil code violation subject to and enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 04-19 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 08-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 14.70 SPECIAL REVIEW

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.75 SUBDIVISION PERMIT

(Recodified as CMC 17.15.145 by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.80 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE PERMIT

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.85 ZONING AND LAND USE PERMIT

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.90 ROAD IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.92 PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE IMPACT FEES

(Recodified as Chapter 18.122 CMC by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.95 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

Sections:

14.95.010    School impact and administrative fees.


14.95.010 School impact and administrative fees. 

(1) Repealed.

(2) Recodified as CMC 18.120.030(1) by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 20-07 § 77; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.44.010))


Chapter 14.100 PUBLIC WORKS FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 20-07)


Chapter 14.105 FINANCIAL GUARANTEES

Sections:

14.105.010    Purpose.

14.105.020    Repealed.

14.105.030    Applicability.

14.105.040    Rules.

14.105.050    Financial guarantee conditions.

14.105.060    Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

14.105.070    Performance guarantee reductions.

14.105.080    Release of financial guarantees.

14.105.090    Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections.

14.105.100    Financial guarantee waivers.

14.105.110    Status of current financial guarantees.

14.105.120    Performance guarantees authorized.

14.105.130    Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized.

14.105.140    Default.

14.105.150    Restoration and reclamation activities.

14.105.160    Site development and restoration.

14.105.170    Liability insurance.

14.105.180    Hold harmless.


14.105.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish authority and procedures for accepting and enforcing financial guarantees, with the intent of assuring that development projects are completed and maintained in accordance with City approval conditions. (Ord. 20-07 § 80; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.010))


14.105.020 Provisions.

Repealed by Ord. 14-09. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.020))


14.105.030 Applicability. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to permits and approvals granted pursuant to CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors). No permit shall be issued unless the developer or contractor posts and maintains a financial guarantee and liability insurance for the period of time the permit is in effect as required by this chapter. (Ord. 14-09 § 2; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.030))


14.105.040 Rules. 

The Department is authorized to adopt such rules as are deemed appropriate to implement this division. The Director may prepare and require the use of such forms as are deemed appropriate for its administration. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.040))


14.105.050 Financial guarantee conditions. 

(1) The developer or contractor shall furnish a performance financial guarantee, which shall be conditioned upon faithful completion of that work performed pursuant to the conditions of approval for development or other permit and in accordance with CMC 14.105.120. All work on public and private roads, work within right-of-way or easements for public or private roads, and construction or modification of storm drainage facilities required as a condition of approval or associated with a City-issued permit, shall be guaranteed by a performance financial guarantee at the time of permit issuance. 

(2) The developer or contractor shall guarantee the successful operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the required improvements in accordance with CMC 14.105.130.

(3) Every financial guarantee shall obligate the applicant to comply with all of the provisions of the Covington Municipal Code and complete all conditions required by the permit or approval within the time limit specified by the financial guarantee.

(4) No financial guarantee shall be released by the City until the City’s inspector has inspected the site(s) and the developer’s engineer or appropriate technical professional has provided written confirmation that the performance, maintenance, mitigation or monitoring requirements have been met. 

(5) The City may collect against the financial guarantee when work is not completed in a timely manner in accordance with conditions of the permit and/or approval granted pursuant to CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors). It is in the Director’s sole reasonable discretion to determine whether the permit or approval conditions have been satisfied in a timely manner, and to determine whether the performance guarantee shall be collected to remedy the violation. The Director shall notify the applicant in writing of any such determination. (Ord. 14-09 § 3; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.050))


14.105.060 Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

(1) Financial guarantees shall be in a form approved by the Director, Finance Director, and City Attorney. All financial institutions identified on a guarantee shall be approved by the Finance Director.

(2) The amounts of the financial guarantees shall be based on the schedules appropriate to the required work, which are updated on a periodic and frequent basis to ensure that the amount fully captures likely costs. Financial guarantees shall also require a contingency in an amount to be determined by the Director. (Ord. 14-09 § 4; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.060))


14.105.070 Performance guarantee reductions.

The Director may allow reductions in performance guarantee amounts in accordance with the City’s cost estimate of the work remaining to be completed. No more than one reduction will be allowed except that two reductions may be allowed at the Director’s discretion for phased subdivisions. The reduction shall not exceed 70 percent of the initial guarantee value including contingency. The request for reduction shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.070))


14.105.080 Release of financial guarantees.

The Department shall not release performance guarantees until all permit fees have been paid to date, maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees have been posted, if applicable, inspection of the development site has been performed, and the Director has determined that the conditions and requirements of the permit/approval otherwise specified in the financial guarantee have been met and granted final construction approval if applicable. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.080))


14.105.090 Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections.

The Department shall be responsible for scheduling final performance, and maintenance and defects inspections. The Department should schedule such inspections approximately 45 days prior to expiration of the performance or maintenance period. If necessary to determine completion of performance, additional inspections should also be made after the expiration of the performance period. Periodic inspections may also be made at the discretion of the Director. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.090))


14.105.100 Financial guarantee waivers.

Consistent with Chapter 36.32 RCW, the City shall not require any State agency, unit of local government, or gas company or electrical company (as those terms are defined in RCW 80.04.010) to secure the performance of a permit requirement with a financial guarantee as a condition of issuing a permit or approval for a building construction project. The Director, however, may require such State agency or unit of local government, gas company or electric company to sign an agreement to complete required improvements and protect the City’s rights and duty to remedy unsatisfactory performance. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.100))


14.105.110 Status of current financial guarantees.

All financial guarantees required by the Department and posted by the applicant prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to be in force until released by the Director following satisfactory compliance with financial guarantee conditions. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.110))


14.105.120 Performance guarantees authorized. 

(1) The Department is authorized to require all applicants constructing improvements pursuant to any permits and approvals granted pursuant to CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) to post performance guarantees with the Director to guarantee completion of required improvements and compliance with this code.

(2) If more than one such guarantee is required, the applicant may, with the permission of the Director, and to the extent allowable by law, combine guarantees; provided, that at no time shall the guaranteed amount be less than the total amount which would have been required in the form of separate financial guarantees; and provided further, that such guarantee shall on its face clearly delineate those separate additional financial guarantees which it is intended in lieu of. 

(3) Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, or as a condition of permit approval, performance guarantees shall require actual construction and installation of required improvements within one year after recording for final subdivision, one year after recording for short subdivision, one year after right-of-way permit issuance or six months after temporary building occupancy issued for a building permit. The time limit for performance guarantee compliance may be extended by six months at the Director’s discretion, if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work and an estimate of the cost to complete the required improvements. The bond amount shall be increased, as determined by the Director, if the delay will cause an increase in construction costs. The City of Covington must approve the release of all financial guarantees. No agent shall release a financial guarantee without City approval. (Ord. 14-09 § 5; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.120))


14.105.130 Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized. 

(1) The Department is authorized to require all applicants to post a maintenance guarantee and/or defect guarantee warranting the successful operation and maintenance of improvements, and guaranteeing the workmanship, materials, and design used in construction of improvements required by the conditions of any permits or approvals issued pursuant to CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) and assuring compliance with the City of Covington Municipal Code.

(2) Unless otherwise specifically indicated in the City of Covington Municipal Code, all maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall guarantee successful operation, workmanship, materials, and design of required facilities for a period of two years following final inspection and approval of improvements.

(3) Inspections of facilities required pursuant to CMC Titles 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) should be scheduled by the appropriate Department approximately 45 days prior to the end of the two-year maintenance and/or defect period. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.130))


14.105.140 Default. 

(1) Determination of default shall be made by the Department after an inspection has indicated that improvements need to be corrected or completed. In the event of failure to comply with any of the conditions and terms of the permits and/or approvals covered by this division, the Director shall notify the applicant and guarantor in writing of the default. If satisfactory assurance is not received by the Department within a time period determined by the Director, that conditions will be appropriately corrected, the Department may: 

(a) Order the applicant to perform all necessary corrective work; and/or 

(b) Demand payment on the financial guarantee(s). Nothing in this division shall limit the ability of the City to enforce or otherwise compel compliance with conditions of any City permit or approval in accordance with any enforcement provision set forth in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(2) The guarantor shall be responsible, up to the limits of the financial guarantee, for the payment of any and all necessary costs and expenses that have been or will be incurred or expended by the City in causing any and all such required work to be done. In the event that total costs associated with the required work exceed the guarantee amount, the applicant shall remain responsible to the City of Covington for the payment of any remaining amount.

(3) In the event of default, the City may contract with a third party to complete work required pursuant to this division. (Ord. 10-07 § 7; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.50.140))


14.105.150 Restoration and reclamation activities. 

(1) Financial guarantees for restoration and reclamation activities required pursuant to CMC Titles 14, 15 and 18 shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. The financial guarantee may be reduced proportionately for phased projects as work is complete and subsequent reclamation and/or restoration on each phase is completed. The request for reduction shall be in writing.

(2) Financial guarantees may be waived for activities pursuant to CMC Title 14, 15 or 18: 

(a) Projects of less than 500 cubic yards of excavation, fill, or a combination thereof unless associated with a development application for short plat, subdivision binding site plan, or commercial site development permit;

(b) City of Covington Department projects; and

(c) Reclamation projects with financial guarantees posted with the State of Washington Department of Natural Resources or with the Federal Office of Surface Mining. (Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-09 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 82; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.030). Formerly 14.110.030)


14.105.160 Site development and restoration. 

(1) Financial guarantees for any improvement required pursuant to CMC Titles 14, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of complying with conditions of the permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. Such financial guarantees shall include site restoration and stabilization requirements.

(2) No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued until:

(a) Drainage facility improvements are functional;

(b) Required parking is provided; and

(c) Safe access is provided.

(3) The Director may allow a performance guarantee to be posted for some or all of the improvements required by subsection (2) of this section if no life safety hazard exists. The request shall be made in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of required improvements. (Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 82; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.050). Formerly 14.110.050)


14.105.170 Liability insurance. 

(1) The developer of record shall carry comprehensive general and automobile insurance in an amount not less than $2,000,000. The liability insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the developer during the period the permit and approval are in effect. The insurance shall include the city as an additional named insured and shall protect the city from any liability up to those amounts for any accident, negligence, or any other liability whatsoever, relating to the construction or maintenance of the development. Liability insurance can be waived for projects less than 500 cubic yards of excavation, fill, or a combination thereof unless associated with a development application for short plat, subdivision binding site plan, or commercial site development permit.

(2) The developer shall not commence work until he has furnished evidence (in duplicate copy) of liability insurance, and such insurance has been approved by the city; nor shall the developer allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on his contract or subcontract until the same insurance requirements have been complied with by such contractor or subcontractor. Approval of the insurance by the city shall not relieve or decrease the liability of the developer thereby. Companies writing the insurance under this section shall be authorized to do business in the State of Washington. (Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-09 § 7)


14.105.180 Hold harmless.

The developer or contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and the city engineer, and their agents, employees, and volunteers from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses for bodily injury, sickness, disease, or death, or for injury or destruction of tangible property (other than the work itself), including the loss of use resulting therefrom, and including attorney’s fees, arising out of or resulting from the performance of the work and shall, after reasonable notice, defend and pay the expense of defending any suit and pay any judgment resulting from any such suit; provided, that any such claim, damage, loss, or expense is caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or omission or by any other action giving rise to strict liability of the developer, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them, or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, regardless of whether or not it is caused in part by a party indemnified hereunder. 

(1) In any and all claims against the city or city engineer, or any of their agents, employees, or volunteers by any employee of the developer, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them, or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, the indemnification obligation under this section shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages or compensation under workman’s compensation acts, disability benefit acts, or other employee’s benefit acts. 

(2) The obligations of the developer under this section shall not include the sole negligence of the city or city engineer. (Ord. 14-09 § 8)


Chapter 14.110 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FEES

Sections:

14.110.010    Repealed.

14.110.020    Recodified.

14.110.030    Recodified.

14.110.040    Recodified.

14.110.050    Recodified.

14.110.060    Recodified.

14.110.070    Recodified.

14.110.080    Recodified.

14.110.090    Repealed.

14.110.100    Repealed.


14.110.010 General. 

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.010))


14.110.020 Drainage improvements.

Recodified as CMC 13.25.100 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.020))


14.110.030 Restoration and reclamation activities. 

Recodified as CMC 14.105.150 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.030))


14.110.040 Rights-of-way.

Moved to CMC 12.70.100 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.040))


14.110.050 Site development and restoration. 

Recodified as CMC 14.105.160 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.050))


14.110.060 Subdivisions. 

Moved to CMC 17.15.140(5) by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.060))


14.110.070 Landscaping. 

Recodified at end of CMC 18.40.150 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.070))


14.110.080 Sensitive areas. 

Recodified at end of CMC 18.65.140 by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.080))


14.110.090 Abatement of dangerous buildings financial guarantees.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 5; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.090))


14.110.100 Moved and temporary buildings.

Repealed by Ord. 20-07. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 6; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.70.100))


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    International Codes Adoption

15.15    Fireworks (Effective until December 10, 2020)

15.15    Fireworks (Effective December 10, 2020)

15.20    Fire Code

15.30    Preventable Alarms

15.40    Unfit Structures

15.50    Minimum Standards for Vacant Buildings


Chapter 15.05 INTERNATIONAL CODES ADOPTION

Sections:

15.05.010    Purpose.

15.05.020    Definitions.

15.05.030    Building Safety Division established.

15.05.040    Building Official designated.

15.05.050    Fire Chief and Fire Marshal designated.

15.05.060    Administration and enforcement of code.

15.05.070    International Building Code adopted.

15.05.080    International Residential Code adopted.

15.05.090    Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

15.05.100    International Mechanical Code adopted.

15.05.110    International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

15.05.120    National Fuel Gas Code (ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54) adopted.

15.05.130    Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

15.05.140    International Energy Conservation Code adopted.

15.05.150    International Fire Code adopted.

15.05.160    International Property Maintenance Code adopted.

15.05.170    International Existing Building Code adopted.

15.05.180    Washington State Manufactured Homes (Mobile Homes) Installation Standards – General.

15.05.190    Copies of codes on file.

15.05.200    Fees.

15.05.210    Code conflicts.

15.05.220    Appeals.

15.05.230    Violations.


15.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter as adopted is to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and not to create or to otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

(1) The purpose of the international codes adoption chapter is to regulate construction and/or development of site work within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Covington. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to adopt locally State-mandated laws and codes regulating construction in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or users of buildings and structures and the general public as a whole by enforcement of building codes throughout this jurisdiction.

(2) It is also the purpose of this title, through enforcement of referenced codes, to regulate the safe and proper function of elements of a site or site improvement work and essential systems of a building including structural framing, plumbing and sanitation, water conservation, heating, air conditioning, ventilation, energy efficiency, safe and equal access, fire suppression systems, alarm systems, and Fire Department access. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.020 Definitions.

The definitions contained in the codes adopted by reference together with the definitions contained within the applicable RCW and WAC provisions shall apply to the enforcement of this chapter unless amended in this section.

Because this section contains amended definitions or terms, a full alphabetical listing of definitions is not duplicated here. Where a term or phrase is defined in this section, the definition printed in this section amends the corresponding definitions in the codes or laws adopted by reference.

(1) “Building code” or “City of Covington Building Code” shall mean and refer to the State Building Code as adopted herein and as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) “Buildings and construction code” shall mean and refer to the International Building Code, as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(3) “Building Official” shall mean the officer or other duly authorized representative as designated by the Community Development Director, charged with the administration and enforcement of the following codes:

(a) International Building Code;

(b) International Residential Code;

(c) International Mechanical Code;

(d) Uniform Plumbing Code;

(e) International Property Maintenance Code;

(f) International Energy Conservation Code;

(g) International Existing Building Code.

(4) “Building service equipment” means and refers to the plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures, and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting, and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

(5) “Corporation counsel” shall mean “City Attorney or designee.”

(6) “City Treasurer” shall mean “Finance Director.”

(7) “CMC” means the Covington Municipal Code.

(8) “Executive body” shall mean the City of Covington Council.

(9) “Existing building” means a building erected prior to the adoption of this code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued and approved.

(10) “Fire code” shall mean and refer to the International Fire Code, as amended pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.20 CMC.

(11) “Fire Marshal” shall mean the Fire Code Official, officer or other duly authorized representative as designated by the Director of Community Development, charged with the administration and enforcement of the International Fire Code.

(12) “International Building Code” shall mean and refer to those portions of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(13) “International Existing Building Code” shall mean and refer to the International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to time by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(14) “International Fire Code” shall mean and refer to those portions of the International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(15) “International Fuel Gas Code and the National Fuel Gas Code” shall mean and refer to those portions of the International Fuel Gas Code and the National Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., that are made a part of the International Mechanical Code, and as are adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(16) “International Mechanical Code” shall mean and refer to those portions of the International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(17) “International Property Maintenance Code” shall mean and refer to International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted pursuant to Section 101.4.5 of the International Building Code.

(18) “International Residential Code” shall mean and refer to those portions of the International Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(19) “Local zoning code” shall mean “CMC Title 18, Zoning.”

(20) “Mechanical code” shall mean and refer to the International Mechanical Code, as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(21) “Mobile home” or “manufactured home” as defined by RCW 46.04.302 means a structure, designed and constructed to be transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities that include plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein.

(22) “Modular home” as defined by RCW 46.04.303 means a factory-assembled structure designed primarily for use as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities that include plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein, does not contain its own running gear, and is mounted on a permanent foundation. A modular home does not include a mobile home or manufactured home.

(23) “Municipality,” “City” and “jurisdiction” shall mean the “City of Covington.” 

(24) “Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

(25) “Person” shall mean and refer to any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock-company, limited liability company, political subdivision, public corporation, taxing districts, trust, or any other legal entity.

(26) “Plumbing code and plumbing code standards” shall mean and refer to the Uniform Plumbing Code and Uniform Plumbing Code Standards, as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(27) “Residential code” shall mean and refer to the International Residential Code, as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(28) “Shall” or “will” as used in this chapter is mandatory.

(29) “State Building Code” shall mean and consist of the national model codes and standards, as such model codes and standards are adopted and amended from time to time by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51.

(30) “State Energy Code” shall mean and refer to the Washington State Energy Code as set forth at Chapter 51-11 WAC, including the Washington State Residential Energy Code and the Washington State Nonresidential Energy Code, and all amendments thereto as adopted from time to time.

(31) “Substantial remodel or addition” means any additions, alterations, or repairs to existing structures in which the area of the additions, alterations, or repairs exceeds more than 50 percent of the habitable area of the existing structure. In the case of a series of additions, alterations, or repairs projects, this title shall become effective at the point where in any three-year period the cumulative area of additions, alterations, or repairs exceeds 50 percent of the area of the structure at the time such additions, alterations, or repairs are commenced or any alteration, remodel, repair or addition which exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing structure. 

(32) “Technical codes” shall mean and refer to the national codes, standards and appendices incorporated as part of the State Building Code, including, without limitation, the International Property Maintenance Code, all as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, together with the International Existing Building Code and the State Energy Code, as amended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(33) “Used mobile home” means a mobile home, which has been previously sold at retail and has been subjected to tax under Chapter 82.08 RCW, or which has been previously used and has been subjected to tax under Chapter 82.12 RCW, and which has substantially lost its identity as a mobile unit at the time of sale by virtue of its being fixed in location upon land owned or leased by the owner of the mobile home and placed on a foundation (posts or blocks) with fixed pipe connections with sewer, water, and other utilities.

(34) “Uniform Plumbing Code and Uniform Plumbing Code Standards” shall mean and refer to those portions of the Uniform Plumbing Code and Uniform Plumbing Code Standards, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as adopted and amended from time to time and made a part of the State Building Code by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.030 Building Safety Division established.

There is established for the City the Building Safety Division as defined in Section 103.1 of the International Building Code, and Section R103.1 of the International Residential Code, and shall be under the supervision and control of the Community Development Director or his/her designee. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.040 Building Official designated.

The Building Official, as defined in Section 104 of the International Building Code, Section R104 of the International Residential Code, and Section 104 of the International Mechanical Code and the codes adopted by the Washington State Building Code Council pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW and WAC Title 51 shall be appointed by the Community Development Director. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.050 Fire Chief and Fire Marshal designated.

The Fire Code Official, as defined in Section 104 of the International Fire Code, shall be appointed by the Community Development Director. The Fire Code Official is also referred to as “Fire Chief” or “Fire Marshal.” (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.060 Administration and enforcement of code.

The City of Covington Community Development Department is charged with the administration and enforcement of the codes referenced in CMC 15.05.070 through 15.05.180. To this end, the Building Official and the Fire Marshal shall provide a system that will retain necessary personnel, conduct inspections and investigations, issue appropriate permits, maintain necessary records and files, and do, or cause to be done, all things necessary and proper for the administration and enforcement of the codes. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.070 International Building Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Building Code (IBC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council and as published by the International Code Council together with Appendix Chapters H – Signs, and I – Patio Covers, as adopted and amended by Chapter 51-50 WAC.

(1) IBC Section 105.2 Exception 1 is amended as follows:

105.2 Exception 1 One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and Federal, State, County, and City owned properties may have one storage building not to exceed 275 square feet.

(2) IBC Section 113 Deleted, Board of Appeals. Section 113 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(3) IBC Section 114.4 Violation Penalties. Section 114.4 is amended with the following:

114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.080 International Residential Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Residential Code (IRC), 2015 Edition, including Chapters 1 through 10, 12 through 24 and 44, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with: Appendix E, Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings; and Appendix K, Sound Transmission.

(1) IRC Section R105.2 Exception 1 is amended as follows:

R105.2 Exception 1 One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet.

(2) IRC Section R105.2 Exception 10 is amended as follows:

R105.2 Exception 10 Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling, do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4, and decks that are not more than 18 inches above grade at any point.

(3) IRC Section R108.6 is amended as follows:

R108.6 Any person who commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

(4) IRC Section R112 Deleted, Board of Appeals. Section R112 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(5) IRC Section R113.4 Violation Penalties. Section R113.4 is amended with the following:

R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.090 Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-56 WAC, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.

(1) UPC Section 102.3 Deleted, Board of Appeals. UPC Section 102.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(2) UPC Section 1101.1 Where Required. Section 1101.1 is amended with the following:

All roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, and courtyards shall be drained into a separate storm sewer system or to some other place of disposal satisfactory of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In the case of one- and two-family dwellings, stormwater may be discharged on flat areas such as streets or lawns so long as the stormwater shall flow away from the building, shall flow away from adjoining property, shall not create a nuisance, and shall be in accordance with the approved drainage report.

(3) UPC Section 1101.5.2 is amended with the following:

Subsoil drains shall discharge downstream of water quality treatment or flow control facilities unless such facilities are designed to accommodate subsoil drain discharges and documented in the approved drainage report.

(4) UPC Section 1101.1.2.2.2 is replaced with the following:

The secondary roof drains shall connect to the vertical piping of the primary storm drainage conductor downstream of any horizontal offset below the roof. The primary storm drainage system shall connect to the building stormwater system that connects to the on-site conveyance system. The combined secondary and primary roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106.0 based on double the rainfall rate for the local area.

(5) UPC Sections 1103.1, 1103.3 and 1103.4 are deleted.

(6) UPC Section 1104.3 is replaced with the following:

a. Combining storm and sanitary drainage is prohibited.

(7) UPC Section 102.5 Penalties. Section 102.5 is amended with the following:

102.5 Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.100 International Mechanical Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by the International Code Council.

(1) IMC Section 109 Deleted, Means of Appeal. IMC Section 109 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(2) IMC Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Section 108.4 is amended with the following:

108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.110 International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by the International Code Council.

(1) IFGC Section 109 Deleted, Means of Appeal. IFGC Section 109 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(2) IFGC Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Section 108.4 is amended with the following:

108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.120 National Fuel Gas Code (ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54) adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the National Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by NFPA. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.130 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, 2014 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC, as published by NFPA. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.140 International Energy Conservation Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC, as published by the International Code Council.

(1) IECC Section C109 Deleted, Board of Appeals. IECC Section C109 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(2) IECC Section R109 Deleted, Board of Appeals. IECC Section R109 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.150 International Fire Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Fire Code as it may be specifically adopted in Chapter 15.20 CMC. This shall be known as the International Fire Code or the IFC. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.160 International Property Maintenance Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council as published by the International Code Council.

(1) The International Property Maintenance Code is amended by deleting Section 103 title and replacing it with:

Administration and Enforcement of Property Maintenance Inspection.

(2) The International Property Maintenance Code is amended by deleting Section 103.1 and replacing it with:

The official in charge of enforcing and administering the International Property Maintenance Code shall be known as the code official. “Code Official” shall mean the Building Official or the designee of the City Manager. The Code Official is responsible for the enforcement and administration of the International Property Maintenance Code. All references within this code to “Department of Property Maintenance Inspection” shall mean the “City of Covington”.

(3) The International Property Maintenance Code is amended by deleting Section 103.2.

(4) The International Property Maintenance Code, Section 109.5, is amended by adding the following:

109.5 Assessment. Upon certification of the assessment amount being due and owing, the county treasurer shall enter the amount of the assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as provided for in RCW 84.56.020, as now or later amended, for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city.

Priority. The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county and municipal taxes.

The code official shall keep an itemized accounting of the expenses incurred by the City of Covington in the course of repair or demolition of any building pursuant to the provisions of Section 110.3 of this code. Upon completion of the demolition or repair work as ordered, the code official will prepare a report specifying the work performed and the itemized cost of such work and the legal description of the property upon which the work was performed.

The code official shall prepare and forward to the legal owner of the said property an itemized billing of the total cost for the repair or demolition as required by Section 110.3 of this code. Such billing shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner as the owner’s name and address appear on the last equalized tax roll of King County. Said bill shall be due and payable within sixty (60) days of receipt.

The owner may file with the applicable department a written appeal to the Hearing Examiner within thirty (30) days of receipt of the billing pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapter 14.35 CMC. Within thirty (30) days of the Hearing Examiner’s decision, the balance of the billing due to the city shall become due and payable and if unpaid shall become a special assessment against the property as a lien.

(5) The following sections of the IPMC, or the corresponding section of any updated or amended version of the IPMC, are removed in their entirety and not adopted: 

	302.2	Grading and drainage

	302.5	Rodent harborage

	302.8	Motor vehicles

	302.9	Defacement of property

	304.2	Protective treatment

	304.13.2	Openable windows

	304.14	Insect screens

	304.15	Exterior doors

	304.17	Guards for basement windows

	304.18	Building security

	305.3	Interior surfaces

	305.6	Interior doors

	307	Rubbish and garbage

	308	Extermination

	404.4.1	Room area

	404.5	Overcrowding

	404.6	Efficiency unit

	604.2	Electrical appliance service

(Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.170 International Existing Building Code adopted.

There is adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, at length, that certain code known as the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2015 Edition, as adopted by the State Building Code Council as published by the International Code Council.

(1) IEBC Section 113 Deleted, Board of Appeals. Section 113 is hereby deleted in its entirety and substitution is made to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with CMC 15.05.220.

(2) IEBC Section 114.4 Violation Penalties. Section 114.4 is amended with the following:

114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(3) IEBC Section 301.1 General. Section 301.1 is amended with the following:

301.1 General. The repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of all existing buildings shall comply with one of the methods listed in Sections 301.1.1 through 301.1.2 as selected by the applicant. Sections 301.1.1 through 301.1.2 shall not be applied in combination with each other. Where this code requires consideration of the seismic force resisting system of an existing building subject to repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings, the seismic evaluation and design shall be based on Section 301.1.4 regardless of which compliance method is used.

(4) The International Existing Building Code is amended by deleting Section 301.3.

(5) The International Existing Building Code is amended by deleting Chapter 14 entirely. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.180 Washington State Manufactured Homes (Mobile Homes) Installation Standards – General.

The City of Covington adopts the following section pursuant to the authority of Chapters 19.27 and 43.22 RCW:

(1) Permit Required.

(a) Prior to the placement and/or installation of a mobile home on a parcel of land or on a site in a mobile home park, an installation permit must be obtained from the City of Covington Community Development Department.

(b) Installing a manufactured home (mobile home) without first having obtained the required permit is not permitted and is subject to the penalties and the serving of a stop work order.

(2) Complete Application. Pursuant to RCW 19.27.095 and 19.27.097, and in addition to the requirements of IRC Section R105.3, no building permit application shall be complete unless or until evidence of an adequate water supply and evidence of water availability and sewer availability or an adequate sewage disposal system for the intended use of the building is provided from an approved agency for structures where plumbing fixtures are part of the proposed building permit application.

(a) Upon building permit application, where parcels are serviced by on-site sewage disposal systems, an accepted building site application is required for:

(i) New construction;

(ii) Additions where there is an increase in the floor area which extends beyond the original exterior walls;

(iii) Alteration or remodeling where the total number of bedrooms is increased; or

(iv) Change in use which results in an increase in the water/sewage volume or potential health risk.

(b) Upon building permit application, a sewer permit or a sewer and water availability letter from the utility district are required for new single-family residences.

(3) Inspections.

(a) The following inspections are required:

(i) Footing and foundation inspection;

(ii) Plumbing;

(iii) Fuel gas piping, if applicable; and

(iv) Final inspection.

(b) Occupancy of a manufactured home (mobile home) shall not be allowed prior to receiving an approved final inspection.

(c) Occupancy of a manufactured home prior to receiving an approved final inspection is subject to the penalties and the serving of a stop work order. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.190 Copies of codes on file.

The City shall at all times keep on file with the City Clerk, for reference by the general public, not less than one copy of the adopted codes and resolutions, or parts thereof, as herein adopted by reference, together with the amendments and supplements thereto herein made a part of this chapter. The copy of codes on file may be placed by the City Clerk in the custody of the office of the Building Official in order to make them more readily available for inspection and use by the general public. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.200 Fees.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the fee for any permit issued by the City under the authority of this chapter shall be as established by the City Council. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.210 Code conflicts.

In case of conflict among the above adopted codes, the hierarchy of the codes adopted by CMC 15.05.070 through 15.05.180 shall be in the order they appear. The first named code shall supersede and shall govern over those following, except as specifically described within Chapters 51-11 through 51-47 WAC. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.220 Appeals.

(1) Creation. There is created a single, consolidated Board of Appeals to exercise those powers and determine those matters as specified in International Building Code Section 112, International Residential Code Section R112, International Mechanical Code Section 109, International Fire Code Section 108, Uniform Plumbing Code Section 102.4, International Existing Building Code Section 112, and International Property Maintenance Code Section 111.1.

(2) Name. All references to “Board of Appeals” in this chapter shall mean the City’s Hearing Examiner.

(3) Filings. Notices of appeal of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official or Fire Marshal shall be filed with the City of Covington Community Development Department within 14 days of the order, decision or determination. 

(4) Where the adoption of these codes requires a certain appeal body, requirement or process, the City Hearing Examiner shall serve as the hearing and decision-making authority for those codes, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 14.30 CMC for a Type 1 decision. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


15.05.230 Violations.

The provisions of this chapter shall constitute a regulation within the meaning of CMC 1.30.020(9), a violation per CMC 1.30.020(10) of which is subject to the code enforcement provision and penalties set forth at Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 11-16 § 1 (Exh. 1))


Chapter 15.15 FIREWORKS (Effective until December 10, 2020)

Sections:

15.15.010    Intent.

15.15.020    Definitions.

15.15.060    Act prohibited without a license – Minimum age for license or permit – Activities permitted without license or permit.

15.15.065    Application for permit.

15.15.070    Investigation, report on permit application.

15.15.080    Director to grant permits – Statewide standards, liability insurance.

15.15.082    Public display permit – Investigation – Governing body to grant – Conditions.

15.15.084    Public display permit – Bond or insurance for liability.

15.15.086    Public display permit – Granted for exclusive purpose.

15.15.088    Public display permit – Amount of bond or insurance.

15.15.090    Retailers – Purchase from licensed wholesalers.

15.15.100    Seizure of fireworks.

15.15.110    Seizure of fireworks – Proceedings for forfeiture – Disposal of confiscated fireworks.

15.15.120    Prohibited transfers of fireworks.

15.15.130    Unlawful possession of fireworks – Penalties.

15.15.140    Unlawful discharge or use of fireworks – Penalty.

15.15.150    Unlawful sales or transfers of special fireworks – Penalty.

15.15.160    Unlawful sales or transfers of common fireworks – Penalty.

15.15.180    Unlawful to permit fire nuisance where fireworks kept – Penalty.

15.15.190    Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes, forest protection.

15.15.200    Special effects for entertainment media.

15.15.210    Penalty.

15.15.220    Violation a separate, continuing offense.

15.15.230    Civil enforcement not precluded.

15.15.240    Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.

15.15.250    Permit application fees.

15.15.260    Administration.


15.15.010 Intent.

The City Council declares that fireworks, when purchased and used in compliance with the Covington Municipal Code and the laws of the State of Washington, are legal. The City Council intends that this chapter is regulatory only, and not prohibitory. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.020 Definitions.

(1) “City” means the City of Covington. 

(2) “Fireworks” means any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the definition of articles pyrotechnic or consumer fireworks or display fireworks. 

(3) “Display fireworks” means large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation and includes, but is not limited to, salutes containing more than two grains (130 mg) of explosive materials, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic compositions, and other display pieces which exceed the limits of explosive materials for classification as “consumer fireworks” and are classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States Department of Transportation at 49 C.F.R. Section 172.101 as of June 13, 2002, and including fused setpieces containing components which exceed 50 mg of salute powder. 

(4) “Consumer fireworks” means any small fireworks device designed to produce visible effects by combustion and which must comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and 1507 and including some small devices designed to produce audible effects, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing 50 mg or less of explosive materials, and aerial devices containing 130 mg or less of explosive materials and classified as fireworks UN0336 by the United States Department of Transportation at 49 C.F.R. Section 172.101 as of June 13, 2002, and not including fused setpieces containing components which together exceed 50 mg of salute powder. 

(5) “Articles pyrotechnic” means pyrotechnic devices for professional use, similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, which meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but which are not labeled as such and which are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States Department of Transportation at 49 C.F.R. Section 172.101 as of June 13, 2002. 

(6) “Agricultural and wildlife fireworks” includes fireworks devices distributed to farmers, ranchers, and growers through a wildlife management program administered by the United States Department of the Interior or an equivalent state or local governmental agency. 

(7)  “Special effects” means any combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere, and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical, or opera production, or live entertainment. 

(8) “Public display of fireworks” means an entertainment feature where the public is or could be admitted or allowed to view the display or discharge of display fireworks. 

(9) “Fire nuisance” means anything or any act which increases, or may cause an increase of, the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay, or hinder, or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay, or hindrance to the prevention or extinguishment of fire. 

(10) “License” means a nontransferable formal authorization which the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, is authorized to issue under this chapter to allow a person to engage in the act specifically designated therein. 

(11) “Licensee” means any person issued a fireworks license in conformance with this chapter. 

(12) “Local fire official” means the City of Covington Fire Marshal.

(13) “Permit” means the official authorization granted by the City for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a place within the City where fireworks are manufactured, constructed, produced, packaged, stored, sold, or exchanged and the official authorization granted by the City for a public display of fireworks. 

(14) “Permittee” means any person issued a fireworks permit in conformance with this chapter. 

(15) “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 

(16) “Importer” includes any person who for any purpose other than personal use:

(a) Brings fireworks into this State or causes fireworks to be brought into this State;

(b) Procures the delivery or receives shipments of any fireworks into this State; or

(c) Buys or contracts to buy fireworks for shipment into this State. 

(17) “Manufacturer” includes any person who manufactures, makes, constructs, fabricates, or produces any fireworks article or device, but does not include persons who assemble or fabricate sets or mechanical pieces in public displays of fireworks or persons who assemble consumer fireworks items or sets or packages containing consumer fireworks items. 

(18) “Wholesaler” includes any person who sells fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale and any person who sells display fireworks to public display licensees. 

(19) “Retailer” includes any person who, at a fixed location or place of business, offers for sale, sells, or exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks to a consumer or user. 

(20) “Pyrotechnic operator” includes any individual who by experience and training has demonstrated the required skill and ability for safely setting up and discharging display fireworks. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.060 Act prohibited without a license – Minimum age for license or permit – Activities permitted without license or permit.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, without appropriate State licenses and City permits as required by this chapter, may:

(a) Manufacture, import, possess, or sell any fireworks at wholesale or retail for any use;

(b) Make a public display of fireworks;

(c) Transport fireworks, except as a licensee or as a public carrier delivering to a licensee; or

(d) Knowingly manufacture, import, transport, store, sell, or possess with intent to sell, as fireworks, explosives, as defined under RCW 70.74.010, that are not fireworks, as defined under this chapter.

(2) Except as authorized by a license and permit under subsection (1)(b) of this section, no person may discharge display fireworks at any place.

(3) No person less than 18 years of age may apply for or receive a license or permit under this chapter.

(4) No license or permit is required for the possession or use of consumer fireworks lawfully purchased at retail. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.065 Application for permit.

(1) Any person desiring to do any act mentioned in CMC 15.15.060(1)(a) or (c) shall apply in writing to the local fire official for a permit.

(2) Any person desiring to put on a public display of fireworks under CMC 15.15.060(1)(b) shall apply in writing to the local fire official for a permit. Application shall be made at least 10 days in advance of the proposed display and be accompanied by the fee outlined in CMC 15.15.250. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.070 Investigation, report on permit application.

When an application for a permit under CMC 15.15.065(1) is received, the local fire official shall investigate the application and submit a report of findings and a recommendation for or against the issuance of the permit, together with reasons, to the Community Development Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.080 Director to grant permits – Statewide standards, liability insurance.

(1) The Director of the Department of Community Development or his or her designee shall grant an application for a permit under CMC 15.15.065(1) if the application meets the standards under this chapter, and any other applicable ordinances of the City or State statute. The permit shall be granted by June 10, or no less than 30 days after receipt of an application, whichever date occurs first, for sales commencing on June 28th and on December 27th; or by December 10th, or no less than 30 days after receipt of an application, whichever date occurs first, for sales commencing only on December 27th.

(2) The City will comply with those uniform Statewide standards for retail fireworks stands including, but not limited to, the location of the stands, setback requirements and siting of the stands, types of buildings and construction material that may be used for the stands, use of the stands and areas around the stands, cleanup of the area around the stands, transportation of fireworks to and from the stands, and temporary storage of fireworks associated with the retail fireworks stands prescribed by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection.

(3) No retail fireworks permit may be issued to any applicant unless the retail fireworks stand is covered by a liability insurance policy with coverage of not less than $50,000 and $500,000 for bodily injury liability for each person and occurrence, respectively, and not less than $50,000 for property damage liability for each occurrence, unless such insurance is not readily available from at least three approved insurance companies. If insurance in this amount is not offered, each fireworks permit shall be covered by a liability insurance policy in the maximum amount offered by at least three different approved insurance companies.

No wholesaler may knowingly sell or supply fireworks to any retail fireworks licensee unless the wholesaler determines that the retail fireworks licensee is covered by liability insurance in the same, or greater, amount as provided in this subsection. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.082 Public display permit – Investigation – Governing body to grant – Conditions.

The local fire official receiving an application for a permit under CMC 15.15.065(2) for a public display of fireworks shall investigate whether the character and location of the display as proposed would be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person. Based on the investigation, the official shall submit a report of findings and a recommendation for or against the issuance of the permit, together with reasons, to the Community Development Director. The Director shall grant the application if it meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.084 Public display permit – Bond or insurance for liability.

Except as provided in RCW 70.77.355, the applicant for a permit under CMC 15.15.065(2) for a public display of fireworks shall include with the application evidence of a bond issued by an authorized surety company. The bond shall be in the amount required by CMC 15.15.088 and shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of all damages to persons or property resulting from or caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the applicant or its agents, servants, employees, or subcontractors in the presentation of the display. Instead of a bond, the applicant may include a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of appropriate liability insurance in the amount required by CMC 15.15.088 for the benefit of the person named therein as assured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages. The local fire official receiving the application shall approve the bond or insurance if it meets the requirements of this section. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.086 Public display permit – Granted for exclusive purpose.

If a permit under CMC 15.15.065(2) for the public display of fireworks is granted, the sale, possession and use of fireworks for the public display is lawful for that purpose only. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.088 Public display permit – Amount of bond or insurance.

In the case of an application for a permit under CMC 15.15.065(2) for the public display of fireworks, the amount of the surety bond or certificate of insurance required under CMC 15.15.084 shall be not less than $50,000 and $1,000,000 for bodily injury liability for each person and event, respectively, and not less than $25,000 for property damage liability for each event. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.090 Retailers – Purchase from licensed wholesalers.

Retail fireworks licensees shall purchase all fireworks from wholesalers possessing a valid wholesale license issued by the State of Washington. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.100 Seizure of fireworks.

Any fireworks which are illegally sold, offered for sale, used, discharged, possessed, or transported in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the rules or regulations of the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, are subject to seizure by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, or his or her deputy, or by State agencies or local governments having general law enforcement authority. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.110 Seizure of fireworks – Proceedings for forfeiture – Disposal of confiscated fireworks.

(1) In the event of seizure under CMC 15.15.100, proceedings for forfeiture shall be deemed commenced by the seizure. The Chief of the Washington State Patrol or a designee, through the Director of Fire Protection or the agency conducting the seizure, under whose authority the seizure was made shall cause notice to be served within 15 days following the seizure on the owner of the fireworks seized and the person in charge thereof and any person having any known right or interest therein, of the seizure and intended forfeiture of the seized property. The notice may be served by any method authorized by law or court rule, including but not limited to service by certified mail with return receipt requested. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing within the 15-day period following the seizure.

(2) If no person notifies the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection or the agency conducting the seizure, in writing of the person’s claim of lawful ownership or right to lawful possession of seized fireworks within 30 days of the seizure, the seized fireworks shall be deemed forfeited.

(3) If any person notifies the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection or the agency conducting the seizure, in writing of the person’s claim of lawful ownership or possession of the fireworks within 30 days of the seizure, the person or persons shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to the claim or right. The hearing shall be before the City’s Hearing Examiner appointed under Chapter 2.25 CMC, except that any person asserting a claim or right may remove the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction if the aggregate value of the seized fireworks is more than $500.00. The hearing before the Hearing Examiner and any appeal therefrom shall be under the procedures set forth under Chapter 2.25 CMC and the Hearing Examiner rules of procedure. In a court hearing between two or more claimants to the article or articles involved, the prevailing party shall be entitled to a judgment for costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees. The burden of producing evidence shall be upon the person claiming to have the lawful right to possession of the seized fireworks. The City shall promptly return the fireworks to the claimant upon a determination by the Hearing Examiner or court that the claimant is lawfully entitled to possession of the fireworks.

(4) When fireworks are forfeited under this chapter, the City may:

(a) Dispose of the fireworks by summary destruction at any time subsequent to 30 days from such seizure or 10 days from the final termination of proceedings under this section, whichever is later; or

(b) Sell the forfeited fireworks and chemicals used to make fireworks, that are legal for use and possession under this chapter, to wholesalers or manufacturers authorized to possess and use such fireworks or chemicals under a license issued by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection. Sale shall be by public auction after publishing a notice of the date, place, and time of the auction in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the auction is to be held, at least three days before the date of the auction. The proceeds of the sale of the seized fireworks under this section may be retained by the agency conducting the seizure and used to offset the costs of seizure and/or storage costs of the seized fireworks. The remaining proceeds, if any, shall be deposited in the fire services trust fund and shall be used as follows: At least 50 percent is for a Statewide public education campaign developed by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, and the licensed fireworks industry emphasizing the safe and responsible use of legal fireworks; and the remainder is for Statewide efforts to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.120 Prohibited transfers of fireworks.

The transfer of fireworks ownership, whether by sale at wholesale or retail, by gift or other means of conveyance of title, or by delivery of any fireworks to any person in the State who does not possess and present to the carrier for inspection at the time of delivery a valid license, where such license is required to purchase, possess, transport, or use fireworks, is prohibited. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.130 Unlawful possession of fireworks – Penalties.

It is unlawful to possess any class or kind of fireworks in violation of this chapter. A violation of this chapter is:

(1) A misdemeanor if involving less than one pound of fireworks, exclusive of external packaging; or

(2) A gross misdemeanor if involving one pound or more of fireworks, exclusive of external packaging.

For the purposes of this section, “external packaging” means any materials that are not an integral part of the operative unit of fireworks. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.140 Unlawful discharge or use of fireworks – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use fireworks in a reckless manner which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person or damage to the property of another. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.150 Unlawful sales or transfers of special fireworks – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, transfer, or agree to sell or transfer any display fireworks to any person who is not a fireworks licensee as provided for by this chapter. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.160 Unlawful sales or transfers of common fireworks – Penalty.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or exchange for consideration, any consumer fireworks to a consumer or user other than at a fixed place of business of a retailer for which a license and permit have been issued.

(2) No licensee may sell any fireworks to any person under the age of 16.

(3) A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.180 Unlawful to permit fire nuisance where fireworks kept – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to allow any combustibles to accumulate in any premises in which fireworks are stored or sold or to permit a fire nuisance to exist in such a premises. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.190 Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes, forest protection.

This chapter does not prohibit the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by motor vehicles, railroads, or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination or for use in forest protection activities. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.200 Special effects for entertainment media.

The assembling, compounding, use, and display of articles pyrotechnic or special effects in the production of motion pictures, radio or television productions, or live entertainment shall be under the direction and control of a pyrotechnic operator licensed by the State of Washington and who possesses a valid permit from the City. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.210 Penalty.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules issued thereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.220 Violation a separate, continuing offense.

A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which he commits, continues, or permits a violation of any provision of, or any order, rule, or regulation made pursuant to, this chapter. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.230 Civil enforcement not precluded.

The inclusion in this chapter of criminal penalties does not preclude enforcement of this chapter through civil means. A civil infraction issued for violation of any portion of this chapter shall incur a penalty of $150.00 for each infraction. The Covington Fire Department and the Covington Code Enforcement Officer may also issue civil infractions for violations of any portion of this chapter pursuant to the procedures under Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 04-10 § 1; Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.240 Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.

(1) It shall be legal to sell fireworks within the City from 12:00 noon until 11:00 p.m. on June 28th and from 9:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. on June 29th through July 4th. Fireworks may not be sold between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. from June 28th through July 4th.

(2) It shall be legal to use or discharge consumer fireworks within the City from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight on July 4th and from 6:00 p.m. on December 31st through 1:00 a.m. on January 1st of the following year. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.250 Permit application fees.

All applications for permits required under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee as established by RCW 70.77.555 and specified in the current fee resolution, which is necessary to cover all legitimate costs incurred by the City, from the application to and through processing, permit issuance and inspection. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


15.15.260 Administration.

The City Manager or his or her designee shall be the local official charged with administering this chapter. (Ord. 13-08 § 2)


Chapter 15.15 FIREWORKS (Effective December 10, 2020)

Sections:

15.15.010    Definitions.

15.15.020    Local fire official designated.

15.15.030    State provisions adopted.

15.15.040    Sale and discharge of fireworks.

15.15.050    Permit required for public display of fireworks.

15.15.060    Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

15.15.070    Permit fee.

15.15.080    Standards for public display of fireworks.

15.15.090    Special effects for entertainment media.

15.15.100    Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes, forest production.

15.15.110    Fire Marshal may grant or deny permit conditions.

15.15.120    Enforcement.

15.15.130    Seizure of fireworks.

15.15.140    Penalty for violations.

15.15.150    Revocation or suspension of permit.

15.15.160    Appeals.


15.15.010 Definitions.

The definitions of Chapter 70.77 RCW as now stated or hereinafter amended shall govern the construction of this chapter, when applicable, and are hereby adopted by this reference. A copy of the same shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.020 Local fire official designated.

The local fire official as defined in RCW 70.77.177 for the City of Covington is the Fire Marshal appointed under CMC 15.05.050 or such person as the Fire Marshal may designate to fulfill the duties of a local fire official set forth in Chapter 70.77 RCW. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.030 State provisions adopted.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Chapter 70.77 RCW as now stated or hereafter amended is adopted by reference, except as amended in this chapter, and a copy of the same shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.040 Sale and discharge of fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, use, transfer, discharge, ignite or explode any fireworks within the City; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to the following activities, when authorized by a State license and City permit:

(1) Duly authorized public display of fireworks, as provided in RCW 70.77.290; and

(2) Duly authorized use by religious organizations or private organizations or persons, as provided in RCW 70.77.311(2), if:

(a) Purchased from a licensed manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler;

(b) For use on prescribed dates and locations; and

(c) For religious purposes. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.050 Permit required for public display of fireworks.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in any public display of fireworks within the City without having obtained and being a holder of a valid permit under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The applicant shall show proof of the issuance of a bond or insurance coverage in the amounts set forth in RCW 70.77.295 or proof that such bond or insurance coverage has been provided under a State general license for public display.

(3) Applications for a public display of fireworks shall be made in writing at least 45 days in advance of the proposed display and shall have authorization from the State Fire Marshal. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.060 Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

Each public display of fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the specific authorized public display event only. Such permits shall be used only by the designated permittee and shall not be transferable. Any transfer or unauthorized use of a permit is a violation of this chapter and shall void the permit granted and shall subject the permit holder and permit transferee or user to all other sanctions provided in this code. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.070 Permit fee.

The per-event fee for a public display of fireworks permit shall be $100.00 and shall be payable to the City of Covington for administrative and inspection costs; provided, there shall be no fee charged to a religious or private organization pursuant to RCW 70.77.311. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.080 Standards for public display of fireworks.

All public display of fireworks shall conform to the following minimum standards and conditions:

(1) All public displays of fireworks must be planned, organized and discharged by a licensed pyrotechnician.

(2) A permit must be obtained from the Fire Marshal prior to any public display of fireworks. The permit shall include the name of the applicant and his/her address; the name of the pyrotechnician and his/her address; the exact location, date and time of the proposed display; the number, type and class of fireworks to be displayed; the manner in which the fireworks are being stored prior to the public display of fireworks; and shall include the name and address of the insurance company providing the bond required.

(3) A drawing shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal showing a plan view of the fireworks discharge site and the surrounding area within a 500-foot radius. The drawing shall include all structures, fences, barricades, streets, fields, streams and any other significant factors that may be subjected to ignition or that may inhibit firefighting capabilities.

(4) The Fire Marshal may require that a fire engine and two trained firefighters be on site from fireworks setup and through at least 30 minutes after the discharge of the fireworks for a minimum of four hours, billable to the entity holding the fireworks display.

(5) All combustible debris and trash shall be removed from the area of discharge for a distance of 300 feet in all directions.

(6) All unfired or undischarged fireworks shall be disposed of in a safe manner.

(7) A minimum of two 2A rated pressurized water fire extinguishers shall be at the fireworks discharge site.

(8) The permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal due to any noncompliance, or weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may be canceled by accidental ignition of any form of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to falling debris from the display.

(9) Areas of public access shall be determined by the Fire Marshal and maintained in an approved manner.

(10) Public displays of fireworks undertaken by religious organizations or private organizations or persons pursuant to RCW 70.77.311 shall be limited to class C common fireworks and special fireworks as defined in RCW 70.77.131 and 70.77.136.

(11) A permit for a public display of fireworks must be applied for at least 45 days before the planned day of the public display. A public notice of any public display of fireworks must be published by the permit holder at least once 30 days or more prior to the intended display in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.

(12) The permit holder will pay the full-cost reimbursement for all time that the Fire Marshal spends on overseeing all aspects of the fireworks permitting, preparation and display. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.090 Special effects for entertainment media.

This chapter does not prohibit the assembling, compounding, use and display of special effects of whatever nature by a pyrotechnic operator licensed by the State of Washington engaged in the production of motion pictures, radio or television productions, theatricals or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of the production and such pyrotechnic operator possesses a valid public display of fireworks permit issued by the City. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.100 Nonprohibited acts – Signal purposes, forest production.

This chapter does not prohibit the use of flares or fuses in connection with the operation of motor vehicles, railroads or other transportation agencies for emergency, illumination or signal purposes, or for forest protection activities. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.110 Fire Marshal may grant or deny permit conditions.

The Fire Marshal shall have the power to grant or deny any application for a permit or to subject the same to such reasonable conditions. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.120 Enforcement.

The Police Chief, Fire Marshal, or their designee is authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.130 Seizure of fireworks.

Any fireworks that are illegally sold, offered for sale, used, discharged, possessed, or transported in violation of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 70.77 RCW shall be subject to seizure by the Police Department. The provisions for seizure of fireworks, petition for return, hearing decision, and judicial action for recovery shall be set forth in RCW 70.77.435 and 70.77.440; provided, that the Police Chief shall have the powers and obligations set forth in said statutes. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.140 Penalty for violations.

Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided therefor. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.150 Revocation or suspension of permit.

(1) The Fire Marshal may at any time suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, if the permittee or permittee’s agents or employees have:

(a) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

(b) Made any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in connection with obtaining the permit.

(c) Failed to obtain or had suspended or revoked any license required by the State under Chapter 70.77 RCW.

(d) Had any insurance coverage required by this chapter canceled, revoked, or lapsed.

(2) Effective Date of Revocation. When the Fire Marshal determines that there is cause for revoking or suspending any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Fire Marshal shall notify the person holding such permit. The notice shall specify the grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit. The suspension or revocation shall become effective immediately upon receipt of the notice by the permittee. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


15.15.160 Appeals.

(1) Permit Denial. Any person denied a permit under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapter 14.45 CMC.

(2) Suspension or Revocation. The decision of the Fire Marshal with respect to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter shall be final. Any permittee whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal the decision of the Fire Marshal to the King County Superior Court by filing such appeal within 10 days of the date of the final decision of the Fire Marshal. This shall be the exclusive remedy of any permittee under this chapter. (Ord. 21-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 15.20 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.20.010    Adoption.

15.20.020    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.

15.20.030    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 2, Definitions.

15.20.040    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 3, General Requirements.

15.20.050    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 5, Fire Service Features.

15.20.060    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems.

15.20.070    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 7, Fire and Smoke Prevention Features.

15.20.080    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.

15.20.090    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 11, Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings.

15.20.100    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 80, Reference Standards.

15.20.110    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.


15.20.010 Adoption.

The International Fire Code with Appendix B, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, as amended in Chapters 51-54A WAC, together with amendments, additions, and deletions adopted by reference, and together with Covington modifications, are adopted as the City of Covington Fire Code, and referred to as “this Code” in this chapter. (Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2))


15.20.020 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.

The following local amendments to Chapter 1 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Scope and 

Administration,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(1) Section 104 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 104.1.1 as follows:

104.1.1. Retained authority – Additional conditions. The fire code official retains the authority to impose additional conditions where the official determines it necessary to mitigate identified fire protection impacts and problematic fire protection systems. These conditions may include, by way of example and without limitation, increased setbacks, use of fire retardant materials, installation and/or modification of standpipes, fire sprinkler and fire alarm systems.

(2) Section 105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 105.1.4 as follows:

105.1.4. Term. Operational permits issued in accordance with this code shall be valid for a 12 month period and are renewable at the end of that 12 month term.

(3) Section 105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 105.6.50 as follows:

105.6.50. Commercial Kitchen. An operational permit is required for all commercial kitchens with type I hood systems.

(4) Section 105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 105.6.51 as follows:

105.6.51. Emergency and standby power systems. An operational permit is required for code required emergency or standby power systems identified in NFPA 110.

(5) Section 105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 105.7.21 as follows:

105.7.21. Emergency and standby power systems. A construction permit is required for the installation of a code required emergency or standby power systems identified in NFPA 110.

(6) Section 108 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting Section 108 with the following:

108 Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable application and interpretation of the provisions of the International Fire Code, the City of Covington hearing examiner is designated as the board of appeals created pursuant to Section 108 of the International Fire Code adopted in CMC Title 15 above. The city hearing examiner shall constitute the board of appeals for all matters concerning the application of the International codes cited in this section. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be made pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC. The city hearing examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code.

(7) Section 113 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 113.3 with the following:

113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. When work is started or commenced prior to obtaining approval or required permits, the ordinary fees shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirement of this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed by this code.

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2))


15.20.030 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 2, Definitions.

The following local amendment to Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Definitions,” is hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(1) Section 202 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding the following definitions to Section 202 as follows:

OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of materials on-site which are not in transit.

PROBLEMATIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. A fire protection system that generates repeated preventable alarms.

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2))


15.20.040 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 3, General Requirements.

The following local amendment to Chapter 3 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General Requirements,” is hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(1) Section 308 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 308.1.6.3 as follows:

308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. The use of sky lanterns is prohibited.

(2) Section 315 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 315.4.3 as follows:

315.4.3 Idle Pallets. Idle pallets shall be stored in accordance with Sections 315.4.3.1 through 315.4.3.4.

315.4.3.1 Buildings protected with automatic sprinklers. The storage of idle pallets shall be in accordance with NFPA 13 Table A12.12.1.1.

315.4.3.2 Buildings without sprinkler protection. The storage of idle pallets shall be in accordance with Table 315.4.3.2.

Table 315.4.3.2 Clearances 1 Between Storage and Buildings 

	Wall Construction Type	Openings	0-50 Pallets	51-200 Pallets	Over 200 Pallets

	Masonry	None	5	5	10

	Masonry	1 hour protected openings	5	10	20

	Masonry	3/4 hour protected openings	10	20	30

	Masonry	Non protected openings	20	30	50

	Other	 	20	30	50

1. All distances measured in feet.

315.4.3.3 Separation from other storage. The storage of idle pallets shall be in accordance with Table 315.4.3.3.

Table 315.4.3.3 Clearance to Other Storage  

	Pile Size	Minimum Distance1

	0-50	20

	51-200	30

	Over 200	50

1. All distances measured in feet.

315.4.3.4 Stacks. Pallet stacks shall be arranged to form stable piles. Pile shall be limited to an area not greater than 400 square feet. A distance half the pile height or not less than 8 ft. shall separate stacks.

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.030)


15.20.050 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 5, Fire Service Features.

The following local amendments to Chapter 5 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Service Features,” are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(1) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is adopted.

(2) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.1.4 as follows:

503.1.4 Conflicts. Where there is a conflict between a requirement of this section and a specific requirement of the Covington Design and Construction, the Covington Design and Construction Standards shall be applicable.

(3) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.1 with the following:

503.2.1 Dimensions. The following minimum dimensions shall apply for fire apparatus access roads:

1. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

2. Fire apparatus access road routes shall be approved.

(4) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.3 with the following:

503.2.3 Surface. Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with asphalt, concrete, or other approved all-weather driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 30 tons (27,240 kg) in accordance with the Covington Design and Construction Standards.

(5) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.4 with the following:

503.2.4 Turning radius. The fire apparatus access road shall have a 30 foot minimum inside turning radius and a 50 foot minimum outside turning radius. The radius must be measured from the travel lane edge, unless otherwise approved.

(6) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.5 with the following:

503.2.5 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45.72 m) in length shall be provided with an approved turnaround designed as illustrated in the Covington Design and Construction Standards.

(7) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.6 with the following:

503.2.6 Bridges and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated surface is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with specifications established by the fire code official and the public works director, or their designees; at a minimum, however, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. Bridges and elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of 30 tons or more ton fire apparatus, the total imposed load to be determined by the fire code official. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the fire code official. Where elevated surfaces designed for emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for such use, approved barriers, approved signs or both shall be installed and maintained when required by the fire code official.

(8) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.7 with the following:

503.2.7 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 15 percent longitudinally and/or 6 percent laterally in grade. Approach and departure angle for fire access shall be as determined by the fire code official.

(9) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.2.9 as follows:

503.2.9 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 26 feet for 20 feet on both sides of the operating nut and may be marked as a fire lane per Section 503.3.

(10) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.3 with the following:

503.3 Marking. Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked whenever necessary to maintain the unobstructed minimum required width of roadways. Subject to the fire code official’s prior written approval, marked fire apparatus access roads, or fire lanes, may be established or relocated at the time of plan review, pre-construction site inspection, and/or post construction site inspection as well as any time during the life of the occupancy. Only those fire apparatus access roads established by the fire code official can utilize red marking paint and the term fire lane. Fire lanes shall be marked as directed by the fire code official with one or more of the following types of marking in accordance with the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards:

503.3.1 Type 1. Type 1 marking shall be installed to identify fire lanes on commercial and multi-family developments or as directed by the fire code official.

1. Curbs shall be identifiable by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the top and front, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

2. Rolled curbs shall be identified by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the upper most portion of the curb, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

3. Lanes without curbs shall be identified by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the pavement, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

4. The words “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE” shall be in 3 inch stroke white letters 18 inches in height, and placed 8 inches measured perpendicular from the red paint stripe on the pavement. Locations and intervals will be designated by the fire code official; marking will not exceed 50 feet apart. In most cases, both sides of the access road shall be marked. Where long drives are to be marked, the repetition shall alternate sides of the drive.

503.3.2 Type 2. Type 2 marking shall be installed to identify fire lanes in one- and two-family dwelling developments or as directed by the fire code official.

1. Type 2 marking requires metal signs stating “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE” to be installed at intervals or locations designated by the fire code official; signage will not exceed 150 feet apart.

2. The signs shall measure 12 inches in width and 18 inches in height and have red letters on a white background. Bottom of sign shall be a minimum of 7 feet from the curb. Signs shall be nominally parallel to the road, facing the direction of travel.

3. The sign shall be installed on an approved metal post.

Exception: On construction sites, approved portable or temporary sign posts and bases may be used.

4. Where fire lanes are adjacent to buildings or structures and when approved or directed by the fire code official, the signs may be placed on the face of the building or structure. 

503.3.3. Type 3. Type 3 marking shall be installed to address situations where neither Type 1 or 2 marking are effective or as directed by the fire code official.

1. Specific areas designated by the fire code official shall be marked with diagonal striping across the width of the fire lane. Diagonal marking shall be used in conjunction with painted curbs and/or edge striping and shall run at an angle of 30 to 60 degrees from one side to the other. These diagonal lines shall be in red traffic paint, parallel with each other, at least 6 inches in width, and 24 inches apart. Lettering shall occur as with Type 1 marking.

(11) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.7 as follows:

503.7 Establishment of fire lanes. Fire lanes in conformance with this code shall be established by the fire code official or his/her authorized designee, and shall be in accordance with 503.7.1 through 503.7.9.

503.7.1 Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited. The obstruction of a designated fire lane by a parked vehicle or any other object is prohibited and shall constitute a traffic hazard as defined in State law and an immediate hazard to life and property.

503.7.2 Existing fire lane signs and markings. The following signs and markings shall be provided:

1. Signs (minimum nine-inch by 16-inch) may be allowed to remain until there is a need for replacement and at that time the sign shall meet the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards and Specifications.

2. Markings may be allowed to remain until there is a need for repainting and at that time the provisions outlined in 503.3 shall be complied with.

503.7.3 Maintenance. Fire lane markings shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner(s) as often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a fire lane.

503.7.4 Towing notification. At each entrance to property where fire lanes have been designated, signs shall be posted in a clearly conspicuous location and shall clearly state that vehicles parked in fire lanes may be impounded, and the name, telephone number, and address of the towing firm where the vehicle may be redeemed.

503.7.5 Responsible property owner. The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall prevent the parking of vehicles or placement of other obstructions in such fire lanes.

503.7.6 Violation – Civil infraction. Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this chapter, or who parks a vehicle in, allows the parking of a vehicle in, obstructs, or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane commits a civil infraction to which the provisions of Chapter 7.80 RCW shall apply. The penalty for failing to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane shall be $150.00. The penalty for parking a vehicle in, allowing the parking of a vehicle in, obstructing, or allowing the obstruction of a designated fire lane shall be $50.00.

503.7.7 Violation – Civil penalty. In addition to, or as an alternate to, the provisions of subsection 503.7.2, any person who fails to meet the provisions of the fire lane requirements codified in this title shall be subject to civil penalties.

503.7.8 Impoundment. Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is declared a traffic hazard and may be abated without prior notification to its owner by impoundment pursuant to the applicable State law.

503.7.9 Enforcement. The Covington Building Official, the Covington Police or any other designated representative of the fire code official shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this code within their respective jurisdictions.

(12) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.8 as follows:

503.8 Commercial and Industrial Developments. The fire apparatus access roads serving commercial and industrial developments shall be in accordance with Sections 503.8.1 through 503.8.3.

503.8.1 Buildings exceeding three stories or 30 feet in height. Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet or three stories in height shall have at least two means of fire apparatus access for each structure.

503.8.2 Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area. Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exception: Projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems.

503.8.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and fire chief.

(13) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.9 as follows:

503.9 Aerial fire apparatus roads. The fire apparatus access roads that accommodate aerial fire apparatus shall be in accordance with Sections 503.9.1 through 503.9.3.

503.9.1 Where required. Buildings or portions of buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet in height above the lowest level of fire department access shall be provided with approved fire apparatus access roads that are capable of accommodating fire department aerial apparatus.

503.9.2 Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 26 feet in the immediate vicinity of any building or portion of building more than 30 feet in height.

503.9.3 Proximity to building. At least one of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The location of the parallel access route shall be approved.

(14) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.10 as follows:

503.10 Multi-family residential developments. The fire apparatus access roads serving multi-family residential developments shall be in accordance with Sections 503.10.1 through 503.10.3.

503.10.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units. Multi-family residential projects having more than 100 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exception: Projects having up to 200 dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

503.10.2 Projects having more than 200 dwelling units. Multi-family residential projects having more than 200 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads regardless of whether they are equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

503.10.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and fire chief.

(15) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.11 as follows:

503.11 One- and Two-family residential developments. The fire apparatus access roads serving one- and two-family residential developments shall be in accordance with Sections 503.11.1 and 503.11.2.

503.11.1 Projects having more than 30 dwelling units. Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceed 30 shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exceptions:

1. Where there are more than 30 dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling units are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code, access from two directions shall not be required.

2. The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will, within a reasonable time, connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official.

503.11.2 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and fire chief.

(16) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.12 as follows:

503.12 Underground structures. Installation of underground structures under or within 10 feet of fire apparatus access roads shall be designed using approved criteria. The criteria shall accommodate for the loading of fire department aerial apparatus unless otherwise approved.

(17) Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 503.13 as follows:

503.13 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:

1. Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not less than 20 feet. Where a fire apparatus road consists of a divided roadway, the gate width shall be not less than 12 feet.

2. Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.

3. Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one person.

4. Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective.

5. Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the fire code official. 

6. Methods of locking shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official.

7. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

8. Gates intended for automatic operations shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 

(18) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.5.2.1 as follows:

507.5.2.1. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standard shall be maintained on the premises for three years; copies shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system.

(19) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.5.3.1 as follows:

507.5.3.1. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standard shall be maintained on the premises for three years; copies shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system.

(20) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 507.5.6 with the following:

507.5.6. Physical protection. Where fire hydrants are subject to impact by a motor vehicle, guard posts shall be designed and installed in accordance with the local water purveyor’s design and construction standards.

(21) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 507.5.7 with the following:

507.5.7. Fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with the local water purveyor’s design and construction standards.

(22) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.5.8 as follows:

507.5.8. Backflow prevention. All private fire systems shall be isolated by an approved method from the local water purveyor.

(23) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.6 as follows:

507.6. Capacity for residential areas. All hydrants installed in single family residential areas shall be capable of delivering 1,500 gpm fire flow over and above average maximum demands at the farthest point of the installation.

(24) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.7 as follows:

507.7. Spacing. The spacing of hydrants shall be in accordance with Sections 507.7.1 through 507.7.5.

507.7.1. Single family. The maximum fire hydrant spacing serving single family residential areas shall be 600 feet.

507.7.2. Commercial, industrial and multi-family. The maximum fire hydrant spacing serving commercial, industrial, multi-family or other areas shall be 300 feet.

507.7.3. Medians. Where streets are provided with median dividers which cannot be crossed by firefighters pulling hose lines hydrants shall be provided on each side of the street and be arranged on an alternating basis.

507.7.4. Arterials. Where arterial streets are provided with four or more traffic lanes hydrants shall be provided on each side of the street and be arranged on an alternating basis.

507.7.5. Transportation. Where new water mains are extended along streets where hydrants are not needed for protection of structures or similar fire problems, fire hydrants shall be provided at a spacing not to exceed 1,000 feet to provide for transportation hazards.

(25) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.8 as follows:

507.8. Required hydrants. The number of hydrants required for a property shall be based on the calculated fire flow. The first hydrant will be calculated for up to 1,500 gpm. An additional hydrant is required for every 1,000 gpm, or fraction thereof. The required hydrants shall be within 600 feet of the property on a fire apparatus road, as measured by an approved method.

(26) Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 507.9 as follows:

507.9. Notification. The owner of property on which private hydrants are located and the public agencies that own or control public hydrants must provide the fire code official with the following written service notifications in accordance with 507.9.1 and 507.9.2.

507.9.1. In-service notification. The fire code official shall be notified when any newly installed hydrant is placed into service.

507.9.2. Out-of-service notifications. Where any hydrant is out of service or has not yet been placed in service, the hydrant shall be identified as being out of service and shall be appropriately marked as out of service, by a method approved by the fire code official.

(Ord. 02-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.040)


15.20.060 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems.

The following local amendments to Chapter 6 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Building Services and Systems,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section 606 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 606.6 with the following:

606.6. Testing of equipment. Refrigeration equipment and systems having a refrigerant circuit more than 220 pounds of Group A1 or 30 pounds of any other group refrigerant shall be subject to periodic testing in accordance with Section 606.6.1. A written record of the required testing shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years; a copy shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of the testing; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the testing. Tests of emergency devices or systems required by this chapter shall be conducted by persons trained and qualified in refrigeration systems.

(2) Section 609 of the International Fire Code is amended by supplementing subsection 609.2 with the following two subsections:

609.2.2. Permit Required. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6.

609.2.3. Approved drawing. The stamped and approved cook line drawing shall be displayed adjacent to the suppression system pull station prior to the final inspection.

(3) Section 609 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 609.3.3.3 with the following:

609.3.3.3. Records. Records for inspections shall state the individual and company performing the inspection, a description of the inspection and when the inspection took place. Records for cleanings shall state the individual and company performing the cleaning and when the cleaning took place. Such records shall be completed after each inspection or cleaning, maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years; a copy shall be sent to the fire code official within 30 days of the inspection or cleaning.

(Ord. 02-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.050)


15.20.070 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 7, Fire and Smoke Prevention Features.

The following local amendments to Chapter 7 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire and Smoke Prevention Features,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section 703 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 703.4 with the following:

703.4. Testing. Horizontal, vertical sliding and rolling fire doors shall be inspected and tested annually to confirm proper operation and full closure. A written record shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years; a copy shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of the inspection or test; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual assembly identifying the date of scheduled confidence test.

(Ord. 02-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.060)


15.20.080 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.

The following local amendments to Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Systems,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section 901 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 901.6.2 with the following:

901.6.2. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for three years; a copy shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled confidence test.

(2) Section 901 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 901.11 as follows:

901.11. Emergency contacts. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any monitored fire protection system to provide and maintain a minimum of three emergency contacts that are capable of responding to the system location with their monitoring company.

(3) Section 902 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding the following to the list in subsection 902.1:

PROBLEMATIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.

(4) Section 903 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 903.2 with the following:

903.2 Where required. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for when one of the following conditions exist:

1. In all buildings without adequate fire flow as required by this code.

Exception: Miscellaneous Group U Occupancies.

2. All new buildings and structures regulated by the International Building Code requiring 2,000 gallons per minute or more fire flow, or with a gross floor area of 10,000 or more square feet (929 m2), or where this code provides a more restrictive floor/fire area requirement, and shall be provided in all locations or where described by this code.

Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries, and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1 hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or not less than 2 hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712 of the International Building Code, or both.

3. Where this code requires the installation of an automatic sprinkler system to protect an occupancy within an otherwise non-sprinklered building, then automatic sprinkler protection will be required throughout the entire building.

4. When the required fire apparatus access roadway grade is 12 percent or greater.

5. Without approved fire department access as defined in the Covington Design and Construction Standards.

(5) Section 903 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 903.2.9.3 as follows:

903.2.9.3 Speculative use warehouses. Where the occupant, tenant, or use of the building or storage commodity has not been determined or it is otherwise a speculative use warehouse or building, the automatic sprinkler system shall be designed to protect not less than Class IV non-encapsulated commodities on wood pallets, with no solid, slatted, or wire mesh shelving, and with aisles that are 8 feet or more in width and up to 20 feet in height.

(6) Section 903 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 903.3.9 as follows:

903.3.9. Check valve. All automatic sprinkler system risers shall be equipped with a check valve.

(7) Section 903 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 903.7 as follows:

903.7 Riser Room Access. All risers shall be located in a dedicated room with an exterior door, interior lighting and heat.

(8) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 907.1.3 with the following:

907.1.3 Equipment. Systems and their components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All new alarm systems shall be addressable. Each device shall have its own address and shall annunciate individual addresses at a UL Central Station.

(9) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 907.6.3 with the following:

907.6.3 Initiating device identification. The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, as appropriate.

Exception: Special initiating devices that do not support individual device identification.

(10) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 907.8.5.1 as follows:

907.8.5.1. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for three years; a copy shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled confidence test.

(11) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 907.11 as follows:

907.11. Latched alarms. All signals shall be automatically “latched” at the alarm panel until their operated devices are returned to normal condition, and the alarm panel is manually reset.

(12) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 907.12 as follows:

907.12 Resetting. All fire alarm panels shall be reset only by an approved person.

907.12.1. Reset Code. The reset code for the fire alarm panel or keypad shall be 3-7-1-2-3-4. The reset code shall not be changed without approval of the fire code official.

(13) Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 907.13 as follows:

907.13 Fire Alarm Control Panel. All fire alarm control panels shall be located in the riser room designed and installed in accordance with Section 903.7 or an approved location.

(14) Section 909 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 909.20.2 with the following:

909.20.2 Written record. The records shall include the date of the maintenance, identification of the servicing personnel and notification of any unsatisfactory condition and the corrective action taken, including parts replacement. The written record of smoke control system testing and maintenance shall be maintained on the premises for three years; a copy shall be submitted by an approved means to the fire code official within 30 days of each test or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled testing.

(15) Section 912 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 912.5 with the following:

912.5 Signs. Fire department connections shall be clearly identified in an approved manner.

All fire department connections shall have an approved sign attached below the Siamese clapper. The sign shall specify the type of water-based fire protection system, the structure, and the building areas served.

(Ord. 02-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.070)


15.20.090 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 11, Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings.

The following local amendments to Chapter 11 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section 1103 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 1103.5.6 as follows:

1103.5.6 Substantial Alterations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in existing buildings regardless of use when a substantial alteration occurs in a structure equaling 10,000 or greater square feet. For the purpose of this section, a substantial alteration shall be defined as an alteration that costs 50 percent or more of the current assessed value of the structure and impacts more than 50% of the gross floor area.

(2) Section 1103 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection 1103.7.8 as follows:

1103.7.8 Fire alarm control unit. If an existing fire alarm control unit is replaced with identical equipment it shall be considered maintenance.

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2))


15.20.100 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 80, Reference Standards.

The following local amendments to Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Reference Standards,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section NFPA of the International Fire Code is amended by modifying the Standard reference number dates of publication as follows:

	13-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems

	13D-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes

	13R-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height

	20-16	Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection

	24-16	Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances

	72-16	National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code

	110-16	Emergency and Standby Power Systems

	111-16	Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems

	720-15	Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detection and Warning Equipment

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.080)


15.20.110 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.

The following local amendments to Appendix B to the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings,” are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(1) Section B103 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection B103.1 with the following:

B103.1 Increases. The fire chief is authorized to increase the fire flow requirements where exposures could be impacted by fire. An increase shall not be more than twice that required for the building under consideration.

(2) Section B105 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection B105.1 with the following:

B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. Fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings shall be in accordance with Sections B105.1.1 through B105.1.3.

B105.1.1 Buildings less than 3,600 square feet. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements shall be 1,000 gallons per minute for 1 hour.

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

B105.1.2 Buildings greater than 3,600 square feet. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements for shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1(2).

Exception: A reduction of fire-flow and flow duration to 1,000 gallons per minute for 1 hour, as approved, is allowed when the building is equipped with the following;

1. An approved automatic sprinkler system

2. 1-hour fire resistant rated exterior walls tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 with exposure on the exterior side and projections with 1-hour underside protection, fire blocking installed from the wall top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing and no gable vent openings.

Exception: Walls with a distance greater than 11' to the nearest exposure or face an unbuildable lot, tract or buffer. The distance shall be measured at right angles from the face of the wall.

B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1(2).

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2).

B105.2.1 Tents and Membrane structures. No fire flow is required for tents and membrane structures.

B105.2.2 Accessory residential Group U buildings. Accessory residential Group U buildings shall comply with the requirements of B105.1.

(3) Section B105 of the International Fire Code is amended by deleting the following:

Table B105.1(1) Required Fire-Flow for One- and Two-family Dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Buildings and Townhouses

Table B105.2 Required Fire-Flow for Other than One- and Two-family Dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Buildings and Townhouses

(4) Section B105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection B105.4 as follows:

B105.4 Urban Separator (R-1) Alternative Fire Flow Mitigation. For development projects within the Urban Separator (R-1) zone, the following alternative fire flow mitigations are approved for use in accordance with Sections B105.4.1 through B105.4.2

B105.4.1 One- and two-family dwellings. Fire flow will not be required for one- and two-family dwellings if all of the following mitigations are met;

1. The fire-flow calculation area is less than 3600 square feet

2. The construction type of the dwelling is Type VA

3. The dwelling is equipped with a central station monitored automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 with a water supply of no less than 30 minutes

4. The dwelling has a fire separation distance of no less than 150 feet on all sides

B105.4.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. Fire flow will not be required for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings if all of the following mitigations are met;

1. The fire-flow calculation area is less than 3600 square feet

2. The construction type of the dwelling is not Type VB

3. The dwelling is equipped with a central station monitored automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 with a water supply of no less than 30 minutes

4. The dwelling has a fire separation distance of no less than 150 feet on all sides

(Ord. 11-16 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 03-13 § 2 (Exh. 2); Ord. 05-10 § 2 (Exh. 2). Formerly 15.20.090)


Chapter 15.30 PREVENTABLE ALARMS

Sections:

15.30.010    Definitions.

15.30.020    Response to fire alarms – Scope.

15.30.030    Owner responsibility, owner response, fire alarm malfunction and corrective action.

15.30.040    Fines and cost recovery.

15.30.050    Notice of fine.

15.30.060    Hearing from administrative decision – Finality.


15.30.010 Definitions.

(1) “Enforcement official” means the Fire Marshal or his designated representative.

(2) “Fee” means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the City of Covington, authorized pursuant to this chapter.

(3) “Fire alarm system” means any mechanical, electrical or radio-controlled device that is designed to emit a sound or transmit a signal or message when activated or any such device that emits a sound and transmits a signal or message when activated because of smoke, heat and/or fire. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, alarm systems shall be deemed to include local, remote, proprietary and central station systems. A single station (residential) smoke alarm shall not be deemed to be an alarm system under this chapter.

(4) “Fire protection system malfunction” means the alarm/activation of any fire protection system which results in the response of the Fire Department caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance, or cause of the alarm/activation is undetermined.

(5) “Owner” means any person who owns a structure.

(6) “Preventable fire alarm” means the alarm/activation of any fire protection system which results in the response of the Fire Department caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of the system by the owner or his employees, servants or agents, or any other activation not caused by heat, smoke or fire, inclusive of a fire protection system malfunction as defined below. Additionally, an alarm is not considered a preventable alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious causes beyond the control of the owner.

(7) “Serve” shall mean the hand-delivery by a representative of the Fire Department to the owner or authorized representative who responded to the structure. In the event the owner or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within 30 minutes, “serve” shall mean placing the form or other matter in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or authorized representative.

(8) “Single-station (residential) smoke alarm” means an assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment and alarm-sounding appliance in one unit operated from a power supply either in the unit, or obtained at the point of installation. (Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.010))


15.30.020 Response to fire alarms – Scope.

This chapter shall apply to activation of a fire protection system resulting in response of fire apparatus due to either direct transmission of the alarm to a monitoring station or telephone report of a fire protection system activation caused by any of the following:

(1) Preventable Nuisance.

(a) Erroneous transmission of an alarm including the reporting of trouble signals by fire alarm monitoring companies.

(b) Working on a fire protection system connected to an alarm system when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent reporting of an alarm to the Fire Department.

(c) Fire drills or tests of fire protection systems when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent reporting of an alarm to the Fire Department.

(d) Work including painting, welding, cleaning, cooking, dust producing or other activities which could activate a fire alarm detector.

(e) Unintentional manual activation of a fire protection system when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent the activation of the device.

(f) Unintentional striking of a detector, circuitry, panel or other components of an alarm system or unintentional breakage or discharge of a sprinkler system or other fire-extinguishing system when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent the damage.

(2) Preventable Malfunctions.

(a) Mechanical failure.

(b) Improper type, installation, sensitivity or maintenance of automatic detectors.

(c) Improper installation (including unapproved or incompatible components) or maintenance of fire protection systems including systems with unapparent reasons for repetitious alarms.

(3) Nonpreventable.

(a) Any actual fire, explosion or overheating or other situation that could have resulted in a fire.

(b) Any manual activation of an alarm where it was believed that a fire or any other emergency requiring response of emergency personnel existed.

(c) Malicious, unintentional manual activation or unlawful tampering with a fire alarm system when reasonable steps were taken to prevent the tampering.

(d) Unintentional breakage or leak of any system that releases steam, heat, gases, water or vapors which might activate a detector.

(e) Earthquake, lightning or natural occurrences that result in movement or flooding of a building.

(f) Work on telephone lines or central office equipment. (Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.020))


15.30.030 Owner responsibility, owner response, fire alarm malfunction and corrective action.

(1) Owner Responsibility.

(a) The owner will provide the Enforcement Official with the following information after acceptance of a new system:

(i) The name(s), address, business and evening telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the structure wherein the fire protection system is installed;

(ii) The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified by the Enforcement Official in the event of the activation of the fire protection system who shall be capable of responding to the structure within 30 minutes, and who is authorized to enter the structure to ascertain the status thereof;

(iii) When any of the information required in this subsection has changed, it shall be reported to the Enforcement Official by the owner within 15 days of such change.

(b) The owner of the alarm system and/or subscriber of an alarm service shall be responsible for all preventable Fire Department responses resulting from activation of a fire alarm system including those caused by tenants, or any other occupants of the building or occupancy, or contracted monitoring and alarm system maintenance companies.

(2) Owner Response. Upon notification of a fire protection system alarm/activation from the monitoring company and/or the Fire Department, the owner or their designee shall travel to the structure to ascertain the status of the system. Should the person notified fail to appear at the said structure within 30 minutes after being notified to do so, the City of Covington shall charge the owner a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. The officer or member of the Fire Department who responded to said structure shall serve the owner or designee a fire protection response report. In the event that there is no contact made by the monitoring company and/or the Fire Department, the owner will be charged a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(3) Fire Alarm Malfunction. In the event of a fire alarm activation deemed by the Enforcement Official to be the result of a preventable malfunction, the owner will be served a fire protection response report by an officer or member of the Fire Department indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a malfunction.

(4) Corrective Action. The owner is required to return a completed affidavit of service/repair within 15 days of said system alarm/activation which can verify, to the satisfaction of the Enforcement Official, that the fire protection system in question has actually been examined by a fire protection system technician and that a bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the fire protection system which was identifiable as the cause of the malfunction. Failure to return an affidavit of service/repair within said 15-day period, which is satisfactory to the Enforcement Official, will result in assessment against the owner of a fine as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.030))


15.30.040 Fines and cost recovery.

(1) Preventable Nuisance Fire Alarms. No fines shall be assessed for the first two preventable nuisance fire alarms at the same structure responded to by the Fire Department during each calendar year. Thereafter, the owner shall pay a fine of $57.00 for the third, $84.00 for the fourth, and $112.00 for the fifth nuisance fire alarm responded to by the Fire Department at the same structure during said calendar year.

(2) Preventable Malfunctions. As to all fire alarm malfunctions responded to by the Fire Department, the owner shall be assessed fines as follows: $57.00 for the first malfunction; $84.00 for the second; $112.00 for the third; $167.00 for the fourth; and $222.00 for the fifth.The owner shall pay the assessed fees unless he or she returns to the Fire Department an affidavit of service/repair deemed satisfactory by the enforcement official. For those malfunctions that the owner returned a satisfactory affidavit of service/repair shall be exempt from any fines in excess of those identified in the current fee resolution during a calendar year.

(3) Problematic Systems. When a structure has an aggregate amount of more than five preventable nuisance and malfunction responses in one calendar year, each additional preventable alarm will be assessed a $271.00 fine. (Ord. 20-07 § 90; Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.040))


15.30.050 Notice of fine.

(1) Notice of imposition of a fine under the provisions of this chapter shall be sent by mail or delivered personally to the owner or authorized designee.

(2) The notice shall specify the sanctions imposed and shall advise the owner that unless he or she appeals to the Hearing Examiner as set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC by filing a written request with the applicable department within 14 days of the date of the notice the sanctions will be imposed. (Ord. 01-09 § 13; Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.050))


15.30.060 Hearing from administrative decision – Finality.

(1) Any person subject to the imposition of a fee under the terms of this chapter shall have a right to a hearing with the Hearing Examiner upon filing a timely written request.

(2) The request for a hearing must be made in writing and filed with the Hearing Examiner within 14 days of the date of the notice of administrative decision required in CMC 15.30.050. Upon receipt of a timely written request, the Hearing Examiner shall schedule a hearing date and inform the owner of the date, time and place of the hearing pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapters 14.30, 14.35, 14.40, and 14.45 CMC and the Hearing Examiner rules of procedure. The Hearing Examiner shall consider the record of past preventable alarms, any corrective action taken and any inspection reports on the cause of the preventable alarm. If the Hearing Examiner determines that the owner or his employees or agents did not cause the preventable alarms and that reasonable steps have been taken to correct the problem, the fine(s) or other sanction may be suspended, in whole or in part. The Hearing Examiner shall issue written findings of fact and a written decision within the time parameters prescribed by Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 01-09 § 14; Ord. 07-07 § 3; Ord. 40-02 § 4 (15.07.060))


Chapter 15.40 UNFIT STRUCTURES

Sections:

15.40.010    Purpose and intent.

15.40.020    Nuisance declared.

15.40.030    Definitions.

15.40.040    Dangerous or unfit structures enumerated.

15.40.050    Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.

15.40.060    Investigation, notice and hearing.

15.40.070    Appeals.

15.40.080    Certificate of compliance.

15.40.090    Re-inspection of vacated buildings.

15.40.100    Abatement by City.

15.40.110    Recovery of costs.

15.40.120    Occupying or renting building or premises unfit for habitation – Termination of utilities.

15.40.130    Removal of posted notices.

15.40.140    Violations.

15.40.150    Civil penalties.


15.40.010 Purpose and intent.

It is found that there exist in the City of Covington, dwellings, and other buildings, structures, and premises or portions thereof that are unfit for human habitation and that are unfit for other uses due to dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, inadequate ventilation and uncleanliness, inadequate light or sanitary facilities, inadequate drainage, overcrowding, abandonment or vacancy, or due to other conditions which are inimical to the health and welfare of the residents of the City. It is the intent of this chapter to clarify and strengthen the procedures for abating such conditions. It is not the intent of this chapter to apply the provisions of this chapter to existing buildings which were approved under prior editions of the code and are being maintained in compliance with those requirements. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.020 Nuisance declared.

All buildings or structures which, by reason of decay, dilapidation, or damage by fire, the elements, or any other cause, are determined by the Building Official to be dangerous to the lives and safety of persons or property or unfit for the purpose or purposes for which they are being used, are declared to be public nuisances. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Building code” means the building code, its components, and related codes adopted by the City of Covington in this title.

(2) “Building Official” means the City Building Official or his or her authorized designee as defined in CMC 15.05.020.

(3) “Fire Marshal” means the City Fire Marshal or his or her authorized designee as defined in CMC 15.05.020.

(4) “Owner” means any person having any interest in the property in question, as shown upon the records of the King County Recorder’s Office.

(5) “Premises” means any structure, lot, parcel, real estate, or land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, and any lake, river, stream, drainage way, or wetland, within the territorial limits of the City.

(6) “Structure” means any building, dwelling, mobile home, factory-built house, shop, stable, or other structure or part thereof, built for the support, shelter, enclosure, or convenience of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

(7) “Vacant” means any structure that is unattended and either open or unsecured so that access may be gained without damaging any portion of the structure, or which looks like no person is presently in possession, to include conditions such as disconnected utilities, accumulated debris, uncleanliness, or disrepair.

(8) “Value of structure” is the current value of a structure as specified in the current edition of “Building Valuation Data” published by the International Conference of Building Officials, or, if not published, as determined by the Building Official. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.040 Dangerous or unfit structures enumerated.

All dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises which have any one or more of the following defects may be deemed “dangerous or unfit structures”:

(1) Those with any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit that is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(2) Those with a walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit that is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

(3) Those with stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to dead and live loads, that is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(4) Those that have been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that their structural strength of stability is materially less than they were before such catastrophe and are less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(5) Those with any portion, member, or appurtenance that is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse, and thereby injure persons or damage property.

(6) Those with any portion, member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior that is not sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 

(7) Those with any portion, member, or appurtenance that has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

(8) Those that are likely to partially or completely collapse because of: 

(a) Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;

(b) Faulty construction; 

(c) The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;

(d) The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or

(e) Any other cause.

(9) Those which, for any reason, are unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.

(10) Those with exterior walls or other vertical structural members that list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

(11) Those that, exclusive of the foundations, show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of their supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of their nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

(12) Those that have been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood, or have become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:

(a) An attractive nuisance to children;

(b) A harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons; or as to 

(c) Enable a person to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.

(13) Those that have been constructed, exist, or are maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the structure, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings.

(14) Those which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, have in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion less than 50 percent or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66 percent of the:

(a) Strength;

(b) Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or 

(c) Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

(15) Those that are used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, but because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, are determined by the Building Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation.

(16) Those that are determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard due to obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus, or other cause.

(17) Those in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.

(18) Those that remain on a site after their demolition or destruction, so as to constitute an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(19) Those that are vacant, not secured against entry, and subject to acts of unlawful burning. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.050 Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.

The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building Official in ordering repair, vacation or demolition of buildings:

(1) If the “dangerous or unfit structure” can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired by the Building Official, or by the Hearing Examiner on appeal.

(2) If the “dangerous or unfit structure” is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated by the Building Official, or by the Hearing Examiner on appeal.

(3) If the “dangerous or unfit structure” is 50 percent damaged or decayed or deteriorated in value, it shall be demolished. “Value” is the valuation placed upon the structure for purposes of general taxation.

(4) If the “dangerous or unfit structure” cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be demolished.

(5) If the “dangerous or unfit structure” is a fire hazard, existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Covington or the laws of the State of Washington, it shall be demolished, provided the fire hazard is not eliminated by the owner within a reasonable time. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.060 Investigation, notice and hearing. 

(1) The Building Official may investigate a structure or premises which he or she believes to be dangerous or unfit. If the investigation reveals conditions that make the structure or premises dangerous or unfit, the Building Official may follow the administrative notice and order procedures outlined in Chapter 1.30 CMC. 

(2) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 1.30 CMC, the notice and order shall also include a statement that describes in what respects such structure or premises is dangerous or unfit as defined in this chapter and an order that requires the owner, occupant, or party in interest, within such reasonable time as may be specified in the order, to:

(a) Repair, alter or improve the structure or premises to render it no longer dangerous or unfit; and/or

(b) Remove or demolish the structure or premises; and/or

(c) Vacate and close the structure or premises, should the Building Official find that it is unfit for human habitation.

(3) When calculating the time for compliance with the order, the Building Official shall consider:

(a) The type of hazard, the nature and immediacy of the threat to the public health and safety, and the blight created by the conditions of the premises;

(b) A demonstrated intent by a responsible party to repair, demolish or vacate and close the building or to correct or improve the condition of the premises by:

(i) Entering into a contract with a licensed contractor to perform the required work within a specific time and for a reasonable compensation;

(ii) Depositing cash in a segregated account in an amount sufficient to complete the required repairs;

(iii) Securing a loan from an established lending institution that will provide sufficient funds to complete the required repairs; or

(iv) Securing a permit to perform the required work and paying the required permit fees;

(c) The length of time required to obtain permits needed to complete the repairs;

(d) The complexity of the repairs, seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal rights of any tenants; and

(e) Circumstances beyond the control of the responsible person.

(4) The notice and order may also include notice of additional penalties or remedies available to the City under other provisions of the Covington Municipal Code. 

(5) A copy of the notice and order may be recorded, and if so, shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.070 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by an order of the Building Official issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the procedures outlined in CMC 1.30.120. Appeal hearings before the Hearing Examiner will be scheduled, conducted and decided pursuant to the process outlined in Chapters 1.30 and 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 01-09 § 15; Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.080 Certificate of compliance.

(1) Compliance with an order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be the responsibility of each person named as a responsible party in the order. An owner or responsible party shall request a re-inspection from the Building Official following correction of the conditions set forth in the order. If the Building Official finds that the repairs, alterations, corrections or other actions required by the order have been performed in compliance with the standards in the building code, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of compliance certifying that, as of the date it is issued, the conditions cited in the order have been corrected.

(2) On issuance of a certificate of compliance, the Building Official certifies only that the conditions listed in the complaint, order or decision that make the structure or premises dangerous or unfit have been corrected as required by the building code. The Building Official makes no representation concerning other conditions in the structure or any equipment therein, or of the premises, that is not listed in the complaint, order or decision. The Building Official shall not be responsible for any injury, damage, death or other loss of any kind sustained by any person, organization, or corporation arising out of any condition of the structure, equipment, or premises. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.090 Re-inspection of vacated buildings.

When a building has been vacated and closed to entry pursuant to an order of the Building Official issued under this chapter, the Building Official shall re-inspect the building annually to verify that the building and structures accessory to the building remain vacant and closed to entry and meet the minimum standards for vacant buildings set forth in this code, and to determine the extent to which the building has deteriorated. The owner shall be charged an inspection fee for the annual inspections. Annual inspection charges shall be assessed and collected as a fee under the fee resolution. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.100 Abatement by City.

If the person responsible for complying with the order of the Building Official fails to comply with the order, the Building Official, by such means and with such assistance as may be available, is authorized to cause the structure or premises to be (1) repaired, altered, or improved to correct the dangerous or unfit conditions; (2) vacated and closed; or (3) demolished and removed. The costs for such actions shall be recovered by the City. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.110 Recovery of costs.

(1) If the costs incurred by the Building Official pursuant to CMC 15.40.100 for repairs, alterations or improvements, or of vacating and closing, or of demolition and removal are not paid after a written demand upon the owner and other persons named as responsible parties in the notice and order, such costs shall be assessed against the property for which the costs were incurred in the manner provided below.

(2) If the Building Official removes or demolishes a structure, he or she shall, if possible, sell the salvageable materials from the building and apply the proceeds of the sale to the reimbursement of the costs of demolition and removal. Any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner.

(3) After notice to the owner, occupant, and other persons with an interest in the property that all or a portion of the costs have not been paid, the Building Official shall notify the City Manager of the amount due and owing, and upon receipt of the notification the City Manager shall certify the amount to the King County Department of Finance for assessment.

(4) Upon certification by the City Manager of the amount due and owing, the King County Department of Finance shall enter the amount of the assessment upon the tax rolls against the real property for the current year to be collected at the same time as the general taxes and with interest at the rates and in the manner provided in RCW 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes. When collected, it shall be deposited in the general fund of the City and credited to the appropriate Community Development Department account.

(5) The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county, and municipal taxes. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.120 Occupying or renting building or premises unfit for habitation – Termination of utilities.

(1) No one shall use, occupy, rent or cause, suffer, or allow another to use, occupy, or rent any structure or premises found to be unfit for human habitation or other use from and after the date specified in a Building Official’s order to repair, alter, or improve, vacate and close, or demolish and remove a building or correct or improve the condition of the premises until the Building Official has certified that the building or premises is fit for human habitation or other use.

(2) The Building Official may, by written notice directed to the owner and to the appropriate utility authority, request that service of water, electricity or gas to the structure or premises be terminated or disconnected on or before a specified date. Upon receipt of such notice, the utility authority is authorized to terminate or disconnect the service, and to restore the service upon the issuance by the Building Official of a certificate of compliance in accordance with this chapter, or upon written notification by the Building Official that water, electricity or gas service should be restored.

(3) It is unlawful for anyone other than the utility authority or its authorized representatives, to restore any water, electricity, or gas service that has been terminated or disconnected by notice from the Building Official. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.130 Removal of posted notices.

Only the Building Official or his or her designee may remove any notice, complaint or order posted in accordance with this chapter prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.140 Violations.

(1) Any failure or refusal to obey an order of the Building Official or Hearing Examiner issued pursuant to this chapter, or any failure to comply with the requirements or standards of this code shall be a violation of this code.

(2) It shall be a violation of this code for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any attempt to correct any condition, or attempt to comply with an order of the Building Official issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


15.40.150 Civil penalties.

Any person failing to comply with an order issued by the Building Official or Hearing Examiner pursuant to this chapter may be subject to a cumulative civil penalty pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 13-07 § 1)


Chapter 15.50 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VACANT BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.50.010    Definition of vacant building.

15.50.020    Nuisance declared.

15.50.030    Maintenance standards.

15.50.040    Inspections.

15.50.050    Occupying or renting vacant buildings.

15.50.060    Termination of utilities.

15.50.070    Remedies not exclusive.


15.50.010 Definition of vacant building.

“Vacant building” as used in this chapter means a building that: (1) is unoccupied, unattended, and is not actively used as a place of residence or business, or (2) is frequently open or unsecured so that unauthorized admittance may be gained without damaging any portion of the property. At the discretion of the building official, a portion of a vacant building may be occupied if the occupied portion meets the standards specified in the Covington Municipal Code and the vacant and closed portion complies with the minimum maintenance standards for vacant buildings specified in this chapter. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.020 Nuisance declared.

Any vacant building that is not maintained in compliance with the minimum standards for vacant buildings imposed by this chapter is deemed and declared to be a public nuisance, which the building official is authorized to abate in accordance with the provisions provided for by this code. Such abatement may include, without limitation, securing the building against unauthorized third-party entry as may be necessary in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the public. In the event that the City secures the building, all costs incurred may be assessed against the owner of the property pursuant to this code. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.030 Maintenance standards.

Every vacant building shall conform to the following standards: 

(1) Sanitary Facilities.

(a) Plumbing fixtures connected to an approved water system, approved sewage system, or approved natural gas utility system shall be installed in accordance with applicable codes and maintained in sound condition and good repair.

(b) Plumbing fixtures connected to an approved water system, approved sewage system, or approved natural gas system, not installed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes shall be removed and the service terminated and the pipes capped in the manner prescribed by applicable codes.

(c) Plumbing fixtures not connected to an approved water system, approved sewage system, or an approved natural gas utility system shall either be connected to an approved system or the fixtures shall be removed and the pipes capped in accordance with applicable codes.

(2) Electrical System. Electrical service lines, wiring, outlets or fixtures not installed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes shall be repaired, or they shall be removed and the services terminated in accordance with applicable codes.

(3) Safety from Fire.

(a) No vacant building or premises or portion thereof be used for the storage of flammable liquids or any other materials that could constitute a safety or fire hazard.

(b) Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant buildings shall be removed, rendered inoperable, or maintained in accordance with applicable codes. Any fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes.

(4) All vacant buildings shall be properly weather-protected to prevent deterioration of the exterior and interior of the building. This weather protection shall be approved by the Building Official and shall include all roof and wall assemblies.

(5) All vacant buildings and their premises and accessory structures shall be closed to unauthorized entry according to the following standards:

(a) All windows shall be protected with intact glazing (glass). All windows lacking intact glazing, the sills of which are located ten feet or less above grade, stairway, landing, ramp, porch, roof, or other similarly accessible area, shall provide resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a solid sheet of plywood of at least three-quarter inch thickness, painted or treated to protect it from the elements, cut to fit the opening, and securely nailed using 6D galvanized nails or woodscrews spaced not more than nine inches.

(b) Doors and service openings with thresholds located 10 feet or less above grade, or stairways, landings, ramps, porches, roofs, or similarly accessible areas, shall provide resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a closed single panel or hollow core door one and three-eighths inches thick equipped with a one-half inch throw deadbolt. Exterior doors, if openable, may be closed from the interior of the building by securing them to the doorframe using minimum one and one-quarter-inch long sheetrock screws at six inches on center.

(c) There shall be one operable door into each building and into each housing unit. If an existing door is operable, it may be used and secured with a suitable lock such as a hasp and padlock or a one-half-inch deadbolt or dead latch. All locks shall be kept locked. When a door cannot be made operable, a door shall be constructed of three-quarter-inch CDX plywood painted in a color matching the existing structure to protect it from weather deterioration and shall be equipped with a lock as described above.

(6) The Building Official may impose additional requirements for the closure of a vacant building when the standards specified in subsection (5) of this section are inadequate to secure the building:

(a) Due to the design of the structure; or

(b) When the structure has been subject to two or more unauthorized entries after closure pursuant to the standards specified above; or

(c) When the building official determines, in consultation with law enforcement and fire officials, that the structure may present a substantial risk to the health or safety of the public, or to police or fire personnel if closed to the standards of subsection (5) of this section.

(7) All debris, combustible materials, hazardous or noxious vegetation, litter and garbage shall be removed from vacant buildings and premises on which a vacant building is located and further accumulation of the same prevented. Further, each and every owner of any vacant building shall remove or destroy all grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation growing or which has grown and died upon property owned or occupied by such owner, and which are a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety and welfare. 

(8) All vacant buildings shall have plainly visible house numbers or address numbers as required by the fire code or other applicable law. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.040 Inspections.

(1) When the Building Official or his or her designee has reason to believe that a building is vacant, he or she may inspect the building and the premises. If the inspection reveals a violation of the minimum standards for vacant buildings, enforcement action may be taken pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC. Thereafter the premises shall be inspected annually to determine whether the building and its accessory structures are vacant and closed to entry in conformance with the standards of this code.

(2) The owner of a vacant building shall cause his or her property to be inspected not less frequently than annually by a duly licensed and capable private inspector, engineer, or other consultant, who shall, within 30 days after said inspection, submit a written inspection report to the Building Official verifying that the building is in compliance with this chapter. In the event a vacant building does not conform to these standards or no such report is timely submitted, the Building Official may order the owner to inspect the property and present satisfactory evidence of compliance with these standards in the form of an inspection report created by a duly licensed and capable private inspector, engineer, or other consultant, verifying that the building is in compliance with the standards. The Building Official or his or her designee may utilize expertise of other governmental or private inspectors or agencies, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the minimum fire and life safety standards of this chapter. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.050 Occupying or renting vacant buildings.

After a notice of violation, order or emergency order is issued in accordance with any applicable code with respect to any vacant building, no one shall use, occupy, rent, or cause, suffer, or allow any person to use or occupy or rent said vacant building, unless written approval from the building official has been first obtained. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.060 Termination of utilities.

The Building Official may, by written notice to the owner and to the appropriate utility authority request that water, electricity, or gas service to a vacant building be terminated or disconnected. If water, electricity or gas service has been terminated or disconnected pursuant to Chapter 15.40 CMC, no one except the utility may take any action to restore the service, including an owner or other private party requesting restoration of service, until a certificate of compliance has been issued in accordance with that chapter or upon written notification by the Building Official that service may be restored. It is unlawful for anyone other than the appropriate utility authority or its duly authorized representative to restore or reconnect any water, electricity, or gas service terminated or disconnected as a result of a Building Official’s notice issued pursuant to Chapter 15.40 CMC. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


15.50.070 Remedies not exclusive.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any other remedy available to the City for noncompliance with applicable codes or other law, including, without limitation, the power of condemnation and sale as provided by Chapter 35.80 RCW, or as the same may be hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-07 § 1)


Title 16 ENVIRONMENT

Chapters:

16.05    Shoreline Master Program

16.10    State Environmental Policy Act

16.15    Flood Damage Prevention


Chapter 16.05 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

16.05.010    Title.

16.05.020    Purpose.

16.05.030    Definitions.

16.05.040    Applicability.

16.05.050    Exemptions and exceptions.

16.05.060    Relationship to other plans and regulations.

Article II. Administration

16.05.070    Purpose.

16.05.080    Program administrator.

16.05.090    Shoreline permit procedures.

16.05.100    Nonconforming uses, structures, and development.

16.05.110    Enforcements and penalties.

16.05.120    Moratoria authority and requirements.

16.05.130    Amendments to the master program and periodic review.

16.05.140    Severability.

Article III. Shoreline Environments

16.05.150    Establishment of shoreline environment designations.

16.05.160    High-intensity environment.

16.05.170    Medium-intensity environment.

16.05.180    Shoreline residential environment.

16.05.190    Urban conservancy environment.

16.05.200    Aquatic environment.

16.05.210    Environment designation interpretation.

Article IV. General Shoreline Regulations

16.05.220    Archaeological and historic resources.

16.05.230    Environmental protection and critical areas.

16.05.240    Public access.

16.05.250    Vegetation management.

16.05.260    Water quality, stormwater, and non-point pollution.

16.05.270    Flood hazard management.

Article V. Specific Shoreline Use Regulations

16.05.280    General shoreline use standards.

16.05.290    Agriculture.

16.05.300    Aquaculture.

16.05.310    Boating facilities.

16.05.320    Commercial development.

16.05.330    Industrial development.

16.05.340    In-stream structural development.

16.05.350    Recreational development.

16.05.360    Residential development.

16.05.370    Signs.

16.05.380    Transportation facilities.

16.05.390    Utilities.

Article VI. Shoreline Modification Regulations

16.05.400    General shoreline modification standards.

16.05.410    Shoreline stabilization.

16.05.420    Dredging and dredge spoil disposal.

16.05.430    Fill and excavation.

16.05.440    Overwater structures.

16.05.450    Shoreline habitat and ecological enhancement.

Article I. General Provisions


16.05.010 Title.

This chapter, in combination with Element 9 of the City of Covington comprehensive plan, shall be known and may be cited as the City of Covington Shoreline Master Program. Code provisions within this chapter may refer to it as “this SMP” or “this master program.” (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.020 Purpose.

The purposes of this master program are:

(1) To carry out the responsibilities imposed on the City of Covington by the Washington State Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW);

(2) To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, by providing a guide and regulation for the future development of the shoreline resources of the City of Covington; and

(3) To further, by adoption, the policies of Chapter 90.58 RCW, and the goals of this master program, as set forth in the shoreline element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.030 Definitions.

This section contains definitions of terms that apply within shoreline jurisdiction. The definitions in this section supplement the terms defined in the Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW). Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable. If there is a conflict, the definitions in this section shall govern.

(1) “Adjacent lands” means lands adjacent to the shorelines of the State (outside of shoreline jurisdiction). The SMA directs local governments to develop land use controls (i.e., zoning, comprehensive planning) for such lands consistent with the policies of the SMA, related rules and the local shoreline master program (see RCW 90.58.340).

(2) “Administrator” means the City Community Development Director or his/her designee, charged with the responsibility of administering the shoreline master program.

(3) “Agriculture” or “agricultural activity” means agricultural uses and practices including, but not limited to: producing, breeding, or increasing agricultural products; rotating and changing agricultural crops; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie fallow in which it is plowed and tilled but left unseeded; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant as a result of adverse agricultural market conditions; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant because the land is enrolled in a local, State, or Federal conservation program, or the land is subject to a conservation easement; conducting agricultural operations; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural facilities; provided, that the replacement facility is no closer to the shoreline than the original facility; and maintaining agricultural lands under production or cultivation.

(4) “Anadromous fish” means species, such as salmon, which are born in fresh water, spend a large part of their lives in the sea, and return to freshwater rivers and streams to procreate.

(5) “Appurtenance” means a structure or development which is necessarily connected to the use and enjoyment of a single-family residence and is located landward of the ordinary high water mark and also of the perimeter of any wetland. (On a Statewide basis, normal appurtenances include a garage, deck, driveway, utilities, fences, installation of a septic tank and drain field, and grading which does not exceed 250 cubic yards (except to construct a conventional drain field) and which does not involve placement of fill in any wetland or waterward of the ordinary high water mark) (see WAC 173-27-040(2)(g)).

(6) “Aquaculture” means the culture or farming of fish, shellfish, or other aquatic plants and animals. Aquaculture does not include the harvest of wild geoduck associated with the State managed wildstock geoduck fishery.

(7) “Associated wetlands” means those wetlands that are in proximity to and either influence, or are influenced by, tidal waters or a lake or stream subject to the Shoreline Management Act. Refer to WAC 173-27-030(1).

(8) “Average grade level” means the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property which will be directly under the proposed building or structure; provided, that, in case of structures to be built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of ordinary high water. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the elevations at the center of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure (WAC 173-27-030(3)).

(9) “Beach enhancement/restoration” means the process of restoring a beach to a state more closely resembling a natural beach, using beach feeding, vegetation, drift sills and other nonintrusive means as applicable.

(10) “Boat launch or ramp” means graded slopes, slabs, pads, planks, or rails used for launching boats by means of a trailer, hand, or mechanical device.

(11) “Boat lift” means a mechanical device that can hoist vessels out of the water for storage. These devices are usually located along a pier.

(12) “Boat rail or railway” means a set of steel rails running from the upland area into the water upon which a cart or dolly can carry a boat to be launched.

(13) “Boathouse” means a structure designed for storage of vessels located over water or upland. Boathouses should not be confused with “houseboats.”

(14) “Boating facility” means a moorage structure serving more than four single-family residences.

(15) “Bulkhead” means a vertical or nearly vertical erosion protection structure placed parallel to the shoreline consisting of concrete, timber, steel, rock, or other permanent material not readily subject to erosion.

(16) “Clearing” means the destruction or removal of vegetation, groundcover, shrubs and trees including root material and topsoil removal.

(17) “Community structure” or “community dock facility” means a building, dock, or other structure which is intended for the common use of the residents of a particular subdivision or community. It is not intended to serve as a public facility.

(18) “Conditional use” means a use, development, or substantial development that is classified as a conditional use or is not classified within the applicable master program. Refer to WAC 173-27-030(4).

(19) “Cumulative impact” means the impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative impacts can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place over a period of time.

(20) “Development” means a use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters of the State subject to Chapter 90.58 RCW at any state of water level (RCW 90.58.030(3)(d)). Development does not include dismantling or removing structures if there is no other associated development or redevelopment.

(21) “Dock” means a structure commonly referred to as a floating moorage structure. See also “floating dock” and “float.”

(22) “Dredge spoil” means the material removed by dredging. Same as “dredge material.”

(23) “Dredging” means excavation or displacement of the bottom or shoreline of a water body. Dredging can be accomplished with mechanical or hydraulic machines. Most dredging is done to maintain channel depths or berths for navigational purposes; other dredging is for shellfish harvesting or for cleanup of polluted sediments.

(24) “Ecological functions” means the work performed or the role played by the physical, chemical, and biological processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem.

(25) “Ecosystem-wide processes” means the suite of naturally occurring physical and geologic processes of erosion, transport, and deposition; and specific chemical processes that shape landforms within a specific shoreline ecosystem and determine both the types of habitat and the associated ecological functions.

(26) “Ell” means the terminal section of a pier which typically extends perpendicular to the pier walkway. These sections can be either on fixed-piles or floating docks and are typically wider than the pier walkway.

(27) “Emergency” means an unanticipated and imminent threat to public health, safety, or the environment which requires immediate action within a time too short to allow full compliance with the master program. Emergency construction is construed narrowly as that which is necessary to protect property from the elements (RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)(iii) and WAC 173-27-040(2)(d)).

(28) “Enhancement” means alteration of an existing resource to improve or increase its characteristics and processes without degrading other existing functions.

(29) “Exemption” means certain specific developments are exempt from the definition of substantial developments and are therefore exempt from the substantial development permit process of the SMA. An activity that is exempt from the substantial development provisions of the SMA must still be carried out in compliance with policies and standards of the Act and the local master program. Conditional use and/or variance permits may also still be required even though the activity does not need a substantial development permit (RCW 90.58.030(3)(e); WAC 173-27-030(7) and 173-27-040). For a complete list of exemptions, see CMC 16.05.050. See “Letter of exemption.”

(30) “Fair market value” means the expected price at which the development can be sold to a willing buyer. For developments which involve nonstructural operations such as dredging, drilling, dumping, or filling, the fair market value is the expected cost of hiring a contractor to perform the operation or, where no such value can be calculated, the total of labor, equipment use, transportation and other costs incurred for the duration of the permitted project (WAC 173-27-030(8)).

(31) “Fill” means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth retaining structure, or other material to an area waterward of the ordinary high water mark, in wetlands, or on shorelands in a manner that raises the elevation or creates dry land.

(32) “Finger pier” means a narrow extension to a fixed-pile pier, usually extending perpendicular to the pier walkway along with an ell to form an enclosed area for boat moorage.

(33) “Float” means a floating structure that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the water offshore and that is generally located at the terminal end of a fixed-pile pier.

(34) “Floating dock” means a fixed structure floating upon a water body for the majority of its length and connected to shore.

(35) “Floating home” means a single-family dwelling unit constructed on a float, that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in waters, and is not a vessel, even though it may be capable of being towed.

(36) “Floodway” means the area that has been established in effective Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance rate maps or floodway maps. The floodway does not include lands that can reasonably be expected to be protected from flood waters by flood control devices maintained by or maintained under license from the Federal government, the State, or a political subdivision of the State.

(37) “Forest practices” means activities not covered by the Forest Practices Act, especially Class IV – General forest practices involving conversion to non-forest use.

(38) “Groin” means a barrier-type structure extending from, and usually perpendicular to, the backshore into a water body. Its purpose is to protect a shoreline and adjacent upland by influencing the movement of water and/or deposition of materials. This is accomplished by building or preserving an accretion beach on its updrift side by trapping littoral drift. A groin is relatively narrow in width but varies greatly in length. A groin is sometimes built in a series as a system and may be permeable or impermeable, high or low, and fixed or adjustable.

(39) “Height” means the distance measured from the average grade level to the highest point of a structure; provided, that television antennas, chimneys and similar appurtenances shall not be used in calculating height, except where it obstructs the view of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines; provided further, that temporary construction equipment is excluded in this calculation (WAC 173-27-030(9)).

(40) “In-kind replacement” means to replace wetlands, habitat, biota or other organisms with substitute flora or fauna whose characteristics closely match those destroyed, displaced or degraded by an activity.

(41) “Landfill” means the creation of, or addition to, a dry upland area (landward of the OHWM) or the creation of, or addition to, an in-water area (waterward of the OHWM) by depositing material into waters or onto shoreline, upland dry areas, or wetland areas.

(42) Launching Rail. See “Boat railway.”

(43) Launching Ramp. See “Boat launch or ramp.”

(44) “Letter of exemption” means a letter issued by the City to indicate that a proposed development is exempted from the requirement to obtain a shoreline permit as provided in WAC 173-27-050. Letters of exemption may include conditions or other provisions placed on the proposal in order to ensure consistency with the Shoreline Management Act and this master program. The letter must indicate the specific exemption provision from WAC 173-27-040(2) that is being applied to the development and provide a summary of the City’s analysis of the consistency of the project with the master program and the SMA.

(45) “Liberal construction” means a legal concept instructing parties interpreting a statute to give an expansive meaning to terms and provisions within the statute. The goal of liberal construction is to give full effect in implementing a statute’s requirements. See RCW 90.58.900.

(46) “Littoral drift” means the movement of mud, sand, or gravel material moved parallel to the shoreline in the nearshore zone by waves and currents.

(47) “Mitigation” or “mitigation sequencing” means the process of avoiding, reducing, or compensating for the environmental impact(s) of a proposal. See WAC 173-26-020(30) and 197-11-768. “Mitigation” or “mitigation sequencing” means the following sequence of steps listed in order of priority, with subsection (47)(a) of this section being top priority:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

(c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;

(e) Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

(f) Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.

(48) “Moorage” means any device or structure (such as a pier or buoy) used to secure a vessel for temporary anchorage.

(49) “Moorage piles” means structural members that are driven into the lake bed to serve as a stationary moorage point. They are typically used for moorage of small boats in the absence of, or instead of, a dock or pier. In some cases, moorage piles may be associated with a dock or pier.

(50) “Mooring buoy” means a floating object anchored to the bottom of a water body that provides tie-up capabilities for vessels.

(51) “Native plants” or “native vegetation” means plants that occur naturally, and that distribute and reproduce without aid. Native plants in western Washington are those that existed prior to intensive settlement that began in the 1850s.

(52) “Nonconforming use” means an existing shoreline use that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of the Act or the applicable master program, but which does not conform to present use regulations due to subsequent changes to the master program.

(53) “Nonconforming development” or “nonconforming structure” means an existing structure that was lawfully constructed at the time it was built but is no longer fully consistent with present regulations such as setbacks, buffers or yards; area; bulk; height or density standards due to subsequent changes to the master program.

(54) “Nonconforming lot” means a lot that met dimensional requirements of the applicable master program at the time of its establishment but now contains less than the required width, depth or area due to subsequent changes to the master program.

(55) “Normal maintenance” means those usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse, or cessation from a lawfully established condition (WAC 173-27-040(2)(b)). See also “Normal repair.”

(56) “Normal protective bulkhead” means a bulkhead, common to single-family residences, constructed at or near the ordinary high water mark to protect an existing single-family residence, and which sole purpose is for protecting land from erosion, not for the purpose of creating new land (WAC 173-27-040(2)(c)).

(57) “Normal repair” means to restore a development to a state comparable to its original condition within a reasonable period after decay or partial destruction except where repair involves total replacement which is not common practice or causes substantial adverse effects to the shoreline resource or environment (WAC 173-27-040(2)(b)). See also “Normal maintenance.”

(58) “Ordinary high water mark” means that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the department; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water. See RCW 90.58.030(2)(b) and WAC 173-22-030(11).

(59) “Overwater structure” means any device or structure projecting above and waterward of the ordinary high water mark, including but not limited to piers, docks, floats, and moorage.

(60) “Permit” or “shoreline permit” means any substantial development permit, variance, or conditional use permit, or revision, or any combination thereof, authorized by the Act. Refer to WAC 173-27-030(13).

(61) “Pier” means a fixed-pile overwater structure.

(62) “Public access” means the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on the waters of the State, and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations. Refer to WAC 173-26-221(4).

(63) “Public interest” means the interest shared by the citizens of the State or community at large in the affairs of government, or some interest by which their rights or liabilities are affected such as an effect on public property or on health, safety, or general welfare resulting from a use or development (WAC 173-27-030(14)).

(64) “Public use” means to be made available daily to the general public on a first-come, first-served basis, and may not be leased to private parties on any more than a day use basis. Refer to WAC 332-30-106.

(65) “Qualified professional” or “professional” means a person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise and/or certification appropriate for the relevant subject. A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology, or related field and, unless otherwise specified in this master program, must have at least two years of related work experience.

(66) “Recreational facilities” means facilities such as parks, trails, and pathways that provide a means for relaxation, play, or amusement. For the purposes of this master program, recreational facilities do not include private residences and are divided into two categories:

(a) Water-oriented (e.g., boating facilities, fishing piers, swim rafts); and

(b) Non-water-oriented (e.g., sports fields, golf courses, RV camping).

(67) “Recreational float” means a floating structure that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the water offshore and that is generally used for recreational purposes such as swimming and diving.

(68) “Restoration” means the act of revitalizing or restoring characteristics and processes of a shoreline, ecosystem, or habitat diminished or lost by past alterations, activities, or catastrophic events.

(69) “Retrieval lines” means a system by which a float or other floating object is retrieved to a pier, dock, or shoreland.

(70) “Rotovating” means an aquatic vegetation harvesting technique that uses rototilling technology to uproot and remove plants.

(71) “Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a specified line, such as a lot, easement or buffer line or the ordinary high water mark, that is required to remain free of structures.

(72) “Shorelands” or “shoreland areas” means those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and all wetland and river deltas associated with the streams and lakes which are subject to the provisions of the Shoreline Management Act. Shorelands in the City of Covington include areas within 200 feet of the ordinary high water mark of shoreline jurisdiction waters and associated wetlands within shoreline jurisdiction. Optional buffers for critical areas are not included in shoreline jurisdiction. Only portions of the floodplain are included in shoreline jurisdiction, including the mapped floodway of Big Soos Creek and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet are also encompassed within the shoreland area. Some additional floodplain areas are included in the Jenkins Creek shoreline management area beyond the statutory minimum because they are located in wetland areas, which are included under mandatory provisions. Waters identified within the City’s shoreline jurisdiction include portions of Big Soos Creek, portions of Jenkins Creek, and the portion of Pipe Lake located within the City limits.

(73) “Shoreline buffer” means the area adjacent to a shoreline that separates and protects the water body from adverse impacts associated with adjacent land uses. It is designed and designated to remain vegetated in an undisturbed and natural condition to protect a water body from upland impacts. Shoreline buffers provide a transition between aquatic and allowed uses in upland areas. Uses within a shoreline buffer are typically limited to those that are water-dependent uses, provide ecological restoration, or provide public access. Shoreline buffers may be modified and reduced to accommodate allowed uses when consistent with the SMA and this master program, and when conducted so that no net loss of shoreline ecological functions occurs.

(74) “Shoreline environment designations” means the categories of shorelines established by local shoreline master programs in order to provide a uniform basis for applying policies and use regulations within distinctively different shoreline areas.

(75) “Shoreline jurisdiction” means all of the geographic areas covered by the SMA, related rules and the applicable master program, and such areas within a specified local government’s authority under the SMA. Shorelands in the City of Covington include areas within 200 feet of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) of shoreline jurisdiction waters, floodways, associated floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways and associated wetlands. Waters identified within jurisdiction include portions of Big Soos Creek, portions of Jenkins Creek, and the portion of Pipe Lake located within the City limits. The mapped floodway of Big Soos Creek, contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways, and associated wetlands are specifically encompassed within the shoreland area. Jenkins Creek does not have a mapped floodway, but floodplain areas within 200 feet of the OHWM and associated wetlands are included in shoreline jurisdiction. Within both Jenkins Creek and Big Soos Creek, additional floodplain areas beyond the statutory minimum are included because they are located in wetland areas. However, the entire floodplain is not included and wetland buffers are not included. See also “Shorelands,” “Shorelines,” “Shorelines of the State,” “Shorelines of statewide significance,” and “Associated wetlands.”

(76) “Shoreline Management Act” or “Act” means Chapter 90.58 RCW, or as amended.

(77) “Shoreline stabilization” means actions taken to address erosion impacts to property and dwellings, businesses, or structures caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, tides, wind or wave action. These actions include structural and nonstructural methods. For the purposes of this SMP, new stabilization measures include enlargement of existing stabilization measures.

(78) “Shorelines” means all of the water areas of the State, including reservoirs, and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them; except (a) shorelines of statewide significance; and (b) shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is 20 cubic feet per second or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and (c) shorelines on lakes less than 20 acres in size and wetlands associated with such small lakes.

(79) “Shorelines Hearings Board” means a State-level quasi-judicial body, created by the SMA, which hears appeals by any aggrieved party on the issuance of a shoreline permit, enforcement penalty and appeals by local government on Washington State Department of Ecology approval of master programs, rules, regulations, guidelines or designations under the SMA. See RCW 90.58.170; 90.58.180.

(80) “Shorelines of statewide significance” means a select category of shorelines of the State, defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e), where special preservationist policies apply and where greater planning authority is granted by the SMA. Permit review must acknowledge the use priorities for these areas established by the SMA. See RCW 90.58.020. Covington does not have any shorelines of statewide significance.

(81) “Shorelines of the State” means “shoreline jurisdiction,” or the total of all “shorelines” and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the State.

(82) “Single-family residence” means a detached dwelling designed for and occupied by one family including those structures and developments within a contiguous ownership which are a normal appurtenance (WAC 173-27-040(2)(g)).

(83) “Stream” means a naturally occurring body of periodic or continuously flowing water where: (a) the mean annual flow is greater than 20 cubic feet per second and (b) the water is contained within a channel (WAC 173-22-030(8)).

(84) “Structure” means a permanent or temporary edifice or building, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, whether installed on, above or below the surface of the ground or water, except for vessels (WAC 173-27-030(15)).

(85) “Substantial development” means any development of which the total cost or fair market value exceeds that established by State law in RCW 90.58.030(3)(e), or any development which materially interferes with the normal public use of the water or shorelines of the State. The dollar threshold established in RCW 90.58.030(3)(e) must be adjusted for inflation by the office of financial management every five years, beginning July 1, 2007, based upon changes in the consumer price index during that time period. “Consumer price index” means, for any calendar year, that year’s annual average consumer price index, Seattle, Washington area, for urban wage earners and clerical workers, all items, compiled by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics, United States Department of Labor. The Office of Financial Management must calculate the new dollar threshold and transmit it to the Office of the Code Reviser for publication in the Washington State Register at least one month before the new dollar threshold is to take effect. A list of activities and developments that shall not be considered substantial development is provided in RCW 90.58.030(3)(e); the City shall issue a letter of exemption for those developments that meet the precise terms of one or more of the listed exemptions.

(86) “Upland” means the dry land area above and landward of the ordinary high water mark.

(87) “Variance” or “shoreline variance” means an approval mechanism to grant relief from the specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards specified in the applicable master program. Variance permits must be specifically approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Washington State Department of Ecology (see WAC 173-27-170).

(88) “Water-dependent use” means a use or a portion of a use which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. Examples of water-dependent uses may include ship cargo terminal loading areas, ferry and passenger terminals, barge loading facilities, ship building and dry docking, marinas, aquaculture, float plane facilities and sewer outfalls.

(89) “Water-enjoyment use” means a recreational use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through location, design, and operation ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that fosters shoreline enjoyment.

(90) “Water-oriented use” means any combination of water-dependent, water-related, and/or water enjoyment uses, and along with single-family residences, serves as an all-encompassing definition for priority uses under the SMA. Non-water-oriented serves to describe those uses which have little or no relationship to the shoreline and are not considered priority uses under the SMA. Examples include professional offices, automobile sales or repair shops, mini-storage facilities, multifamily residential development, department stores and gas stations.

(91) “Water-related use” means a use or a portion of a use which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location because:

(a) A functional requirement for a waterfront location exists, such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or

(b) The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent commercial activities and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient. Examples include manufacturers of ship parts large enough that transportation becomes a significant factor in the products’ cost, professional services serving primarily water-dependent activities and storage of water-transported foods. Examples of water-related uses may include warehousing of goods transported by water, seafood processing plants, hydroelectric generating plants, gravel storage when transported by barge, oil refineries where transport is by tanker and log storage.

(92) “Water quality” means the physical characteristics of water within shoreline jurisdiction, including water quantity, hydrological, physical, chemical, aesthetic, recreation-related, and biological characteristics. Where used in this chapter, the term “water quantity” refers only to development and uses regulated under this chapter and affecting water quantity, such as impermeable surfaces and storm water handling practices. Water quantity, for purposes of this chapter, does not mean the withdrawal of ground water or diversion of surface water pursuant to RCW 90.03.250 through 90.03.340.

(93) “Weir” means a low dam built across a stream to raise its level, divert its flow and/or measure its flow. Weirs have been used to address erosion and scouring of stream channels, but can also have negative impacts depending on how they are constructed, e.g., detrimental impacts on fish habitat conditions. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.040 Applicability.

(1) This chapter applies to all uses and development occurring within the shoreline jurisdiction of the City of Covington, as defined in RCW 90.58.030 and CMC 16.05.030. This includes:

(a) Rivers and streams with more than 20 cubic feet per second mean annual flow;

(b) Water areas and reservoirs 20 acres or greater in area;

(c) All associated wetlands;

(d) Shorelands adjacent (upland areas) to these water bodies, typically within 200 feet of the ordinary high water mark; and

(e) Floodways and contiguous floodplain areas extending 200 feet from the floodway.

(2) Within the City of Covington, the following waters are considered “shorelines of the State” and are subject to the provisions of this master program. Where applicable, the upstream extent of shoreline jurisdiction for each water body, by section, township, and range, is included in parentheses:

(a) Big Soos Creek (T22N R5E S35);

(b) Jenkins Creek (T22N R5E S36); and

(c) Pipe Lake.

(3) Official Shorelines Map.

(a) Shoreline jurisdiction boundaries are depicted on the official shorelines map, adopted at the time of adoption of this master program and included in the shoreline element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan.

(b) The shoreline jurisdiction boundaries depicted on the official shorelines map are approximate and are to be used for guidance only. They shall be used in conjunction with site-specific field investigation in order to determine the actual boundary of shoreline jurisdiction. Whether or not they are mapped, all areas meeting the definition of a shoreline of the State shall be subject to the provisions of this master program. Conversely, any property shown on the official shorelines map as within shoreline jurisdiction, but that does not meet the criteria for shoreline jurisdiction as defined in subsection (1) of this section, shall not be subject to the provisions of this master program.

(c) The actual location of the ordinary high water mark, floodplain, floodway, and wetland boundaries, where applicable, shall be determined at the time a development is proposed. Wetland boundary and ordinary high water mark determinations shall be valid for five years from the date the determination is made. Floodplain and floodway boundaries shall be assessed using FEMA maps or the most current technical information available. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.050 Exemptions and exceptions.

(1) Developments Exempt from Permit Requirements.

(a) Certain developments are exempt from the requirement to obtain a substantial development permit. Developments that are exempt from the requirement for a substantial development permit are identified in WAC 173-27-040, or as subsequently amended. Developments that are exempt from the requirement to obtain a substantial development permit still require a letter of exemption consistent with CMC 16.05.090. Such developments may also still require a variance or conditional use permit, and all development within the shoreline is subject to the substantive standards of this SMP, regardless of whether a substantial development permit is required.

(b) Certain developments that are exempt from all permit requirements under the Shoreline Management Act are identified in WAC 173-27-044, or as subsequently amended. These developments are exempt from the requirement to obtain a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, letter of exemption, or other review conducted by the City of Covington to implement this chapter.

(2) Developments and Lands Not Subject to the Shoreline Management Act. The Shoreline Management Act, and the provisions of this SMP, do not apply to the following:

(a) Developments identified in WAC 173-27-045, or as subsequently amended; and

(b) Areas and uses in those areas that are under exclusive Federal jurisdiction as established through Federal or State statutes. Those nonfederal lands lying within the exterior boundaries of Federal lands and those Federal lands leased to other persons, which fall within the definition of shorelands, shall be subject to the Shoreline Management Act and this SMP. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.060 Relationship to other plans and regulations.

(1) The permitting process for a shoreline development or use does not exempt an applicant from complying with any other local, State, regional, or Federal statutes or regulations which may also be applicable to such development or use. Plans and policy documents that shall be considered in Covington include, but are not limited to, the Covington comprehensive plan and the King County Surface Water Design Manual. Proposals shall also comply with the regulations developed by the City to implement its plans, such as the zoning and building codes, which are codified in other chapters of the CMC.

(2) Relationship to Critical Areas Regulations.

(a) For protection of critical areas where they occur in shoreline jurisdiction, this master program adopts by reference the City’s critical areas regulations (Chapter 18.65 CMC, Ordinance No. 09-19, dated July 9, 2019), which are incorporated into this master program with specific exclusions and modifications in CMC 16.05.230.

(b) Pursuant to WAC 173-26-191(2)(b), amending the critical areas regulations referenced in the master program for those critical areas under shoreline jurisdiction will require an amendment to the master program and approval by the Washington State Department of Ecology (Department of Ecology).

(c) Within shoreline jurisdiction, the critical areas regulations (Chapter 18.65 CMC) shall be liberally construed together with this master program to give full effect to the objectives and purposes of this master program and Chapter 90.58 RCW.

(3) Should a conflict occur between the provisions of this SMP or between this SMP and the laws, regulations, codes, or rules promulgated by any other authority having jurisdiction within the City, the requirement which most supports the provisions of RCW 90.58.020 shall be applied, except when constrained by Federal or State law, or where specifically provided otherwise in this SMP. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))

Article II. Administration


16.05.070 Purpose.

There is hereby established an administrative system designed to:

(1) Assign responsibilities for implementation of this master program;

(2) Prescribe an orderly process by which to review proposals and permit applications; and

(3) Ensure that all persons affected by this master program are treated in a fair and equitable manner. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.080 Program administrator.

(1) The Community Development Director or designee is vested with:

(a) Overall responsibility for administering the Shoreline Management Act and this master program as the Shoreline Administrator;

(b) Authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny shoreline permit revisions in accordance with the policies and provisions of this master program; and

(c) Authority to grant letters of exemption from shoreline substantial development permits in accordance with the policies and provisions of this master program.

(2) The duties and responsibilities of the Shoreline Administrator shall include:

(a) Preparing and using application forms deemed essential for the administration of this master program;

(b) Advising interested citizens and applicants of the goals, policies, regulations, and procedures of this master program;

(c) Making administrative decisions and interpretations of the policies and regulations of this master program and the Shoreline Management Act;

(d) Collecting applicable fees, as established by the City in CMC 16.05.090(2)(c);

(e) Determining that all applications and necessary information and materials are provided;

(f) Conducting field inspections, as necessary;

(g) Reviewing, insofar as possible, all provided and related information deemed necessary for appropriate applications needs;

(h) Determining if a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance permit is required;

(i) Providing copies of permit applications to relevant staff and agencies for review and comment;

(j) Conducting a thorough review and analysis of shoreline exemption applications; reviewing other staff and agency comments; making written findings and conclusions; and approving, approving with conditions, or denying such exemptions;

(k) Conducting a thorough review and analysis of shoreline substantial development permit applications; reviewing other staff and agency comments; making written findings and conclusions; and approving, approving with conditions, or denying such permits;

(l) Submitting shoreline variance and conditional use permit applications and written recommendations and findings on such permits to the City’s Hearing Examiner for their consideration and action;

(m) Submitting shoreline redesignation permit applications and written recommendations and findings on such permits to the City Council;

(n) Assuring that proper notice is given to appropriate persons and the public for all hearings;

(o) Providing technical and administrative assistance to the City’s Hearing Examiner and City Council as required for effective and equitable implementation of this program and the Act;

(p) Investigating, developing, and proposing amendments to this master program as deemed necessary to more effectively and equitably achieve its goals and policies;

(q) Seeking remedies for alleged violations of this program, the provisions of the Act and this master program or of conditions of any approved shoreline permit issued by the City of Covington;

(r) Acting as the primary liaison between local and State agencies in the administration of the Shoreline Management Act and this master program; and

(s) Forwarding shoreline permits to the Department of Ecology for filing or action, consistent with CMC 16.05.090. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.090 Shoreline permit procedures.

(1) Permit Required.

(a) A substantial development shall not be undertaken within the jurisdiction of the SMA, Chapter 90.58 RCW, and this master program unless a shoreline substantial development permit has been obtained and the appeal period has been completed and any appeals have been resolved and/or the applicant has been given permission to proceed by the proper authority.

(b) Unless specifically exempted by statute, all proposed uses and development occurring within shoreline jurisdiction shall conform to Chapter 90.58 RCW, the Shoreline Management Act and this master program whether or not a permit is required.

(2) Permit Submittal Process.

(a) Applicants shall apply for shoreline substantial development, variance, and conditional use permits and/or letter of exemption on forms provided by the City.

(b) Completed application documents for all shoreline permits shall be submitted to the Administrator for processing and review. Any deficiencies in the application or document shall be corrected by the applicant prior to further processing.

(c) Application fees in an amount set forth in the current fee resolution shall be paid to the City of Covington at the time of application. Fees shall include but not be limited to cost recovery for engineering and planning review time, site inspection time, administration, third-party peer review, and any other special costs attributable to the shoreline master program review process.

(3) Public Notice.

(a) A notice of application shall be issued for shoreline permit applications as provided for in CMC 14.35.040 and permit notice shall occur pursuant to Chapter 14.40 CMC, as amended, except that the public comment period for a substantial development permit, variance, or conditional use shall be no less than 30 days.

(b) The City shall send a notice of application to the Muckleshoot Tribe Fisheries Division for all projects seeking approval under the SMP, including shoreline exemptions.

(c) The Administrator shall be responsible for delivering the legal notice containing the information required by WAC 173-27-110 to the newspaper to be published at least once a week on the same day of the week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the area in which the development is proposed. Advertising costs shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

(4) Shoreline Exemption – Letter of Exemption.

(a) Purpose and Applicability.

(i) Any person claiming exemption from the shoreline substantial development permit requirements under CMC 16.05.050(1)(a) shall make an application to the Shoreline Administrator for a letter of exemption. All proposals for activities that are exempt from the substantial development process should be documented with an exemption letter from the city that spells out what is included as part of the exemption. Site plans should be included.

(ii) If any part of a proposed development is not eligible for exemption, then a shoreline substantial development permit is required for the entire proposed development.

(b) Letter of Exemption.

(i) If the exemption is approved, the Shoreline Administrator shall prepare and transmit a letter of exemption (LOE), addressed to the applicant and Department of Ecology, indicating the specific applicable exemption provisions from WAC 173-27-040 and providing a summary of the project’s consistency with this master program and the Act. A copy of the LOE shall be maintained on file by the City.

(ii) The Shoreline Administrator may attach conditions and/or mitigating measures to the LOE to achieve consistency and compliance with the provisions of this master program and the Act.

(5) Shoreline Substantial Development Permit.

(a) Purpose and Applicability. Unless exempted under CMC 16.05.050 or otherwise classified by this master program as requiring a shoreline conditional use permit, uses that are classified or set forth as permitted uses in the master program shall require authorization under a shoreline substantial development permit.

(b) Review Criteria. Uses that are classified or set forth as permitted uses in the master program may be authorized, provided the applicant demonstrates consistency with all of the following substantial development criteria, as listed in WAC 173-27-150:

(i) Consistency with the policies and procedures of the Shoreline Management Act;

(ii) Consistency with the provisions of Chapter 173-27 WAC; and

(iii) Consistency with this master program.

(6) Shoreline Conditional Use Permit.

(a) Purpose and Applicability.

(i) The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide a system within the master program that allows flexibility in the application of use regulations in a manner consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020.

(ii) In authorizing a conditional use, special conditions may be attached to the permit by the City of Covington or the Department of Ecology to prevent undesirable effects of the proposed use and/or to assure consistency of the project with the Act and the master program.

(iii) Uses that are not classified or set forth in this master program may be authorized as conditional uses provided the applicant can demonstrate consistency with the requirements of this section and the requirements for conditional uses contained in the master program.

(iv) Uses that are specifically prohibited by this master program may not be authorized with the approval of a conditional use permit.

(b) Review Criteria.

(i) Uses that are classified or set forth as conditional uses in the master program may be authorized, provided the applicant demonstrates consistency with all of the following conditional use criteria, as listed in WAC 173-27-160:

(A) That the proposed use is consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and the master program;

(B) That the proposed use will not interfere with the normal public use of public shorelines;

(C) That the proposed use of the site and design of the project is compatible with other authorized uses within the area and with uses planned for the area under the comprehensive plan and this master program;

(D) That the proposed use will cause no significant adverse effects to the shoreline environment in which it is to be located; and

(E) That the public interest suffers no substantial detrimental effect.

(ii) In the granting of all conditional use permits, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if conditional use permits were granted for other developments in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the conditional uses shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and shall not produce substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment.

(7) Shoreline Variance.

(a) Purpose and Applicability.

(i) The purpose of a variance permit is strictly limited to granting relief to specific bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the master program, and where there are extraordinary or unique circumstances relating to the property such that the strict implementation of the master program would impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or thwart the SMA policies as stated in RCW 90.58.020.

(ii) These provisions should be applied in a manner which, while protecting the environment, will assure that a person will be able to use his/her property in a fair and equitable manner.

(iii) Variances from the use regulations of this master program are prohibited.

(b) Application Requirements.

(i) An application for a shoreline variance shall be submitted on a form provided by the City accompanied by maps, completed environmental checklist, applicable fees, and any other information specified in this master program or requested by the Administrator.

(ii) An applicant for a substantial development permit who wishes to request a variance shall submit the variance application and the substantial development permit application simultaneously.

(c) Review Criteria.

(i) Variance permits for development that will be located landward of the ordinary high water mark and landward of any wetland may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate consistency with the following variance criteria, as listed in WAC 173-27-170:

(A) That the strict application of the bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the master program precludes, or significantly interferes with, reasonable use of the property;

(B) That the hardship described above is specifically related to the property, and is the result of unique conditions such as irregular lot shape, size, or natural features and the application of the master program and not, for example, from deed restrictions or the applicant’s own actions;

(C) That the design of the project is compatible with other permitted activities within the area and with uses planned for the area under the comprehensive plan and master program and will not cause adverse impacts to the shoreline environment;

(D) That the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by the other properties in the area;

(E) That the variance requested is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and

(F) That the public interest will suffer no substantial detrimental effect.

(ii) Variance permits for development and/or uses that will be located waterward of the ordinary high water mark or within any wetland may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate consistency with the following variance criteria:

(A) That the strict application of the bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the master program precludes all reasonable use of the property;

(B) That the proposal is consistent with the criteria established under subsection (7)(c)(i) of this section; and

(C) That the public rights of navigation and use of the shorelines will not be adversely affected.

(iii) In the granting of all variance permits, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests for like actions in the area. For example, if variances were granted to other developments and/or uses in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the variances shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and shall not cause substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment.

(8) Permit Review Procedures.

(a) Shoreline exemptions are a Type 1 process application, shoreline substantial development permits are a Type 2 process application, shoreline conditional use permits and shoreline variances are a Type 3 process application and shoreline environment redesignations are a Type 4 process application. All applications shall be processed in accordance with the applicable regulations of Chapters 14.30 and 14.35 CMC, as amended.

(b) Administrator Review.

(i) The burden of proving that a proposed development is consistent with the approval criteria and master program policies and regulations rests with the applicant.

(ii) The Shoreline Administrator shall make recommendations in the case of variance and conditional use permits, and decisions in the case of substantial development permits, exemptions, or requests for revisions to approved permits based upon: (A) the policies and procedures of the Shoreline Management Act and related sections of the Washington Administrative Code; and (B) this SMP.

(c) Hearing Examiner Review.

(i) The Covington Hearing Examiner shall make the final decision at the local level for conditional use and variance and shoreline redesignation applications.

(ii) The Covington Hearing Examiner shall review the recommendations prepared by the Covington Shoreline Administrator and make the final decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit applications based upon: (a) this SMP; (b) the policies and procedures of the Shoreline Management Act and related sections of the Washington Administrative code; (c) written and oral comments from interested persons; and (d) reports from the Shoreline Administrator. The Hearing Examiner is subject to the procedures and requirements contained in Chapters 2.25, 14.30, 14.35, 14.40, and 14.45 CMC, as amended.

(d) Washington State Department of Ecology Review.

(i) After City approval of a conditional use or variance permit, the City shall submit the permit to the Department of Ecology for approval, approval with conditions, or denial. The Department of Ecology shall render and transmit to the City and the applicant its final decision approving, approving with conditions, or disapproving the permit within 30 days of the date of submittal by the City pursuant to WAC 173-27-110.

(ii) The Department of Ecology shall review the complete file submitted by the City on conditional use and variance permits and any other information submitted or available that is relevant to the application. The Department of Ecology shall base its determination to approve, approve with conditions or deny a conditional use permit or variance on consistency with the policy and provisions of the Shoreline Management Act and, except as provided in WAC 173-27-210, the criteria in WAC 173-27-160 and 173-27-170. The City and the Department of Ecology may, in addition, apply the more restrictive criteria where they exist in the shoreline master programs.

(iii) The City shall provide timely notification of the Department of Ecology’s final decision to those interested persons having requested notification from the City pursuant to WAC 173-27-130.

(9) Financial Guarantee. To guarantee that conditions imposed in conjunction with permit approval are completed, the City may require the applicant to post a performance bond or other financial guarantee in an amount satisfactory to the City. Any such bond or guarantee shall be from a reputable bonding company in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.

(10) Timing and Duration.

(a) Commencement of Activity. If a permit is approved, the applicant or any other party authorized to conduct activities or uses by the decision shall not begin construction, development, or any authorized use or activity until 21 days after the permit is filed with the Department of Ecology pursuant to subsection (12) of this section and any appeals are concluded.

(b) Duration of Permits. The time requirements of this section shall apply to all substantial development permits and to any development authorized pursuant to a variance or conditional use permit authorized by this chapter. Upon a finding of good cause, based on the requirements and circumstances of the project proposed and consistent with the policy and provisions of this master program, the City may adopt different time limits from those set forth in subsections (10)(b)(i) and (ii) of this section as a part of action on a substantial development permit.

(i) Construction activities shall be commenced or, where no construction activities are involved, the use or activity shall be commenced within two years of the effective date of the permit.

(ii) Authorization to conduct development activities shall terminate five years after the effective date of the permit: provided, that the City may authorize a single extension before the end of the time limit, if a request for extension has been filed before the expiration date and with prior notice to parties of record and the Department of Ecology, for up to one year based on reasonable factors.

(iii) The running of a permit time period shall not include the time during which an activity was not actually pursued due to the pendency of reasonably related administrative appeals or legal action or due to the need to obtain any other government permits and approvals for the development that authorize the development to proceed, including all reasonably related administrative or legal actions on any such permits or approvals.

(iv) When permit approval is based on conditions, such conditions shall be satisfied prior to occupancy or use of a structure or prior to commencement of a nonstructural activity; provided, that an alternative compliance limit may be specified in the permit.

(11) Revisions.

(a) When Required. A permit revision is required whenever the applicant proposes substantive changes to the design, terms or conditions of a project from that which is approved in the permit. Changes are substantive if they materially alter the project in a manner that relates to its conformance to the terms and conditions of the permit, the master program or the policies and provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW. Changes that are not substantive in effect do not require approval of a revision.

(b) Submittal Materials. When an applicant seeks to revise a substantial development, conditional use, or variance permit, the Shoreline Administrator shall request from the applicant detailed plans and text describing the proposed changes.

(c) Administrator Review.

(i) If the Shoreline Administrator determines that the proposed changes are within the scope and intent of the original permit, and are consistent with this master program and the Act, the Shoreline Administrator may approve a revision. “Within the scope and intent of the original permit” means the following:

(A) No additional overwater construction is involved except that pier, dock, or float construction may be increased by 500 square feet or 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit, whichever is less.

(B) Ground area coverage and height may be increased a maximum of 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit.

(C) The revised permit does not authorize development to exceed height, lot coverage, setback, or any other requirements of this master program except as authorized under a variance granted as the original permit or a part thereof.

(D) Additional or revised landscaping is consistent with any conditions attached to the original permit and with this master program.

(E) The use authorized pursuant to the original permit is not changed.

(F) No adverse environmental impact will be caused by the project revision.

(ii) Revisions to permits may be authorized after original permit authorization has expired under RCW 90.58.143. The purpose of such revisions shall be limited to authorization of changes which are consistent with this section and which would not require a permit for the development or change proposed under the terms of Chapter 90.58 RCW and this shoreline master program. If the proposed change constitutes substantial development then a new permit is required. Provided, this subsection shall not be used to extend the time requirements or to authorize substantial development beyond the time limits of the original permit.

(iii) If the sum of the revision and any previously approved revisions under former WAC 173-27-100 or this section violate the provisions in subsection (11)(c)(i) of this section, the City shall require that the applicant apply for a new permit.

(d) Notice of Decision.

(i) The revision approval, including the revised site plans and text consistent with the provisions of WAC 173-27-180 as necessary to clearly indicate the authorized changes, and the final ruling on consistency with this section, shall be filed with the Department of Ecology. In addition, the Shoreline Administrator shall notify parties of record of their action.

(ii) If the revision to the original permit involves a conditional use or variance, the Shoreline Administrator shall submit the revision to the Department of Ecology for approval, approval with conditions, or denial, and shall indicate that the revision is being submitted under the requirements of this subsection. The Department of Ecology shall render and transmit to the Shoreline Administrator and the applicant its final decision within 15 days of the date of the Department of Ecology’s receipt of the submittal from the Shoreline Administrator. The Shoreline Administrator shall notify parties of record of the Department of Ecology’s final decision.

(e) Effective Date. The revised permit is effective immediately upon final decision by the Shoreline Administrator or, when appropriate under subsection (11)(d)(ii) of this section, upon final action by the Department of Ecology.

(12) Rulings to State. Any ruling on an application for a shoreline permit under authority of this master program, whether it is an approval or denial, shall, with the transmittal of the ruling to the applicant, be filed concurrently with the Department of Ecology. Filing shall occur in accordance with RCW 90.58.140(6) and WAC 173-27-130, as amended.

(13) Appeals.

(a) Local Appeals.

(i) Any decision made by the Administrator on a letter of exemption, master program policy or regulation interpretation, permit revision, or other action within the responsibility of the Administrator, may be appealed by the applicant, private or public organization, or individual to the Hearing Examiner within 14 calendar days following the issuance of a written decision by the Administrator, or otherwise becomes effective.

(ii) Such appeals shall be initiated by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal setting forth the action being appealed and the principal points upon which the appeal is based, together with a filing fee as prescribed by ordinance.

(b) Appeals to the State Shorelines Hearings Board.

(i) Any person aggrieved by the granting or denying of a substantial development permit, variance, or conditional use permit, the upholding of an exemption appeal, or by the rescinding of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this master program, may seek review from the State of Washington Shorelines Hearing Board by filing a request for the same within 21 days of the date of filing as defined in subsection (13)(b)(ii) of this section and by concurrently filing copies of such request with the Department of Ecology and the Attorney General’s office.

(ii) Consistent with RCW 90.58.140(6), the date of filing is defined as follows:

(A) For projects that only require a substantial development permit: the date that the Department of Ecology receives the City decision.

(B) For a conditional use permit or variance: the date that the Department of Ecology’s decision on the conditional use permit or variance is transmitted to the applicant and the City.

(C) For shoreline substantial development permits simultaneously mailed with a conditional use permit or variance to the Department of Ecology: the date that the Department of Ecology’s decision on the conditional use permit or variance is transmitted to the applicant and the City.

(iii) A copy of such appeal notice shall also be filed with the City of Covington Shoreline Administrator.

(iv) State Hearings Board regulations are provided in RCW 90.58.180 and Chapter 461-08 WAC. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.100 Nonconforming uses, structures, and development.

(1) Applicability. This section applies to nonconforming uses, development, structures, and lots, as defined in CMC 16.05.030 of this chapter.

(2) Nonconforming Structures and Development. Nonconforming structures and development shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) Nonconforming structures used for a conforming use may continue as legal nonconforming structures and may be maintained and repaired.

(b) Nonconforming structures may be enlarged or expanded; provided, that said enlargement does not increase the extent of nonconformity by further encroaching upon or extending into areas where construction or use would not be allowed for new structures or development, with the exception that improvements to nonconforming structures for the purpose of compliance with applicable accessibility regulations are not subject to this restriction.

(c) A structure for which a variance has been issued shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure and the requirements of this section shall apply as they apply to preexisting nonconformities.

(d) A structure that is being or has been used for a nonconforming use may be used for a different nonconforming use only upon the approval of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit may be approved only upon finding that the following conditions are met. Additional conditions may be attached to the permit as are deemed necessary to assure compliance with the following listed conditions, the requirements of the master program, and the Act, and to assure that the use will not become a nuisance or hazard:

(i) No reasonable alternative conforming use is practical; and

(ii) The proposed use will be at least as consistent with the policies and provisions of the Act and the master program and as compatible with the uses in the area as the preexisting use.

(e) A nonconforming structure that is moved any distance shall be brought into conformance with the master program and the Act.

(f) If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, or other casualty or act of God, to an extent not exceeding 75 percent of the replacement cost of the original structure, such structure may be reconstructed or restored and the previous use activity continued subject to all other provisions of this section; provided, that application is made for the permits necessary to restore the development within six months of the date the damage occurred, and all permits are obtained and the restoration completed within two years of permit issuance.

(g) Preexisting Residential Structures. Primary residential and appurtenant structures, located landward of the ordinary high water mark, that are classified as nonconforming structures under subsection (1) of this section, are considered conforming structures for the purpose of this master program, and shall be subject to the following provisions:

(i) Enlargement or expansion, by the addition of space to the main structure, or by the addition of space to an appurtenant structure, may be permitted if the following criteria are met:

(A) The enlargement or expansion does not extend farther waterward than the existing primary residential structure;

(B) Any lateral expansion is limited to a one-time expansion of up to 250 square feet of new impervious footprint;

(C) Potential adverse impacts to shoreline ecological functions are mitigated in accordance with no net loss requirements and mitigation sequencing per CMC 16.05.230; and

(D) The enlargement or expansion does not otherwise increase the level of nonconformity.

(ii) Proposed enlargements or expansions that do not meet the criteria in subsection (2)(g)(i) of this section shall require a variance pursuant to CMC 16.05.090(7).

(iii) Bulkheads, overwater structures, and other shoreline modifications accessory to the preexisting residential structures shall be excluded from the provisions of this subsection.

(3) Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) Nonconforming uses may continue as legal nonconforming uses and may be repaired and maintained.

(b) Nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged or expanded, except that nonconforming single-family residences classified as nonconforming uses and located landward of the ordinary high water mark may be enlarged or expanded in conformance with applicable bulk and dimensional standards by the addition of space to the main structure or by the addition of normal appurtenances upon approval of a conditional use permit.

(c) A nonconforming use that is discontinued for 12 consecutive months or for 12 months during any two-year period shall lose its nonconforming status and associated rights, and any subsequent use shall be conforming. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate an intent to abandon in order for the nonconforming rights to expire.

(d) A use that is listed as a conditional use in this master program, but that existed prior to adoption of this master program, and for which a conditional use permit has not been obtained, shall be considered a nonconforming use.

(4) Nonconforming Lots. An undeveloped nonconforming lot located landward of the ordinary high water mark may be developed if permitted by other City land use regulations; and provided, that such development conforms to all other requirements of the master program and the Act. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.110 Enforcements and penalties.

(1) The choice of enforcement action and the severity of any penalty should be based on the nature of the violation and the damage or risk to the public or to public resources. The existence or degree of bad faith of the persons subject to the enforcement action, benefits that accrue to the violator, and the cost of obtaining compliance may also be considered.

(2) Enforcement. All provisions of the master program shall be enforced by the Shoreline Administrator and/or his/her designated representatives. For such purposes, the Shoreline Administrator or his/her duly authorized representative shall have the power of a police officer.

(3) Penalty. Any person found to have willfully engaged in activities on the City’s shorelines in violation of the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 or in violation of the City’s master program, rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of the Covington Municipal Code (civil citation penalties and criminal penalties).

(4) Violator’s Liability. Any person subject to the regulatory program of the master program who violates any provision of the master program or permit issued pursuant thereto shall be liable for all damages to public or private property arising from such violation, including the cost of restoring the affected area to its condition prior to such violation. The Attorney General or Covington attorney shall bring suit for damages under this section on behalf of the State or City governments. If liability has been established for the cost of restoring an area affected by a violation, the court shall make provision to assure that restoration will be accomplished within a reasonable time at the expense of the violator. In addition to such relief, including money damages, the court in its discretion may award attorneys’ fees and costs of the suit to the prevailing party. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.120 Moratoria authority and requirements.

(1) The City of Covington has authority to adopt a moratorium control or other interim control on development under RCW 90.58.590.

(2) Before adopting a moratorium or control pursuant to this authority, the City shall:

(a) Hold a public hearing on the moratorium or control. The public hearing shall be held within 60 days of the adoption of the moratorium or control.

(b) Adopt detailed findings of fact that include, but are not limited to, justifications for the proposed or adopted actions and explanations of the desired and likely outcomes.

(c) Notify the Department of Ecology of the moratorium or control immediately after its adoption. The notification shall specify the time, place, and date of any public hearing.

(3) A moratorium or control adopted pursuant to this authority may be effective for up to six months if a detailed work plan for remedying the issues and circumstances necessitating the moratorium or control is developed and made available for public review.

(4) A moratorium or control adopted pursuant to this authority may be renewed for one or more six-month period if the City complies with the requirements in subsection (2) of this section before each renewal. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.130 Amendments to the master program and periodic review.

(1) Amendments to the Master Program. Any of the provisions of this master program may be amended as provided for in RCW 90.58.120 and 90.58.200 and Chapter 173-26 WAC. Any amendments shall also be subject to the procedures in Chapter 14.25 CMC. Amendments or revisions to the master program, as provided by law, do not become effective until 14 days from the date of the Department of Ecology’s written notice of final action stating the Department of Ecology has approved the proposal.

(2) Master Program Review. This master program shall be periodically reviewed and amendments shall be made as are necessary to reflect changing local circumstances, new information or improved data, and changes in State statutes and regulations. This review process shall be consistent with the requirements of RCW 90.58.080 and WAC 173-26-090 or its successor and shall include a local citizen involvement effort and public hearing to obtain the views and comments of the public. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.140 Severability.

If any provisions of this master program, or its application to any person or legal entity or parcel of land or circumstances, are held invalid, the remainder of the master program, or the application of the provisions to other persons or legal entities or parcels of land or circumstances, shall not be affected. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))

Article III. Shoreline Environments


16.05.150 Establishment of shoreline environment designations.

(1) This master program establishes the following five shoreline environments for the City of Covington. These shoreline environments shall include the shorelines of the City of Covington, including shorelands, surface waters, and bedlands.

(a) High-intensity;

(b) Medium-intensity;

(c) Shoreline residential;

(d) Urban conservancy; and

(e) Aquatic.

(2) Shoreline environment designations are depicted on the official shorelines map, adopted at the time of adoption of this master program and included in the shoreline element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan. These maps only approximately identify or depict the lateral extent of shoreline jurisdiction. The actual lateral extent of the shoreline jurisdiction shall be determined on a site-specific basis by a qualified professional at the time of a development application. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.160 High-intensity environment.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the high-intensity environment designation is to provide for high-intensity water-oriented and non-water-oriented commercial, transportation, and industrial uses while protecting existing ecological functions and restoring ecological functions in areas that have been previously degraded.

(2) Designation Criteria. A high-intensity environment designation shall be assigned to those shoreline areas within incorporated municipalities and urban growth areas if they currently support high-intensity uses related to commerce, transportation, or navigation; or are suitable and planned for high-intensity water-oriented uses. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.170 Medium-intensity environment.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the medium-intensity environment designation is to provide for water-oriented and non-water-oriented commercial, mixed-use, and residential uses while protecting existing ecological functions and restoring ecological functions in areas that have been previously degraded. Adaptive reuse of existing structures for office uses is emphasized, along with public access and water-enjoyment uses.

(2) Designation Criteria. A medium-intensity environment designation shall be assigned to shoreline areas if they currently support residential, water-enjoyment, or commercial uses; are located in upland areas outside of stream buffers; and are suitable and planned for limited intensity commercial, residential, or water-enjoyment uses. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.180 Shoreline residential environment.

(1) Purpose. The shoreline residential environment designation is designed to provide for residential needs where the necessary facilities for development can be provided. An additional purpose is to provide appropriate public access and recreational uses.

(2) Designation Criteria. A shoreline residential environment designation shall be assigned to shoreline areas if they are predominantly single-family or multifamily residential development or are planned and platted for residential development. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.190 Urban conservancy environment.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the urban conservancy environment designation is to protect and restore ecological functions of open space, floodplain, and other sensitive lands where they exist in urban and developed settings, while allowing a variety of compatible uses.

(2) Designation Criteria. An urban conservancy environment designation shall be assigned to those shoreline areas where one or more of the following characteristics apply:

(a) They are suitable for water-related or water-enjoyment uses;

(b) They are open space, floodplain, stream buffer, or other sensitive areas that should not be more intensively developed;

(c) They have potential for ecological restoration;

(d) They retain important ecological functions, even though partially developed; or

(e) They have the potential for development that is compatible with ecological restoration. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.200 Aquatic environment.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the aquatic environment designation is to protect, restore, and manage the unique characteristics and resources of the areas waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

(2) Designation Criteria. An aquatic environment designation shall be assigned to all areas waterward of the ordinary high water mark. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.210 Environment designation interpretation.

(1) Upland environment designations, including high-intensity, medium-intensity, shoreline residential, and urban conservancy, shall apply to shorelands.

(2) Only one environment designation shall apply to a given shoreland area. In the case of different designations occurring parallel to the shoreline, designations shall be divided along an identified linear feature (such as a stream buffer).

(3) Any areas within shoreline jurisdiction that are not mapped and/or designated due to minor mapping inaccuracies in the lateral extent of shoreline jurisdiction from the shoreline water body related to site-specific surveys of ordinary high water mark, associated wetlands, floodway, and/or floodplain are automatically assigned the environment designation of the contiguous waterward shoreline environment designation.

(4) All other areas of shoreline jurisdiction that are neither mapped as jurisdiction nor assigned an environment designation shall be assigned an urban conservancy environment designation until the shoreline area can be redesignated through an SMP amendment process conducted consistent with WAC 173-26-100, as amended, and Article II of this chapter. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))

Article IV. General Shoreline Regulations


16.05.220 Archaeological and historic resources.

(1) Applicability. The following provisions apply to archaeological and historic resources that are either recorded at the State Historic Preservation Office and/or by local jurisdiction or are inadvertently uncovered.

(2) Local developers and property owners shall immediately stop work and notify the City, the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and affected Indian tribes if archaeological resources are uncovered during excavation.

(3) A site inspection or evaluation by a professional archaeologist in coordination with affected Native American tribes shall be required for all permits issued in areas documented to contain archaeological resources. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of the shoreline permit.

(4) Significant archaeological and historic resources shall be permanently preserved for scientific study, education and public observation. When the City determines that a site has significant archaeological, natural scientific or historical value, a shoreline substantial development permit and/or any other permit authorizing development or land modification shall not be issued which would pose a threat to the site. The City may require that a site be redesigned or that development be postponed in such areas to allow investigation of public acquisition potential and/or retrieval and preservation of significant artifacts.

(5) In the event that unforeseen factors constituting an emergency as defined in RCW 90.58.030 necessitate rapid action to retrieve or preserve artifacts or data identified above, the project may be exempted from the permit requirement of these regulations. The City shall notify the State Department of Ecology, the State Attorney General’s Office and the State Historic Preservation Office of such a waiver in a timely manner.

(6) In addition to the provisions of this SMP, archaeological sites shall be subject to Chapter 27.44 RCW (Indian Graves and Records) and Chapter 27.53 RCW (Archaeological Sites and Records) and shall comply with Chapter 25-48 WAC, or as subsequently amended.

(7) Identified or suspected historical or archaeological resources shall be considered in park, open space, public access, and site planning with access to such areas designed and managed to give maximum protection to the resource and surrounding environment.

(8) Clear interpretation of historical and archaeological features and natural areas shall be provided when appropriate. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.230 Environmental protection and critical areas.

(1) No Net Loss of Shoreline Ecological Functions.

(a) No use, activity, or modification shall result in a net loss of shoreline ecological function. Impacts to ecological functions shall be avoided, minimized, and mitigated to achieve this standard.

(b) No permit shall be approved and no activity shall be authorized by the Shoreline Administrator without a clear finding that the use, activity, or modification, and any required mitigation, complies with the no net loss standard as set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(c) The applicant and/or party responsible for the use, activity, or modification shall provide all necessary information needed to demonstrate compliance with the no net loss standard.

(d) The City shall periodically review shoreline conditions to determine whether or not other actions are necessary to ensure no net loss of ecological functions, protect and enhance visual quality, and enhance residential and recreational uses on the City’s shoreline. Specific issues to address in such evaluations include, but are not limited to:

(i) Water quality;

(ii) Conservation of aquatic vegetation (control of noxious weeds and enhancement of vegetation that supports more desirable ecological and recreational conditions);

(iii) Changing visual character as a result of new residential development, including additions, and individual conservation practices (both along shorelines and in upland areas); and

(iv) Shoreline stabilization and modifications.

(2) Critical Areas in Shoreline Jurisdiction. The Covington Critical Areas Regulations, as codified in Chapter 18.65 CMC (Ordinance No. 09-19, dated July 9, 2019), are herein incorporated by reference into this master program, with the following exclusions, clarifications and modifications:

(a) Exclusions.

(i) The reasonable use exception provisions (CMC 18.65.075) and the public agency/utility exception provisions (CMC 18.65.070) shall not apply in shoreline jurisdiction. Exceptions within shoreline jurisdiction shall require a shoreline variance based on the variance criteria listed in CMC 16.05.090 and WAC 173-27-170.

(ii) The exemptions provisions (CMC 18.65.047) and partial exemptions provisions (CMC 18.65.048) shall not apply within shoreline jurisdictions. Exemptions are described in CMC 16.05.050.

(iii) The allowed alteration provisions of the critical areas regulations (CMC 18.65.050) shall not apply in shoreline jurisdiction. Activities and alterations to critical areas, shorelines of the State, and their buffers shall be subject to the provisions of this master program.

(iv) The stream buffer reduction provisions of CMC 18.65.360(3)(a) and (b) shall not apply in shoreline jurisdiction.

(b) Clarifications and Modifications.

(i) Shoreline buffer widths are defined in CMC 16.05.280.

(ii) Critical areas and buffers do not extend shoreline jurisdiction beyond the limits specified in this master program, except as provided for in CMC 16.05.040.

(iii) Future amendments to the critical areas regulations (Chapter 18.65 CMC) require Department of Ecology approval of an amendment to this master program to incorporate updated language.

(iv) If provisions of the critical areas regulations (Chapter 18.65 CMC) conflict with provisions of this master program, the provisions most protective of the ecological resource shall apply, as determined by the Administrator.

(v) If there are provisions of the critical areas regulations (Chapter 18.65 CMC) that are not consistent with the Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW, and supporting Washington Administrative Code chapters, those provisions shall not apply.

(3) Mitigation Sequencing. Where required, mitigation measures shall be applied in the following sequence of steps, listed in order of priority; lower priority measures shall be applied only where higher priority measures are determined to be infeasible or inapplicable:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

(c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

(d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;

(e) Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

(f) Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.

(4) Solid waste, liquid waste, and untreated effluent shall not be allowed to enter any bodies of water or to be discharged onto the land.

(5) The direct release of oil and hazardous materials or chemicals onto the land or into water is prohibited. Equipment for the transportation, storage, handling or application of such materials shall be maintained in a safe and leak-proof condition. If there is evidence of leakage, the further use of such equipment shall be suspended until the deficiency has been satisfactorily corrected.

(6) All shoreline uses and activities shall utilize best management practices (BMPs) to minimize any increase in surface runoff and to control, treat and release surface water runoff so that receiving water quality and shore properties and features are not adversely affected. Physical control measures include, but are not limited to, catch basins, settling ponds, oil/water separators, filtration systems, grassy swales, interceptor drains and landscaped buffers. All types of BMPs require regular maintenance to continue to function as intended.

(7) All shoreline developments and uses shall utilize effective erosion control methods during both construction and operation.

(8) All shoreline uses and activity shall be located, designed, constructed and managed in a manner that avoids, if feasible, and then minimizes adverse impacts to surrounding land and water uses and that is aesthetically compatible with the affected area.

(9) All shoreline developments shall be located, constructed and operated so as not to be a hazard to public health and safety.

(10) Land clearing, grading, filling and alteration of natural drainage features and land forms shall be limited to the minimum necessary for development. Any allowed activity shall be consistent with Chapter 14.60 CMC and this master program. Surface drainage systems or substantial earth modifications involving greater than 500 cubic yards of material shall be designed by a professional engineer. These designs shall seek to prevent maintenance problems, avoid adverse impacts to adjacent properties or shoreline features, and result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(11) All shoreline uses and activities shall be located and designed to prevent or minimize the need for shoreline protection structures (bulkheading, riprap, etc.) and stabilization, landfills, groins, jetties, or substantial site regrades.

(12) Identified significant short-term, long-term, or cumulative adverse environmental impacts lacking appropriate mitigation shall be sufficient reason for permit denial. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.240 Public access.

Public access includes the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on the waters of the State, and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations. There are a variety of types of potential public access, including picnic areas, pathways and trails, promenades, bridges, street ends, ingress and egress, parking and others.

(1) Public access shall be required in the following circumstances:

(a) Public access shall be required for all shoreline development and uses, except for water-dependent uses and single-family residences not part of a development planned for more than four parcels.

(b) Subdivisions of land into more than four parcels shall include dedication and improvement of public access.

(c) Public entities, including the City of Covington, shall be required to incorporate public access measures as part of each public shoreline development project, unless access is incompatible with safety, security, or environmental protection.

(2) Where public access is required under subsection (1) of this section, a payment in lieu of providing public access shall be permitted in accordance with RCW 82.02.020 (relating to fees associated with development); provided, that both of the following conditions are met:

(a) The applicant demonstrates, and the City determines, that one or more of the following circumstances applies:

(i) Unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public exist which cannot be prevented by any practical means; or

(ii) Inherent security requirements of the proposed development or use cannot be satisfied through the application of alternative design features or other solutions; or

(iii) The cost of providing the access, easement, or an alternative amenity is unreasonably disproportionate to the total long-term cost of the proposed development; or

(iv) Unacceptable environmental harm such as damage to fish spawning areas will result from the public access that cannot be mitigated; or

(v) Significant undue and unavoidable conflict between the proposed access and adjacent use would occur and not be mitigated; and

(b) The applicant demonstrates, and the City determines, that all reasonable alternatives have been exhausted, including but not limited to:

(i) Regulating access by such means as limiting hours of use to daylight hours;

(ii) Designing separation of uses and activities, with such means as fences, terracing, hedges, and landscaping;

(iii) Providing access that is physically separated from the proposal, such as a nearby street end, an off-site viewpoint, or a trail system.

(3) Where public access is required, the following provisions apply:

(a) Public access sites shall be connected directly to the nearest public street if possible.

(b) Public access sites shall be made barrier-free for the physically disabled where feasible.

(c) Physical public access shall be designed to prevent significant impacts to sensitive natural systems. Where impacts to shoreline ecological functions cannot be avoided, mitigation shall be required to meet the no net loss standard.

(d) Public access sites shall utilize environmentally friendly materials and technologies in such things as building materials, porous pavement, site preparation, drainage, and landscaping to the extent feasible.

(e) Where public access is to be provided by a trail, it shall be subject to the following provisions:

(i) The trail shall be located and designed using best management practices.

(ii) Where feasible, the trail shall be placed on the furthest landward edge of the shoreline buffer or within the outer 25 percent of the standard critical area buffer, whichever is greater.

(iii) Landscaping shall be composed of native, drought-tolerant, and site-appropriate vegetation to the extent feasible.

(iv) Trails shall avoid the removal of mature trees and limit disturbance of native understory vegetation.

(v) The City may require that other specific conditions, as determined by the City, be described in a trail plan.

(f) Required public access sites shall be fully developed and available for public use at the time of occupancy or use of the development or activity.

(g) Public access easements and permit conditions shall be recorded on the deed where applicable or on the face of a plat or short plat as a condition running in perpetuity with the land. Recording with the King County Department of Records shall occur at the time of permit approval (RCW 58.17.110; relating to subdivision approval or disapproval).

(h) The standard State-approved logo and other approved signs that indicate the public’s right of access and hours of access shall be constructed, installed, and maintained by the applicant in conspicuous locations at public access sites. In accordance with subsection (1)(a) of this section, signs controlling or restricting public access may be approved as a condition of permit approval.

(i) Future actions by the applicant or other parties shall not diminish the usefulness or value of the public access site.

(4) Developments, uses, and activities shall be designed and operated to avoid blocking, reducing, or adversely interfering with the public’s visual or physical access to the water and the shorelines. In providing visual access to the shoreline, the natural vegetation shall not be excessively removed either by clearing or by topping. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.250 Vegetation management.

Vegetation within and adjacent to water bodies provides a valuable function for the health of aquatic ecosystems. Vegetation management involves both a passive and active management system. The intent of both systems is to minimize habitat loss and the impact of invasive plants, erosion, sedimentation, and flooding. “Passive” vegetation management deals with protection and enhancement of existing diverse native plant communities along all shorelines including creeks, streams, wetlands, and lakes. “Active” vegetation management involves aquatic weed control as well as the restoration of altered or threatened shorelines using technology called soil bioengineering. Soil bioengineering reestablishes native plant communities as a dynamic system that stabilizes the land from the effects of erosion. The following regulations apply to any activity, development, or use which results in the removal of or impact to shoreline vegetation, whether or not that activity requires a shoreline permit. Such activities include clearing, grading, grubbing, and trimming of vegetation. These provisions also apply to vegetation protection and enhancement activities.

(1) All vegetation removal activities shall adhere to the requirements of the City’s code pertaining to clearing (Chapter 14.60 CMC), critical areas (Chapter 18.65 CMC), and tree preservation and protection (Chapter 18.45 CMC), unless more restrictive standards are provided for in this chapter. A shoreline exemption letter or substantial development permit is required unless otherwise stated in this section. Unless specified, the term “vegetation” includes trees.

(2) Selective Vegetation Pruning. Pruning of existing trees and vegetation within the shoreline jurisdiction with hand labor and hand-operated equipment consistent with current International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) best management practices guidelines, in accordance with the master program, is allowed without a shoreline permit or approval. A clearing and grading permit, major or minor tree permit, and/or SEPA review may still be required. In no event may a tree or vegetation which is an active nest site for a species of local importance be pruned.

(3) Removal of vegetation within areas classified as critical areas or critical area buffers under Chapter 18.65 CMC, or shoreline buffers under CMC 16.05.280, is subject to the following provisions:

(a) Removal of vegetation in such areas is prohibited unless such removal is determined to be necessary to support a water-oriented use, in connection with an approved alteration, to remove a documented hazard to existing development, or to remove noxious weeds as listed by the State in Chapter 16-750 WAC, and no other feasible alternative exists.

(b) All vegetation removal in such areas shall document how they comply with all of the requirements of CMC 16.05.230(3), Mitigation Sequencing, and Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(c) Vegetation removed in such areas, other than significant trees, shall be replaced at a spatial ratio of 1:1 to replicate the structural habitat and ecological functions provided by native species. Significant trees shall be replaced according to subsection (6) of this section.

(d) All vegetation and significant trees removed from such areas shall be replaced within the same critical area, critical area buffer, or shoreline buffer.

(e) New or expanded lawn areas within shoreline buffers shall be prohibited.

(f) The City shall require a report prepared by a qualified professional to ensure impacts are mitigated.

(4) Outside of areas classified as critical areas or critical area buffers under CMC 16.05.230(2), or shoreline buffers under CMC 16.05.280, removal of vegetation shall only be allowed in association with a permitted shoreline use or development, except that the following activities may be allowed independent of a permitted shoreline use or development:

(a) Removal of noxious weeds as listed by the State in Chapter 16-750 WAC, provided such activity shall be conducted in a manner consistent with best management practices and the City of Covington’s engineering design standards, and native vegetation shall be promptly reestablished in the disturbed area.

(b) Modification of vegetation in association with a legal, nonconforming use or development; provided, that said modification is conducted in a manner consistent with this master program and results in no net loss to ecological functions or critical fish and wildlife habitats. This could include, but is not limited to, the maintenance of an existing developed yard and ornamental landscaping.

(c) Normal and routine maintenance of existing trees, for view maintenance, safety, or other purposes; provided, that said maintenance is consistent with accepted arboricultural practices, does not involve removal of healthy trees, and is not detrimental to the health of any trees.

(d) Maintenance or restoration of view sheds situated on public lands; provided, that said activity is conducted in a manner consistent with this master program and results in no net loss to ecological functions or critical fish and wildlife habitat areas.

(5) Areas cleared of vegetation and not developed shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) Such areas shall be replanted within one year, and shall be planned and maintained such that, within three years’ time, the vegetation is at least 90 percent reestablished.

(b) Areas cleared of native vegetation shall be replanted with similar species of native vegetation in quantities designed to achieve no net loss of ecological function. Areas cleared of ornamental landscapes, including grass, may be replanted with similar species, unless mitigation is necessary to address project impacts. In all cases of revegetation, native vegetation shall be preferred.

(6) Tree Removal.

(a) When the removal of a healthy tree, or a tree deemed as diseased by a certified arborist that is not considered hazardous, is allowed, all significant trees removed shall be replaced with a Pacific Northwest native tree, a minimum two-inch caliper size, for replacement plantings consistent with the following minimum standards:

	Significant Tree1 Removed	Replacement Ratio

(replaced: removed)

	6 – 10 inches	1:1

	10 – 16 inches	2:1

	Greater than 16 inches	3:1

1    A significant tree means any healthy tree of six inches caliper or larger.

(b) The removal of trees that are determined by a certified arborist as hazardous, possible threat to public safety, or posing an imminent risk of damage to an existing legally conforming structure, public or private road or sidewalk or other permanent improvement within the shoreline jurisdiction, is allowed subject to the following:

(i) Mitigation. The landowner shall replace any trees that are removed with a Pacific Northwest native tree with a minimum two-inch caliper size replacement trees(s) at a one-to-one ratio (1:1).

(ii) Wildlife Snag as Alternative to Mitigation. A landowner may choose to convert a hazard tree proposed for removal to a wildlife snag as an alternative if recommended by a certified arborist.

(iii) Within stream buffers, hazard trees shall be turned into snags if feasible, and/or resulting woody debris shall be put into the stream channel if it can be done in a manner that does not create a hazard on the site or to downstream properties.

(iv) Native understory vegetation is preserved outside of areas used for structures and their maintenance, active recreation, and shoreline access.

(7) The control of aquatic vegetation shall be subject to the following provisions:

(a) Such activity shall only occur when native plant communities and associated habitats are threatened or where an existing water-dependent use is restricted by the presence of weeds.

(b) Such activity shall occur in compliance with all other applicable laws and standards, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife requirements.

(c) Control of aquatic vegetation by mechanical methods is exempt from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit only if the bottom sediment or benthos is not disturbed in the process. It is assumed that mechanical removal of accumulated vegetation at a level closer than two feet to the root level, including derooting or rotovating, will disturb the bottom sediment and benthos layer. Such methods shall be considered development for which a shoreline substantial development permit is required.

(d) The use of herbicides and pesticides to remove noxious plants in rivers, streams, wetlands, or ditches shall be subject to the following provisions:

(i) Within critical areas and critical area buffers, such activity shall be prohibited, except where no reasonable alternatives exist and it is demonstrated that such activity is in the public interest. Where such activity is permitted, a conditional use permit shall be required.

(ii) A permit from the Department of Ecology shall be required. Preparation of a SEPA checklist for review by other agencies may also be required.

(iii) Mechanical removal of noxious weeds shall be timed and carried out in a manner to minimize any disruption of wildlife or habitat.

(iv) The individual(s) involved shall obtain a pesticide applicator license from the Washington State Department of Agriculture.

(8) Property owners should use the following BMPs when maintaining residential landscapes:

(a) Avoid use of herbicides, fertilizers, insecticides, and fungicides along banks of streams, drainage channels, and shores of Pipe Lake, as well as in the water.

(b) Limit the amount of lawn and garden watering so that there is no surface runoff.

(c) Dispose of grass clippings, leaves, or twigs properly; do not sweep these materials into the street, into a body of water, or near a storm drain. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.260 Water quality, stormwater, and non-point pollution.

Water quality is affected in numerous ways by human occupation and development of shoreline areas. Typically the increase in impermeable surfaces as a result of development increases stormwater runoff volumes, causing higher peak stormwater discharges at higher velocities that cause scouring and erosion of stream banks. Erosion increases suspended solids concentrations and turbidity in receiving waters, and carries heavy metals, household wastes, excess nutrients, and other pollutants into these waters. Increased nitrogen and phosphorus enrichment results in algal growth that depresses levels of dissolved oxygen in receiving waters. The degradation of water quality adversely impacts wildlife habitat and public health.

(1) All shoreline development, both during and after construction, shall minimize impacts related to surface runoff through control, treatment and release of surface water runoff such that there is no net loss of receiving water quality in the shoreline environment. Control measures include but are not limited to dikes, runoff intercepting ditches, catch basins, settling wet ponds, sedimentation ponds, oil/water separators, filtration systems, grassy swales, planted buffers, and fugitive dust controls.

(2) All shoreline development shall comply with the applicable requirements of the most recent edition of the Adopted Surface Water Design Manual and all applicable City stormwater regulations. The City will also rely on source control standards and other BMPs contained in the most recent versions of the Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington and The Low Impact Development Manual: Technical Guidance for Puget Sound.

(3) Shoreline development and uses shall adhere to all required setbacks, buffers and standards for stormwater storage basins and facilities. Low impact stormwater facilities may be allowed within designated shoreline setback areas if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all other regulations, including any applicable critical areas standards.

(4) Property owners with failing septic systems and applicants seeking required building, land use and shoreline permits for a major redevelopment shall be required to connect to the public sewer if such connection can be made within 300 feet of the subject property.

(5) The use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers on lawns shall be prohibited within shoreline buffers. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.270 Flood hazard management.

(1) Development within flood hazard areas shall be subject to the provisions of the City of Covington flood damage prevention regulations (Chapter 16.15 CMC) in addition to the provisions of this SMP.

(2) New development or uses in shoreline jurisdiction, including the subdivision of land, are prohibited when it is reasonably foreseeable that the development or use would require structural flood hazard reduction measures within the channel migration zone or floodway during the life of the development.

(3) New structural flood hazard reduction measures in shoreline jurisdiction shall be permitted only when it can be demonstrated by a scientific and engineering analysis that:

(a) They are necessary to protect existing development;

(b) Nonstructural measures are not feasible;

(c) Impacts on ecological functions and priority species and habitats can be successfully mitigated so as to assure no net loss; and

(d) Appropriate vegetation conservation actions are taken consistent with CMC 16.05.250.

(4) New structural flood hazard reduction measures shall be placed landward of associated wetlands and designated shoreline buffers, except for actions that increase ecological functions, such as wetland restoration; provided, that such flood hazard reduction projects may be authorized if it is determined that no other alternative to reduce flood hazard to existing development is feasible.

(5) New public structural flood hazard reduction measures, such as dikes or levees, shall dedicate and improve public access pathways unless public access improvements would cause unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public, inherent and unavoidable security problems, unacceptable and immitigable significant ecological impacts, unavoidable conflict with proposed use, or a cost that is disproportionate and unreasonable to the total long-term cost of the development. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))

Article V. Specific Shoreline Use Regulations


16.05.280 General shoreline use standards.

(1) Permitted Uses.

(a) Table 16.05.280-1 indicates which new, expanded, or altered shoreline uses may be allowed or prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction within each shoreline environment designation. Refer to the text in CMC 16.05.290 through 16.05.390 for provisions related to specific uses listed in the table. Uses are classified as follows:

(i) Uses allowed by shoreline substantial development permit or shoreline exemption are indicated by a “P” in the table.

(ii) Uses allowed by shoreline conditional use permit are indicated by a “C” in the table.

(iii) Prohibited uses are not allowed and are indicated by an “X” in the table.

(iv) Uses regulated consistent with the adjacent upland environment designation are indicated by “Upland” in the table.

(v) Uses not specifically identified in the table may be allowed by a shoreline conditional use permit.

(vi) If there are any conflicts between Table 16.05.280-1 and the written provisions in this master program, the written provisions shall control.

(b) Unless otherwise indicated in Table 16.05.280-1, the provisions of this section apply to primary uses, and accessory uses are regulated consistent with the primary use.

(c) Additional Provisions for the Urban Conservancy Environment. All new uses and developments, permitted or allowed as conditional, in the urban conservancy environment shall be compatible with conserving, protecting, and restoring ecological conditions of the shoreline. New uses and developments shall demonstrate consistency with the urban conservancy management policies as set forth in the Covington comprehensive plan.

Table 16.05.280-1. Permitted Uses by Shoreline Environment Designation  

	Shoreline Use	Shoreline Environment Designation

	High-Intensity	Medium-Intensity	Shoreline Residential	Urban Conservancy	Aquatic

	Agriculture	X	X	X	X	X

	Aquaculture	P	P	C	P	Upland

	Boating Facilities	X	X	C	C	Upland

	Commercial Development	 	 	 	 	 

	Primary	P	P	X (1)	X	X

	Accessory	P	P	P	C	X

	Forest Practices	X	X	X	X	X

	Industrial Development	P	X	X	X	X

	Institutional Development (2)	P	P	P	P	P

	In-Stream Structural Development

	As part of a fish enhancement project	P	P	P	P	P

	Other	C	C	C	C	C

	Mining	X	X	X	X	X

	Recreational Development

	Water-oriented	P	P	P	P	P

	Non-water-oriented	 	 	 	 	 

	Primary	P	P	C	C	X

	Accessory	P	P	P	P	X

	Multi-use trails	P	P	C	C	X

	Minor trails	P	P	P	P	X

	Residential Development

	Single-family	P	P	P	P/C/X (3)	X

	Multifamily	P	P	X	X	X

	Signs	 	 	 	 	 

	Primary	X	X	X	X	X

	Accessory	P	P	P	C	C

	Transportation Facilities

	New circulation routes related to permitted shoreline use	C	C	C	C	C (4)

	Expansion of existing circulation system	P	P	C	C	C (4)

	Multi-use trails	P	P	C	C	C (4)

	Parking

	Primary	X	X	X	X	X

	Accessory	P	P	P	C	X

	Utilities

	Major

	Solid waste disposal or transfer sites (excluding storage of recyclable materials)	X	X	X	X	X

	Power generation, substations, and gas storage facilities	C	C	C	C	X

	All other	C	C	C	C	C

	Minor	P	P	P	C	C

	Uses Not Specified	C	C	C	C	C

Table Notes:

1.    Commercial uses that are incidental to the primary residential use and are compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood, such as home occupations, may be permitted.

2.    Institutional development shall include scientific, historical, cultural, or educational uses. The provisions for commercial development set forth in CMC 16.05.320 shall apply to institutional development.

3.     Allowed as a permitted use (P) in the Jenkins Creek shoreline jurisdiction; as a conditional use (C) in the Big Soos Creek shoreline jurisdiction; and prohibited (X) in the Pipe Lake shoreline jurisdiction. All residential development shall be subject to the critical areas regulations set forth in CMC 16.05.230.

4.    Bridges shall be allowed only in accordance with the provisions set forth in CMC 16.05.380, Transportation facilities, and all applicable shoreline modification regulations set forth in CMC 16.05.400 through 16.05.450.

(2) Dimensional Standards.

(a) Table 16.05.280-2 defines the dimensional standards applicable to all shoreline development within each shoreline environment designation. Dimensional standards include maximum height, shoreline buffers, building setbacks from the shoreline buffer, impervious surface coverage, and minimum lot width. All development shall also comply with all applicable dimensional standards, including interior and yard setbacks, pursuant to CMC Title 18. Where a conflict exists between a requirement of this master program and the zoning code, the most protective provision shall prevail.

Table 16.05.280-2. Dimensional Standards  

	 	Shoreline Environment Designation

	Dimensional Standard	High-Intensity	Medium-Intensity	Shoreline Residential	Urban Conservancy	Aquatic

	Maximum Height	45 ft. (1)	45 ft. (1)	30 ft.	30 ft.	NA

	Shoreline Buffer (2)	115 ft.	115 ft.	115 ft. (3)	115 ft.	NA

	Building Setback from the Shoreline Buffer	15 ft.	15 ft.	15 ft.	15 ft.	NA

	Impervious Surface Coverage	60%	50%	50%	10%	NA

	Minimum Lot Width	60 ft.	60 ft. (4)	60 ft.	100 ft. (4)	NA

Table Notes:

1.    A height of up to 45 feet may be approved if allowed in the underlying zoning and if the applicant can demonstrate the structure will not obstruct the view of a substantial number of residences and will serve the public interest. Otherwise height is limited to 35 feet.

2.    Shoreline buffers may be modified subject to the critical areas provisions of CMC 16.05.230. Use and management of the buffer shall comply with all critical areas standards unless a provision would preclude a water-dependent use.

3.    Shoreline buffers in the shoreline residential environment may be reduced pursuant to the provisions of subsection (2)(c) of this section.

4.    Where the urban conservancy environment and the medium-intensity environment are parallel shoreline environments along Jenkins Creek, no minimum lot width shall be required for residential development, provided a conservation easement shall be required for all portions of lots within the urban conservancy designation; native vegetation shall be preserved within the easement; and joint consolidated access shall be provided within the easement.

(b) Maximum Height.

(i) The maximum height set forth in Table 16.05.280-2 and the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to television antennas, chimneys, flagpoles, public utilities, and similar appurtenances.

(ii) In addition to compliance with the maximum height standard as set forth in Table 16.05.280-2, an applicant shall demonstrate that structures located below the ordinary high water mark are the minimum necessary to accommodate a water-dependent or other permitted use. Elevated decks, storage buildings, and other structures on docks are prohibited unless necessary for the operation of a water-dependent use, and no reasonable alternative exists.

(iii) A height of more than 35 feet may be approved only if the applicant prepares a view corridor study indicating that the proposed structure would not diminish views of the shoreline from surrounding properties.

(iv) Development shall also be subject to the height limits established by the underlying zoning, but in no case shall height exceed 45 feet above average grade level.

(v) Accessory structures, where allowed, shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet.

(c) Shoreline Buffers.

(i) The shoreline buffer shall be measured landward, on a horizontal plane perpendicular to the shoreline. The buffer shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless a channel migration zone is found to occur and documented in a study submitted by a qualified professional, in which case the City may require that the shoreline buffer be measured from the edge of the channel migration zone.

(ii) Developments associated with water-dependent uses, ecological restoration, and public access shall not be subject to the requirement for a shoreline buffer. Mitigation sequencing shall be applied to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, consistent with CMC 16.05.230(3).

(iii) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures that are not water-dependent or water-related are prohibited within the shoreline buffer, except within the shoreline residential environment accessory structures may be allowed within the shoreline buffer if they are no closer than 10 feet from the OHWM, and less than or equal to 200 square feet in total area, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet. The area of shoreline buffer impacted shall be mitigated by planting native vegetation in an equivalent area elsewhere within in the shoreline buffer.

(iv) Pipe Lake Buffer Reduction.

(A) Within the shoreline residential environment only, the Shoreline Administrator may approve reduction of the standard buffer down to a minimum of 60 feet when a combination of the mitigation measures set forth in Table 16.05.280-3 is used to achieve an equal or greater protection of shoreline ecological functions, and subject to the provisions of this subsection.

Table 16.05.280-3. Shoreline Buffer Reduction Mechanisms  

	Reduction Mechanism	Reduction Allowance

	Water-Related Actions (1)

	1	Removal of an existing bulkhead covering at least 75 percent of the shoreline frontage that is located at, below, or within 5 feet landward of the ordinary high water mark; and subsequent restoration of the shoreline to a natural or semi-natural state, including restoration of topography and beach/substrate composition.	30 ft.

	2	Removal of an existing bulkhead covering at least 25 percent of the shoreline frontage that is located at, below, or within 5 feet landward of the ordinary high water mark; and subsequent restoration of the shoreline to a natural or semi-natural state, including restoration of topography, beach/substrate composition, and vegetation.	15 ft.

	3	Preservation of existing natural shoreline conditions (e.g., no bulkhead or other unnatural shoreline features such as upland impervious surfaces or other structural alterations) within 5 feet of the ordinary high water mark, including preservation of existing vegetation.	10 ft.

	4	Preservation of existing trees and native vegetation and restoration of native vegetation as necessary in at least 75 percent of the remaining buffer area. Up to 25 percent of the buffer area can be composed of existing non-invasive, non-native vegetation. Up to 15 feet of the shoreline frontage (from the ordinary high water mark landward to the building setback line) may be permitted for improved shoreline access, provided access areas shall be located to avoid areas of greater sensitivity and habitat value. (2)	20 ft.

	5	Preservation of existing trees and native vegetation and restoration of native vegetation in at least 25 percent of the remaining buffer area. Up to 15 feet of the shoreline frontage (from the ordinary high water mark landward to the building setback line) may be permitted for improved access, provided access areas shall be located to avoid areas of greater sensitivity and habitat value. (3)	10 ft.

	Upland-Related Actions (4)

	6	Installation of biofiltration/infiltration mechanisms such as bioswales, created and/or enhanced wetlands, or ponds that exceed standard stormwater requirements.	15 ft.

	7	Installation of a “green” roof in accordance with the standards of the LEED Green Building Rating System.	15 ft.

	8	Installation of pervious material for driveway or road construction.	10 ft.

	9	Limiting total impervious surface in the reduced buffer area to less than 5 percent.	10 ft.

	10	Preserving or restoring at least 20 percent of the total lot area outside of the reduced buffer as native vegetation. No more than 20 percent of the total lot area can be lawn.	10 ft.

Table Notes:

1.    At least one water-related action must be undertaken in order to achieve the full buffer reduction allowed.

2.    This mitigation measure may not be used by any properties that currently have native vegetation in 75 percent or more of the remaining buffer area.

3.    This mitigation measure may not be used by any properties that currently have native vegetation in 25 percent or more of the remaining buffer area.

4.    A maximum of 35 feet in cumulative buffer reduction may be achieved using upland-related actions.

(B) Buffer averaging as set forth in CMC 18.65.360(2) may be used in combination with the mitigation measures provided in Table 16.05.280-3; provided, that the buffer shall not be reduced to a width of less than 50 feet at any location. Further buffer reduction shall require approval of a shoreline variance.

(v) All property owners who obtain approval for a reduction in the buffer must record the final approved buffer and corresponding conditions in a notice on title, and provide a copy of the notice on title to the Shoreline Administrator.

(vi) All property owners who obtain approval for a reduction in the buffer must prepare, and agree to adhere to, a shoreline vegetation management plan prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the Shoreline Administrator that includes appropriate limitations on the use of fertilizer, herbicides, and pesticides as needed to protect lake water quality. This plan shall be recorded as a notice on title, and a copy of the final recorded notice on title provided to the Shoreline Administrator.

(vii) Restoration of native vegetation shall consist of a mixture of trees, shrubs, and groundcover and be designed to improve habitat functions. Preparation of a revegetation plan shall be completed by a qualified professional and include a monitoring and maintenance program that shall, at a minimum, include the following:

(A) The goals and objectives for the mitigation plan;

(B) The criteria for assessing the mitigation;

(C) A monitoring plan that includes annual progress reports submitted to the Shoreline Administrator and that lasts for a period sufficient to establish that performance standards have been met as determined by the Shoreline Administrator, but not less than five years; and

(D) A contingency plan.

(viii) Whenever the Shoreline Administrator determines that monitoring has established a significant adverse deviation from predicted impacts, or that mitigation or maintenance measures have failed, the applicant or the property owner shall be required to institute correction action, which shall also be subject to further monitoring as provided in this section.

(ix) The Shoreline Administrator may require a financial guarantee in an amount sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed in a manner that complies with conditions of approval and to guarantee satisfactory workmanship and materials for a period not to exceed five years. The Shoreline Administrator shall establish the conditions of the bond according to the nature of the proposed mitigation, maintenance or monitoring and the likelihood and expense of correcting mitigation or maintenance failures.

(x) All costs associated with the mitigation/monitoring and planning, including City expenses, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

(xi) Existing Structures. Existing structures that are not considered to be nonconforming and located within the shoreline buffer may be replaced in their current location and configuration to the extent allowed by local, State, and Federal agencies with jurisdiction.

(d) Building Setbacks. Structures allowed within the shoreline buffer under subsection (2)(c) of this section shall also be allowed within the building setback from the shoreline buffer unless otherwise prohibited by Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(e) Impervious Surface Coverage.

(i) The amount of impervious surface shall be the minimum necessary to provide for the proposed use.

(ii) Impervious surface coverage is further restricted in critical areas, critical area buffers, and shoreline buffers pursuant to the critical areas regulations set forth in CMC 16.05.230.

(iii) Outside of critical areas, critical area buffers, and shoreline buffers, a credit towards the total impervious surface coverage may be provided through the use of permeable materials, such as pervious concrete, subject to approval by the Shoreline Administrator in consultation with the Development Review Engineer pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC. Within the urban conservancy environment, this credit shall be limited to a maximum of 20 percent of the site area. The City will encourage practices that further minimize impervious surfaces and stormwater runoff, including use of best available technologies. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.290 Agriculture.

(1) Only existing agricultural uses that predated the incorporation of Covington in 1998 are permitted, subject to all requirements of this master program, and provided:

(a) All uses and development shall be located and designed to assure no net loss of ecological functions and have no significant adverse impact on other shoreline resources and values;

(b) A shoreline substantial development permit is required for all agricultural development not specifically exempted by the provisions of RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)(iv);

(c) Any barn, shed, or other structure constructed in conjunction with the permitted agricultural activity shall not be constructed within the floodway;

(d) All existing agricultural activity along shorelines of the State shall conform to the best management practices developed pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 and adopted by the King County Soil Conservation District;

(e) Lagoons, ponds, or other waste retention facilities shall be subject to subsection (1)(b) of this section; and

(f) Agricultural uses shall comply with all applicable critical areas regulations as set forth in CMC 16.05.230. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.300 Aquaculture.

(1) Aquaculture shall not be permitted in areas where it would result in a net loss of ecological functions or significantly conflict with navigation or other water-dependent uses.

(2) Aquacultural development shall conform to applicable State and Federal policies and regulations, provided they are consistent with the Act and this master program, to ensure no net loss of ecological function.

(3) Aquaculture facilities shall be designed and located such that they do not spread disease to native aquatic life, establish new nonnative species that cause significant ecological impacts, or significantly impact the aesthetic qualities of the shoreline.

(4) Impacts to ecological functions shall be mitigated in accordance with the sequence set forth in CMC 16.05.230(3). (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.310 Boating facilities.

(1) Applicability. Boating facilities, as regulated in this section, shall include commercial or non-commercial moorage structures serving more than four single-family residences.

(2) Boating facilities shall be located where such development can comply with the requirement for no net loss of ecological functions, and where existing navigation rights and channels can be protected.

(3) Extended moorage on waters of the State without a lease or permission shall be prohibited, except as allowed by applicable State regulations and unless a lease or permission is obtained from the State and impacts to navigation and public access are mitigated.

(4) The responsibility to comply with all State agency policies and regulations, including all applicable health, safety, and welfare requirements associated with the primary use or accessory use, shall belong to the applicant.

(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that traffic generated by the boating facility shall be safely and conveniently handled by the streets serving the proposed facility.

(6) New boating facilities shall be designed to avoid, then minimize, potential aesthetic impacts. Where such impacts cannot be avoided they shall be mitigated, including the use of vegetation, screening, and placement, where applicable.

(7) Public access shall be required for all new boating facilities, unless the applicant demonstrates that such access is infeasible, subject to all requirements in CMC 16.05.240.

(8) Live-aboards and nighttime use of boats, including for sleeping, shall be prohibited.

(9) Boating facilities shall have provisions available for cleanup of accidental spills of contaminants.

(10) Use of internal combustion engines on Pipe Lake shall be prohibited, in accordance with Chapter 8.25 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.320 Commercial development.

(1) Water-enjoyment and water-related commercial development shall be required to provide public access and ecological restoration where feasible, consistent with the provisions of CMC 16.05.240, and shall avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to existing vegetation, recreational uses, and public access.

(2) New non-water-oriented commercial development shall be prohibited unless it is part of a mixed-use project, navigation is severely limited, and the use provides a significant public benefit consistent with the policies of the Act.

(3) Non-water-dependent commercial development shall be prohibited over water, except in existing structures and where necessary to support water-dependent uses.

(4) Home occupations may be permitted within the shoreline residential environment, provided they meet the requirements of CMC 18.80.100, Home occupations, as amended.

(5) Commercial development accessory to a permitted recreational use or facility may be permitted as a conditional use in the urban conservancy environment. Examples of commercial developments accessory to a permitted recreational use or facility include concession stands and private parties, receptions, or banquets (one-time CUP to establish scope of activity allowed).

(6) Commercial vendors located outside of shoreline jurisdiction shall not establish facilities within shoreline jurisdiction, except that this prohibition does not preclude a vendor from being hired to provide services in connection with a permitted use. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.330 Industrial development.

(1) Industrial development and redevelopment shall be located, designed, and constructed to result in no net loss of ecological processes and functions.

(2) Industrial development and redevelopment shall include cleanup and restoration of impacted sites.

(3) Public access shall be required consistent with CMC 16.05.240, and unless such a requirement would interfere with operations or create hazards to life or property.

(4) Industrial development shall utilize the best techniques in design and siting to prevent the release of contaminants into the adjoining water bodies in order to comply with the water quality standards set forth in Chapter 90.58 RCW.

(5) New non-water-oriented industrial development shall be prohibited unless it is part of a mixed-use project and provides a significant public benefit such as ecological restoration, environmental clean-up, historic preservation, or public access. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.340 In-stream structural development.

(1) In-stream structures shall not impede upstream or downstream migration of anadromous fish. All new replacement structures, including culverts, shall be made fish passable in accordance with the most recent Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife requirements or with the National Marine Fisheries Service guidelines for Endangered Species Act-listed species.

(2) Structures shall be designed and located to minimize removal of riparian vegetation.

(3) In-water structures shall be located and designed to preserve or enhance aquatic habitat and to minimize impacts on the visual and aesthetic quality of the shoreline.

(4) In-water structures shall be allowed when performed by or at the direction of a government agency as follows:

(a) Construction methods will reduce or not adversely affect geologic hazards;

(b) Work is completed in the least impactful way during the least impactful time of year and is in conformance with applicable best management practices;

(c) All affected in-stream and buffers features are restored;

(d) Proposed in-stream work will restore or improve habitat;

(e) Use of retaining walls that allow maintenance of existing natural slope areas is preferred over graded artificial slopes, unless an alternative design provides equivalent or greater long-term slope stability;

(f) The maintenance does not involve the use of herbicides, hazardous substances, sealants, or other liquid oily substances in streams, wetlands or their buffers; and

(g) When maintenance involves work over and within water:

(i) The maintenance is compliant with Washington State Department of Ecology and other applicable State and Federal agencies; and

(ii) The maintenance of culverts is limited to removal of sediment and debris from the culvert and its inlet, invert and outlet and the stabilization of the disturbed or damaged bank or channel immediately adjacent to the culvert and shall not involve the excavation of a new sediment trap adjacent to the inlet. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.350 Recreational development.

Recreational uses include passive activities, such as walking, viewing and fishing. Recreational development also includes facilities for active uses, such as swimming, boating, and other outdoor recreation uses. Recreational facilities are not intended for a private residence, but as private or public shoreline recreational facilities.

(1) Applicability. This section shall apply to both public and private shoreline recreational facilities, excluding private residences. Commercial recreational development shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 16.05.320, Commercial development.

(2) Proposals for new or expanded recreational development shall include provisions for public access to the shoreline. Public access sites shall comply with the requirements of CMC 16.05.240(3). New or expanded recreational development that does not provide public access may be authorized provided the applicant demonstrates compliance with CMC 16.05.240.

(3) Recreational developments, uses, and activities shall be designed and operated to avoid blocking, reducing, or adversely interfering with the public’s visual or physical access to the water and the shorelines. In providing visual access to the shoreline, the natural vegetation shall not be excessively removed either by clearing or by topping.

(4) All new structures associated with a recreational development, other than accessory or water-dependent structures such as docks and boardwalks that provide access to the water for that development, shall maintain the required shoreline buffer and building setback as set forth in CMC 16.05.280. Existing structures may be replaced in their existing location and configuration to the extent allowed by local, State, and Federal agencies with jurisdiction. Shoreline buffer reduction beyond that allowed under CMC 16.05.280 shall require a shoreline variance.

(5) Recreational development shall be located, designed, and constructed to result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, including protection of existing native shoreline vegetation and restoration of native shoreline vegetation impacted by development activities. Mitigation shall be provided as necessary to meet this requirement. The City may request studies by qualified professionals to determine compliance with this requirement.

(6) Water-dependent or water-related activities such as swimming, boating, and fishing, and activities that benefit from waterfront scenery such as picnicking, hiking, and bicycling, shall be given priority in planning public and private recreational development in shoreline jurisdiction.

(7) Recreational development shall make adequate provisions for, as applicable:

(a) Motorized, nonmotorized, and pedestrian access;

(b) The prevention of trespass onto adjacent properties, using mechanisms including but not limited to landscaping and fencing;

(c) Protection and restoration of critical areas and shoreline processes and functions;

(d) Signs indicating the public’s right of access to shoreline acres, installed and maintained in conspicuous locations at the point of access and entrance; and

(e) Buffering of such development from adjacent private property or natural areas.

(8) In approving recreational development, the City shall ensure that the development will maintain, enhance, or restore desirable shoreline features.

(9) Swimming areas shall be separated from boat launch areas.

(10) The construction of swimming facilities, piers, moorages, floats, and launching facilities waterward of the ordinary high water mark shall also be subject to the provisions for overwater structures as set forth in CMC 16.05.440.

(11) Public boat launching facilities may be permitted provided the traffic generated by such facilities can be safely and conveniently handled by the streets serving the proposed facility.

(12) Fragile and unique shoreline areas with valuable ecological functions, such as wetlands and wildlife habitats, shall be used only for non-intensive recreation activities that do not involve the construction of structures.

(13) Recreational developments that require periodic use of fertilizers, pesticides, and other chemicals, such as golf courses and playfields, or that support high-intensity activities such as sporting events as a primary use, shall be located outside of shoreline jurisdiction.

(14) Trails.

(a) Trails shall be designed to avoid significant impacts to sensitive natural systems and shall result in no net loss of ecological functions. Mitigation sequencing as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(3) shall be required.

(b) Trails shall be located at least 80 feet from the ordinary high water mark, except in limited areas to provide viewpoints or conform to topography. Publicly accessible trails shall meet the applicable provisions of CMC 16.05.240.

(c) Trails not intended for public access shall be limited to non-motorized, pervious trails, including boardwalks, no greater than six feet wide. Trails not meeting these criteria shall be considered multi-use, and shall require a conditional use permit in the shoreline residential and urban conservancy environments.

(15) Whenever financially feasible and practical, the City shall require the use of building materials and technologies whose production and use result in reduced environmental impacts when developing public access to the shoreline. Porous pavements shall be used unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Shoreline Administrator that such materials would restrict accessibility, pose a safety hazard, or are not sufficiently durable. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.360 Residential development.

“Residential development” means one or more buildings, structures, lots, parcels, or portions thereof which are designed for and used or intended to be used to provide a place of abode for human beings, including single-family residences and other detached dwellings together with accessory uses and structures normally applicable to residential uses located landward of the OHWM, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, garages, sheds, fences and saunas.

(1) Consistent with CMC 16.05.050, Exemptions, and WAC 173-27-040, a substantial development permit is not required for construction within the shoreline residential environment by an owner, lessee, or contract purchaser of a single-family residence for his own use or the use of his family. However, such construction and all normal appurtenant structures shall otherwise conform to the provisions of this master program. An “appurtenance” means a structure that is necessarily connected to the use and enjoyment of a single-family residence and may include a garage, deck, driveway, utilities, fences, and grading that does not exceed 250 cubic yards.

(2) All new structures associated with a residential development, other than water-dependent structures such as docks, shall maintain the required shoreline buffer and building setback as set forth in CMC 16.05.280. Existing structures, not determined to be nonconforming, may be replaced in their existing location and configuration to the extent allowed by local, State, and Federal agencies with jurisdiction. Shoreline buffer reduction beyond that allowed under CMC 16.05.280 shall require a shoreline variance.

(3) Overwater residences and floating homes shall be prohibited.

(4) New residential lots created through subdivision or short subdivision shall be designed, configured, and developed to:

(a) Prevent the loss of ecological functions at full build-out;

(b) Prevent the need for new shoreline stabilization or flood hazard reduction measures; and

(c) Be consistent with the environment designations and standards of this master program.

(5) New multi-unit residential development, including the subdivision of land into more than four parcels, shall provide community and/or public access in conformance with the provisions of CMC 16.05.240.

(6) The stormwater runoff for all new or expanded pavements or other impervious surfaces associated with residential development shall be directed to infiltration systems, and other low impact development techniques shall be incorporated into new development as feasible, in accordance with the City’s adopted Surface Water Design Manual and the Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.

(7) Residential development shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. Mitigation sequencing as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(3) shall be required. The City may request studies by qualified professionals to determine compliance with this requirement.

(8) The City shall notify affected Indian Tribes when a single-family home or other exempt development is proposed in the Jenkins Creek or Big Soos Creek shoreline areas. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.370 Signs.

(1) Commercial signs are prohibited in all shoreline buffers unless associated with an authorized water-dependent commercial shoreline use.

(2) Noncommercial signs, where allowed by Chapter 18.55 CMC, shall comply with the following provisions:

(a) Sign plans and designs shall be submitted for review and approval at the time of shoreline permit application.

(b) All signs shall be located and designed to minimize interference with vistas, viewpoints, and visual access to the shoreline.

(c) Overwater signs shall be related to water-dependent uses only. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.380 Transportation facilities.

(1) General Standards.

(a) New road and bridge construction in shoreline jurisdiction shall be avoided and minimized and allowed only through a conditional use permit when related to and necessary for the support of permitted shoreline activities.

(b) New stream crossings associated with transportation uses shall be avoided if possible and minimized in number and total area impacted (e.g., using perpendicular crossings). Culverts and bridges shall be designed to allow passage of adult and juvenile salmon pursuant to WDFW Fish Passage Guidelines and to accommodate the flow of water, sediment, and woody debris during the 100-year return storm event. Bridge abutments shall be located outside of floodplains and channel migration zones if feasible.

(c) Applicants for new transportation facilities shall demonstrate how such facilities have been planned, located, and designed where routes will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile shoreline features.

(d) Transportation facilities shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and no adverse impacts on existing or planned water-dependent uses. Mitigation shall be provided as necessary to meet this requirement.

(e) Where feasible, transportation and utility facilities shall be required to make joint use of rights-of-way, and to consolidate crossings of water bodies to minimize adverse impacts to the shoreline.

(f) Circulation system plans within the shoreline shall consider and include appropriate provisions for pedestrian, bicycle, and public transportation.

(2) Roads.

(a) Expansion of existing roadways may be permitted only when the applicant demonstrates that:

(i) No alternative route is feasible;

(ii) The roadway is constructed and maintained to cause the least possible adverse impact on the land and water environment; and

(iii) The roadway expansion is in the public interest.

(b) Where new roads are proposed, applicants shall demonstrate that efforts have been made to coordinate with existing land use plans, including the City’s comprehensive plan and this master program.

(c) All debris and other waste materials from roadway construction shall be disposed of in such a way as to prevent their entry into any water body.

(d) Roads shall be designed to provide safe pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicular crossings where public access to shorelines is intended.

(e) Any road expansion affecting streams and waterways shall be designed to allow fish passage and minimum impact to habitat.

(f) Streets within shoreline jurisdiction shall be designed with the minimum pavement area required. Gravel and more innovative materials shall be used where feasible for pathways and road shoulders to minimize the amount of impermeable surfaces and help to maintain a more natural appearance.

(g) The City shall give preference to mechanical means for roadside brush control on roads in shoreline jurisdiction rather than the use of herbicides.

(3) Parking.

(a) Parking facilities shall be located outside of shoreline jurisdiction except to support an authorized shoreline use. Parking as a primary use shall be prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction.

(b) Parking facilities shall provide adequate provisions to control surface water runoff to prevent it from contaminating water bodies.

(c) Parking facilities serving individual buildings on the shoreline shall be located landward from the principal building being served, except when the parking facility is within or beneath the structure and adequately screened or in cases when an alternate orientation would have less adverse impact on the shoreline.

(d) Exterior parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon adjacent shoreline and abutting properties. Exterior parking facilities for nonresidential uses shall be landscaped with vegetation in such a manner that plantings provide effective screening within three years of project completion.

(e) New and reconstructed parking areas within the urban conservancy shoreline environment shall utilize low impact development (LID) techniques as appropriate and as described in the most recent edition of the Low Impact Development Manual: Technical Guidance for Puget Sound. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.390 Utilities.

Utilities are services and facilities that produce, transmit, store, process or dispose of electric power, gas, water, stormwater, sewage and communications. Utilities are split into major and minor based on type and scale.

(1) General Standards.

(a) Utility development shall, through coordination with local government agencies, provide for compatible, multiple use of sites and rights-of-way. Such uses include shoreline access points, trail systems, and other forms of recreation and transportation, providing such uses will not unduly interfere with utility operations, endanger public health and safety, or create a significant and disproportionate liability for the owner.

(b) Utility lines shall utilize existing rights-of-way, corridors, and/or bridge crossings whenever possible and shall avoid duplication and construction of new corridors in all shoreline areas. Proposals for new corridors or water crossings shall fully substantiate the infeasibility of existing routes.

(c) Utility facilities shall be located, designed, and constructed to avoid disturbance of unique and fragile areas, including wildlife spawning, nesting, and rearing areas. Utility facility development shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. Mitigation shall be provided as necessary to meet this requirement, with consideration given to ongoing impacts, such as permanent restrictions on vegetation growing under transmission lines or within utility corridors.

(d) Clearing of vegetation for the installation or maintenance of utilities shall be kept to a minimum. Upon project completion, any disturbed areas shall be restored to their pre-project condition or better consistent with CMC 16.05.250.

(2) Major Utilities.

(a) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection apply to major utilities, such as solid waste handling and disposal, water transmission lines, sewage treatment facilities and mains, power-generating or transfer facilities, gas distribution lines and storage facilities, and stormwater mains and regional treatment facilities.

(b) Major utilities shall be located outside of shoreline jurisdiction unless no other feasible alternative exists. When allowed under this regulation, major utilities shall be located landward of the ordinary high water mark, unless such location is not feasible or would result in potentially greater environmental impacts.

(c) In the case of a new primary utility corridor serving multiple municipalities and districts, the determination as to the feasibility of alternative routes outside of shoreline jurisdiction and/or the possibility of using existing rights-of-way may include, but is not limited to, consideration of:

(i) Construction impacts on the community, including impacts on traffic and adjacent land uses;

(ii) Engineering considerations, including restoration or disruption issues related to the presence of existing public improvements and utility facilities;

(iii) Environmental considerations, including impacts on the ecological function both within and outside of shoreline jurisdiction; and

(iv) Project considerations, including construction cost, construction schedule, and expenditures or contractual commitments made by the proponent of the corridor, prior to the adoption of this master program, in acquiring rights for the proposed route.

(d) Where major utilities must be located within shoreline jurisdiction, they shall be located and designed so as not to destroy or obstruct scenic views.

(e) Stream and water crossings shall be minimized according to mitigation sequencing. Boring shall be the preferred method unless it is demonstrated to be infeasible. Utilities that need to cross water shall be deep enough to avoid the need for bank stabilization or fill. Consideration shall be given to flooding and erosion when considering appropriate depth.

(f) Solid waste disposal sites and facilities shall be prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction. Storage of recyclable materials shall not be considered solid waste disposal.

(g) Major utilities shall provide screening of facilities from water bodies and adjacent properties in a manner that is compatible with the surrounding environment. Type of screening required shall be determined by the City on a case-by-case basis.

(h) To allow for the greatest amount of public input to help guide utility-related decisions, the City shall hold public meetings prior to the issuance of a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, or shoreline variance for a major primary utility project in accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in Article II of this master program.

(3) Minor Utilities.

(a) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection apply to utilities that are accessory to shoreline uses, including utilities that affect small-scale distribution services connected directly to uses along the shoreline, such as power, telephone, cable, water service, sewer service lines, and stormwater collection and conveyance.

(b) Utility development shall, through coordination with local government agencies, provide for compatible, multiple use of sites and rights-of-way.

(c) Proposals for new utility corridors shall fully substantiate the infeasibility of using existing utility corridors.

(d) New utility lines, pipelines, and cables, including electricity, communications, and fuel lines, shall be located underground unless demonstrated to be infeasible. Existing above-ground lines shall be moved underground when properties are redeveloped or in conjunction with major system upgrades or replacements.

(e) The location and construction of outfalls shall comply with all applicable Federal, State, County, and City regulations.

(f) The City of Covington shall maintain, enhance, and restore the natural drainage systems to protect water quality, reduce flooding, reduce public costs, and prevent associated environmental degradation for no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(g) The City shall establish maintenance procedures to assure continued proper functioning of surface water management and drainage systems. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))

Article VI. Shoreline Modification Regulations


16.05.400 General shoreline modification standards.

Shoreline modification activities are those actions that modify the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area. Shoreline modification activities are, by definition, undertaken in support of or in preparation for a permitted shoreline use. A single use may require several different shoreline modification activities. A proposed development must meet all of the regulations for both applicable uses and activities as well as the general and environment designation regulations.

(1) Permitted Modifications.

(a) Table 16.05.400-1 indicates which new, expanded, or altered shoreline modifications may be allowed or prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction within each shoreline environment designation. Refer to the text in CMC 16.05.410 through 16.05.450 for provisions related to specific modifications listed in the table. Modifications shall also be subject to underlying zoning. Modifications are classified as follows:

(i) Modifications allowed by shoreline substantial development permit or shoreline exemption are indicated by a “P” in the table.

(ii) Modifications allowed by shoreline conditional use permit are indicated by a “C” in the table.

(iii) Prohibited modifications are not allowed and are indicated by an “X” in the table.

(iv) Modifications regulated consistent with the adjacent upland environment designation are indicated by “Upland” in the table.

(v) Modifications not specifically identified in the table may be allowed by a shoreline conditional use permit.

(vi) If there are any conflicts between Table 16.05.400-1 and the written provisions this master program, the written provisions shall control.

Table 16.05.400-1. Permitted Modifications by Shoreline Environment Designation  

	Shoreline Use	Shoreline Environment Designation

	High-Intensity	Medium-Intensity	Shoreline Residential	Urban Conservancy	Aquatic

	Dredging and Dredge Spoil Disposal

	Dredging	C	C	C	C	C

	Dredge spoil disposal	C	C	C	C	C

	Fill and Excavation

	Fill	C (1)	C (1)	C (1)	C (1)	C

	Excavation (2)	C (1)	C (1)	C (1)	C (1)	C

	Overwater Structures

	Boathouse	X	X	X	X	X

	Bridge	C	C	C	C	C

	Joint-use pier, dock, or float	X	X	P	C/X(3)	Upland

	Accessory to residential structures

	Single-use pier, dock, or float	X	X	P	C/X (3)	Upland

	Launching ramp	X	X	X	X	X

	Not accessory to residential structures

	Single-use pier, dock, or float	X	X	C	C/X (3)	Upland

	Launching ramp	X	X	X	C/X (3)	Upland

	Launching rails	X	X	C	C/X (3)	Upland

	Shoreline Habitat and Ecological Enhancement	P	P	P	C/P (4)	Upland

	Shoreline Stabilization

	Soil bioengineering	P	P	P	P	P

	Bulkheads	X	X	P	C	Upland

	Breakwaters, groins, and jetties	X	X	X	X	X

	Riprap	C	X	X	X	Upland

	Weirs, new	X	X	X	X	X

	Weirs, repair and replacement of existing	C	C	C	C	C

	Modifications Not Specified	C	C	C	C	C

Table Notes:

1.    Fill landward of the ordinary high water mark associated with a permitted upland use shall be permitted as a shoreline substantial development permit or shoreline exemption (“P”). Fill landward of the ordinary high water mark that does not exceed 250 cubic yards of material shall be exempt pursuant to the provisions of WAC 173-27-040.

2.    Moorage excavated from dry land shall be prohibited in all environments.

3.    Recreational floats, launching ramps not accessory to residential structures, and launching rails not accessory to residential structures shall be permitted as a conditional use (“C”) in Pipe Lake shoreline jurisdiction, and shall be prohibited (“X”) in Big Soos Creek and Jenkins Creek shoreline jurisdiction.

4.    Beach restoration and enhancement shall be permitted as a conditional use (“C”) in Pipe Lake shoreline jurisdiction, and shall be permitted as a shoreline substantial development permit or shoreline exemption (“P”) in Big Soos Creek and Jenkins Creek shoreline jurisdiction.

(2) All shoreline modification activities shall be in support of a permitted shoreline use that is in conformance with the provisions of this master program unless it can be demonstrated that such activities are necessary and in the public interest.

(3) Shoreline modification projects shall avoid and then minimize adverse impacts to the environment to the greatest extent feasible, and where such impacts cannot be avoided, mitigation shall be provided to achieve no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. Mitigation sequencing as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(3) shall be required.

(4) All shoreline modification activities within the City shall comply with all other regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, or others with jurisdiction.

(5) Professional design, as approved by the City, shall be required for all shoreline modification structures. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.410 Shoreline stabilization.

Shoreline stabilization includes actions taken to address erosion impacts to property caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, wake or wave action. These actions include all structural and nonstructural methods.

(1) General Standards.

(a) All clearing and grading activities associated with shoreline stabilization shall adhere to the requirements of the City’s code pertaining to land clearing and grading (Chapters 14.60 and 18.45 CMC) and the vegetation management provisions set forth in CMC 16.05.250.

(b) An existing shoreline stabilization structure may be replaced with a similar structure if there is a demonstrated need to protect principal uses or structures from erosion caused by currents or waves. Where allowed, replacement shall be subject to the following standards:

(i) The replacement structure is designed, located, sized, and constructed and mitigation is provided as necessary to ensure no net loss of ecological functions.

(ii) Replacement walls or bulkheads shall not encroach waterward of the ordinary high water mark or existing stabilization structure unless as provided below and in subsection (3)(c) of this section.

(iii) Where existing structural stabilization is replaced by soft shoreline stabilization using bioengineering techniques and results in a documented improvement of shoreline functions, such stabilization may be allowed waterward of the ordinary high water mark subject to State and Federal approvals.

(c) Shoreline stabilization shall not be used to create new land.

(d) New structural (soft and hard) stabilization measures and enlargement of existing structural stabilization measures shall be limited to the minimum size necessary and shall be permitted only when it has been conclusively demonstrated through analysis in a geotechnical report prepared by a qualified professional that shoreline stabilization is necessary to protect existing primary structures, public improvements, ecological restoration projects or hazardous substance remediation projects from erosion, and that nonstructural measures, planting vegetation, or installing on-site drainage improvements are not feasible or not sufficient.

In such cases, soft structural solutions shall be used if feasible. The geotechnical report shall evaluate the necessity of structural stabilization measures by estimating time frames and rates of erosion (damage within three years), urgency of replacement, alternative solutions and other pertinent factors. Nonstructural solutions include (but are not limited to) soil bioengineering, beach enhancement, alternative site designs, drainage improvements and increased building setbacks (for proposed structures).

(f) All new shoreline development, including the division of land into new parcels, shall be located and designed to prevent the need for shoreline stabilization activities based on geotechnical analysis.

(g) New development on steep slopes or bluffs shall be set back sufficiently to ensure that shoreline stabilization is unlikely to be necessary during the life of the structure, as demonstrated by a geotechnical analysis.

(h) New development that would require shoreline stabilization which causes significant impacts to adjacent or down-current properties and shoreline areas is prohibited, and where stabilization is allowed, impacts to sediment transport shall be avoided or minimized and stabilization measures shall be specifically designed so as not to create a need for shoreline stabilization elsewhere.

(i) Shoreline stabilization shall not significantly interfere with normal surface and/or subsurface drainage into adjacent or nearby water bodies.

(j) Shoreline stabilization shall be designed so as not to constitute a hazard to navigation and to not substantially interfere with visual access to the water.

(k) Public access shall be required as part of publicly financed shoreline stabilization measures unless public access improvements would cause unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public, inherent and unavoidable security problems, unacceptable and unmitigable significant ecological impacts, unavoidable conflict with proposed use, or a cost that is disproportionate and unreasonable to the total long-term cost of the development.

(2) Soil Bioengineering. Soil bioengineering is the preferred “best practices” choice when considering shoreline stabilization. Soil bioengineering is the term given to the practice of using natural vegetative materials to stabilize shorelines and prevent erosion. This may include use of bundles of stems, root systems, or other living plant material; fabric or other soil stabilization techniques; and limited rock toe protection, where appropriate. Bioengineering projects often include fisheries habitat enhancement measures such as anchored logs or root wads, in project design. Soil bioengineering techniques may be applied to shoreline areas and the upland areas away from the immediate shoreline.

(a) All soil bioengineering projects shall use native plant materials appropriate to the specific area including trees, shrubs, and groundcovers, unless demonstrated infeasible for the particular site.

(b) Unless more specific and restrictive critical area regulations apply, all cleared areas shall be replanted immediately following construction and irrigated (if necessary) to ensure that within three years all vegetation is 100 percent reestablished to achieve no net loss of ecological functions of the shoreline area. Areas that fail to adequately reestablish vegetation shall be replanted with approved plant materials until such time as the plantings are viable. Additional performance standards may be established by the Shoreline Administrator in administrative rules.

(c) Bank stabilization in the form of a vegetated buffer zone shall be maintained (e.g., weeding, watering, dead plant replacement) for a minimum of three years. The buffer zone shall exclude activities that could disturb the site. Where determined necessary by the Shoreline Administrator, fencing may be required to ensure protection of buffer plantings.

(d) All construction and planting activities shall be scheduled to minimize impacts to water quality and fish and wildlife aquatic and upland habitat, and to optimize survival of new vegetation.

(e) More specific and stringent performance standards, including relevant requirements from the City of Covington Critical Areas Regulations for shoreline jurisdiction, as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(2), may be required as a condition of permit issuance to ensure the proposal will result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(3) Bulkheads.

(a) Bulkhead design and development shall conform to the general standards as set forth in subsection (1) of this section and all other applicable local, State, and Federal agency regulations.

(b) On shorelines where no other bulkheads are adjacent, the construction of a bulkhead shall tie in with the contours of the adjoining shorelines, as feasible, such that the proposed bulkhead shall not cause erosion of the adjoining properties.

(c) On all shorelines, bulkhead shall not be placed waterward of the ordinary high water mark, except as provided below:

(i) A replacement bulkhead protecting a primary residence may encroach waterward of the ordinary high water mark or existing bulkhead if the residence was occupied prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns. In such a case, the replacement bulkhead shall abut the existing shoreline stabilization structure.

(ii) Bulkheads may tie in flush with existing bulkheads on adjoining properties, provided that the new bulkhead does not extend waterward of the ordinary high water mark, except to the degree necessary to make the connection to the adjoining bulkhead. In such circumstances, the remaining portion of the bulkhead shall be placed landward of the existing ordinary high water mark such that no net loss of aquatic area occurs and the design complies with all other regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction.

(d) When a bulkhead is required at a public access site, provisions for safe public access to the water shall be incorporated into bulkhead design.

(e) Stairs or other permitted structures may be built into a bulkhead, but shall not extend waterward of the bulkhead.

(f) Fill landward of bulkheads shall be limited to an average of one cubic yard per linear foot of bulkhead. Any filling in excess of this amount shall be considered a regulated activity subject to the policies and regulations of this master program pertaining to fill activities and the requirement for obtaining a shoreline substantial development permit.

(4) Weirs.

(a) New weirs shall be prohibited.

(b) Repair and maintenance of existing weirs shall be permitted; provided, that no more environmentally beneficial solution, including removal or modification of the weirs, is feasible.

(c) Replacement of existing weirs may be permitted; provided, that construction is conducted using natural materials and consistent with other applicable provisions of this master program.

(5) Breakwaters, jetties, and groins shall be prohibited.

(6) Shoreline stabilization using beach substrate enhancement shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 16.05.450, Shoreline habitat and ecological enhancement. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.420 Dredging and dredge spoil disposal.

(1) General Standards.

(a) Dredging and disposal of dredge spoils shall avoid, then minimize significant ecological impact; impacts that cannot be avoided shall be mitigated to achieve no net loss of ecological processes and functions. Proposals for dredging and dredge disposal shall include details on all feasible mitigation measures to protect aquatic habitats.

(b) Dredging and dredge spoil disposal are prohibited in wetlands, except for the purposes of enhancing valuable wetland functions. A design prepared by a qualified wetland scientist is required prior to allowing dredging and/or disposal of dredge spoils into a wetland.

(c) The City of Covington may impose limitations on dredging activities, such as limited operating hours, time periods, and requirements for buffer strips at the site.

(d) New development siting and design shall avoid the need for new and maintenance dredging.

(2) Dredging.

(a) Dredging may be permitted as a conditional use activity only:

(i) When necessary to support a water-dependent use or navigation;

(ii) For expansion or alteration of public utility facilities or bridges within a public right-of-way, when there is a documented need and where other feasible sites or routes do not exist;

(iii) As part of approved mitigation actions, environmental restoration, and habitat enhancement projects;

(iv) To improve water quality;

(v) To improve water flow or manage flooding when a biological and geomorphological study demonstrates a long-term benefit to hazard reduction and the action is part of a comprehensive flood management solution; or

(vi) To clean up contaminated sediments.

(b) Where dredging is permitted pursuant to subsection (2)(a) of this section, the applicant shall demonstrate that applicable permits of other local, State, and Federal agencies have been obtained, and shall demonstrate using technical information produced by a qualified professional that:

(i) Water circulation, littoral drift, aquatic life, and water quality will not be substantially impaired; and

(ii) Other solutions would result in greater environmental impact.

(c) Dredging to establish, expand, relocate, or reconfigure navigation channels consistent with subsection (2)(a)(i) of this section shall be allowed only where needed to accommodate existing navigational uses, and then only when significant ecological impacts are minimized and when mitigation is provided consistent with required mitigation sequencing.

(d) Maintenance dredging of established navigation channels and basins shall be restricted to maintaining the previously dredged and/or existing authorized location, depth and width.

(e) When dredging is permitted, the extent of dredging shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate the proposed use.

(f) Dredging for the primary purpose of obtaining fill or construction material is prohibited.

(g) Dredging shall be timed so that it does not interfere with aquatic life.

(h) Dredging shall utilize techniques (such as hydraulic dredging instead of agitation dredging) that cause minimal dispersal and broadcast of bottom material.

(i) Dredging landward of the ordinary high water mark is considered excavation and shall be subject to the regulations set forth in CMC 16.05.430.

(3) Dredge Spoil Disposal.

(a) Disposal of dredge spoils shall be done only in approved sites.

(b) Dredging material that will not subsequently cause violation of State Water Quality Standards may be used in permitted landfill projects.

(c) Individual disposal operations shall comply with Department of Natural Resources leasing practices, the Department of Ecology Water Quality Certification process, and the permit requirements of the State Department of Fish and Wildlife and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

(d) Dredge spoil disposal waterward of the ordinary high water mark may be allowed only by conditional use permit for one or more of the following circumstances:

(i) For wildlife habitat improvement;

(ii) To correct problems of material distribution adversely affecting fish;

(iii) For permitted beach enhancement;

(iv) When the alternative of depositing material on land is demonstrated to be more detrimental to shoreline resources than depositing in water areas; or

(v) In approved open-water disposal sites as identified by appropriate agencies.

(e) If suitable alternatives for land disposal are not available or are infeasible consistent with subsection (3)(d)(iv) of this section, water disposal sites shall be identified consistent with the following criteria:

(i) Sites shall not interfere with geohydrologic processes;

(ii) Dredge spoils have been analyzed by qualified personnel and found to be nonpolluting;

(iv) Aquatic life will not be adversely affected; and

(v) The sites and method of disposal shall meet all requirements of applicable regulatory agencies.

(f) Dredge disposal within the channel migration zone of Jenkins Creek, Big Soos Creek or any other stream is prohibited, unless part of an approved fish habitat improvement project and studies indicate it is consistent with the criteria in subsection (3)(e) of this section.

(g) Any significant placement of materials from off site (other than surcharge or pre-load), or the substantial creation or raising of dry upland shall be considered fill and shall also comply with the fill provisions of CMC 16.05.430. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.430 Fill and excavation.

(1) All fill and excavation activities shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 14.60 CMC, Clearing and Grading Regulations.

(2) Fill, excavation, and alteration of natural drainage features and landforms shall be limited to the minimum necessary for development.

(3) All shoreline development shall comply with the applicable requirements of the most recent edition of the adopted Surface Water Design Manual and all applicable City stormwater regulations. The City shall rely on source control standards and other BMPs contained in the most recent version of the Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington and the Low Impact Development Manual: Technical Guidance for Puget Sound.

(4) Stabilization of exposed erosion-prone surfaces within the shoreline environment shall, wherever feasible, utilize soil bioengineering techniques.

(5) Fills shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent, minimize, and control all material movement, erosion, and sedimentation from the affected area.

(6) All perimeters of fills shall be provided with vegetation, retaining walls, or other satisfactory mechanisms for erosion prevention and sediment capture.

(7) Fill proposals must demonstrate, at a minimum, that they will result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

(8) Fill shall be permitted only where it is demonstrated that the proposed action will not:

(a) Result in significant damage to water quality, fish, aquatic habitat, and/or wildlife habitat; or

(b) Adversely alter natural drainage and circulation patterns, currents, or stream flows, or significantly reduce flood water holding capabilities.

(9) No refuse disposal sites, solid waste disposal sites, or sanitary fills shall be permitted along the Pipe Lake shoreline in Covington.

(10) Fill waterward of the ordinary high water mark shall be permitted as a conditional use only:

(a) In conjunction with a water-dependent or public use permitted by this master program;

(b) In conjunction with a bridge for which there is a demonstrated public need and where no feasible upland sites, design solutions, or routes exist; or

(c) For fisheries, aquaculture, or wildlife enhancement projects.

(11) Excavation on beaches shall include precautions to prevent the migration of fine grain sediments, disturbed by the excavation, onto adjacent beach areas. Excavation on beaches shall be backfilled promptly using material of similar composition and similar or coarser grain size. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.440 Overwater structures.

(1) General Standards.

(a) All new, reconstructed, repaired, or modified overwater structures shall comply with the critical areas regulations for shoreline jurisdiction as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(2); meet the requirement for no net loss of ecological functions; and comply with all other regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction.

(b) With the exception of bridges, overwater structures are prohibited in the Soos Creek and Jenkins Creek shoreline environmental jurisdictions.

(c) Proposed overwater structures that are not accessory to a residential development and are not joint-use structures may be permitted as a conditional use subject to the following requirements:

(i) The overwater structure does not create any potential adverse impacts to navigation or public safety;

(ii) The overwater structure does not cause environmental impacts that cannot be sufficiently mitigated;

(iii) The overwater structure complies with all other conditional use criteria as set forth in WAC 173-27-160 and CMC 16.05.090; and

(iv) The overwater structure complies with the provisions of this section applicable to overwater structures that are accessory to residential development.

(d) Development on or over the water shall be constructed as far landward as possible to avoid interference with views from surrounding properties to the shoreline and adjoining waters.

(e) Construction of residential development on an overwater structure shall be prohibited.

(f) Proposed overwater structures that do not comply with the applicable dimensional standards set forth in this section shall be approved only through a shoreline variance.

(g) All overwater structures shall be constructed and maintained in a safe and sound condition. Abandoned or unsafe overwater structures shall be removed or repaired promptly by the owner.

(h) Piles, floats, or other structures in direct contact with water shall not be treated or coated with herbicides, fungicides, paint, or pentachlorophenol.

(i) Boathouses, boat lifts, moorage piles, and moorage covers shall be prohibited.

(j) Lighting facilities should be limited to the minimum extent necessary to locate the pier or dock at night. Ensure that any lighting is not directed into the water.

(2) Piers and Docks. Preference is for a fixed-pile pier elevated above the OHWM. Floating docks shall not be allowed unless the applicant can demonstrate why a fixed-pile pier is not feasible or will result in greater impacts.

(a) When Allowed. New piers and docks shall be allowed:

(i) As an accessory to a permitted residential development, provided it is designed and intended as a facility for access to watercraft and subject to the provisions of subsection (2)(b) of this section; or

(ii) For public access or as an accessory to a permitted water-dependent use, when intended for public use or when the applicant has demonstrated that a specific need exists to support the intended water-dependent use.

(b) Where proposed as an accessory to a residential development, piers and docks shall comply with the following provisions:

(i) No more than one pier or dock for each single-family residence shall be permitted.

(ii) On lots with less than 50 feet of waterfront, joint-use piers/docks shall be required, except when both lots abutting the subject lot have legal preexisting piers or docks and the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Shoreline Administrator that a shared use agreement is not feasible. Only in this case may a lot with less than 50 feet of waterfront be permitted an individual pier or dock.

(iii) For residential development or subdivision of more than two dwellings, a joint-use pier/dock or community dock facility shall be required rather than individual docks unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Shoreline Administrator that a joint-use or community facility is not feasible.

(c) Dimensional Standards.

(i) No portion of the deck of a pier shall, during the course of the normal fluctuations of the elevation of the water body, protrude more than five feet above the ordinary high water mark.

(ii) All pier and dock lengths shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible and shall comply with regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction. The proposed length shall be the minimum necessary to support the intended use. The maximum waterward intrusion as measured from the ordinary high water mark of any portion of any pier or dock shall be limited to the following:

(A) Forty feet for a single property owner.

(B) Fifty feet for a joint-use structure utilized by two or more residential property owners.

(C) Eighty feet for a pier that allows public access.

(iii) The maximum square footage of ells and fingers shall be 120 square feet.

(iv) The maximum width of walkways and additional fingers shall be minimized to the maximum extent practical. All walkways shall be fully grated and ells and floats shall have a minimum two-foot strip of grating down the center.

(v) Surface coverage, including all floats, ramps, and ells, shall be limited to the following:

(A) Four hundred square feet for a single property owner.

(B) Six hundred square feet for a joint-use structure utilized by two or more residential property owners.

(C) Eight hundred square feet for a pier that allows public access.

(3) Launching Rails and Ramps.

(a) Launching ramps are not an allowed shoreline modification in any shoreline environment except as provided in subsection (3)(b) of this section. Launching rails may be permitted as a conditional use in the shoreline residential environment and in the Pipe Lake urban conservancy environment when not accessory to residential structures, in lieu of a moorage pier or dock; provided, that the following requirements are met:

(i) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed length of the rail is the minimum necessary to safely launch the intended craft and comply with all regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction;

(ii) In no case shall the rail extend beyond the point where the water depth is 10 feet below the ordinary high water mark;

(iii) The rail shall be anchored to the ground with the use of tie-type construction; and

(iv) No more than one launching rail per single-family residence or duplex shall be permitted.

(b) Launching ramps may be permitted as a conditional use for recreational uses in the Pipe Lake urban conservancy environment; provided, that the following requirements are met:

(i) The applicant demonstrates that the proposed length of the ramp is the minimum necessary to safely launch the intended craft and comply with all regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction; and

(ii) In no case shall the ramp extend beyond the point where the water depth is 10 feet below the ordinary high water mark.

(4) Recreational Floats. Recreational floats should be allowed where they are intended to support public or private recreational uses, or in lieu of fixed piers adjacent to residential land uses.

(a) Recreational floats shall be designed and intended for swim use or other nonmotorized use.

(b) Recreational floats shall have fully grated decks.

(c) Retrieval lines shall not float at or near the surface of the water.

(d) All float tubs shall be fully encapsulated.

(e) Floats shall have reflectors for nighttime visibility.

(f) Dimensional Standards.

(i) Area. The area of a recreational float shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible and shall comply with regulations as stipulated by State and Federal agencies, local Tribes, and others with jurisdiction. No recreational float shall be greater than 200 square feet in area.

(ii) Height. Recreational floats shall be built so that the deck surface is one foot above the water’s surface.

(iii) Distance Waterward from the Ordinary High Water Mark. Recreational floats shall be in water with depths of eight feet or more at the landward end of the float and may be located up to a maximum waterward distance of 50 feet, or where the water depth is demonstrated safe for swimming, whichever is reached first. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


16.05.450 Shoreline habitat and ecological enhancement.

(1) Beach/Bank Restoration and Enhancement.

(a) Beach restoration and enhancement along Big Soos and Jenkins Creeks shall be subject to the critical areas regulations for shoreline jurisdiction as set forth in CMC 16.05.230(2).

(b) Beach enhancement along Pipe Lake may be permitted when the applicant has demonstrated that the project will not detrimentally interrupt littoral processes; redirect waves, current, or sediment to other shorelines; or adversely affect adjacent properties or habitat.

(2) Natural Beach Restoration/Enhancement.

(a) Design Standards. Natural beach restoration/enhancement shall not:

(i) Extend waterward more than the minimum amount necessary to achieve the desired stabilization;

(ii) Disturb significant amounts of valuable shallow water fish or wildlife habitat without appropriate mitigation of the impacts.

(b) Construction Standards.

(i) The size and/or mix of new materials to be added to a beach shall be as similar as possible to that of the natural beach sediment, but large enough to resist normal current, wake, or wave action at the site.

(ii) The restored beach shall approximate, and may slightly exceed, the natural beach width, height, bulk, or profile, but not so much as to obviously create additional dry land.

(c) Beach enhancement is prohibited within fish and/or wildlife spawning, nesting, or breeding habitat that would be adversely affected by it and also where littoral drift of the enhancement materials would adversely affect adjacent spawning grounds or other areas of biological significance.

(3) Where a shoreline habitat or ecological enhancement project results in a change in the location of the ordinary high water mark and associated shoreline jurisdiction on the subject property and/or adjacent properties, and where application of the provisions of this master program would preclude or interfere with the uses permitted by the underlying zoning, thus presenting a hardship to the project proponent, relief may be granted from the provisions of this master program consistent with the following requirements:

(a) The proposed relief is the minimum necessary to relieve the hardship;

(b) After granting the proposed relief, there is net environmental benefit from the restoration project;

(c) Granting the proposed relief is consistent with the objectives of the shoreline restoration project and with this master program;

(d) The shoreline restoration project does not provide mitigation required to obtain a development permit; and

(e) The application for relief is reviewed and approved by the Department of Ecology. (Ord. 09-19 § 6 (Exh. C))


Chapter 16.10 STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT

Sections:

16.10.010    Authority.

16.10.020    General requirements.

16.10.030    Additional definitions.

16.10.040    Designation of responsible official.

16.10.050    Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

16.10.060    Transfer of lead agency status to a State agency.

16.10.070    Additional timing considerations.

16.10.080    Categorical exemptions (threshold determinations).

16.10.090    Categorical exemptions (flexible thresholds).

16.10.100    Use of exemptions.

16.10.110    Environmental checklist.

16.10.120    Mitigated determination of nonsignificance.

16.10.130    Environmental impact statement (EIS).

16.10.140    Preparation of EIS (additional considerations).

16.10.150    Commenting.

16.10.160    Public notice.

16.10.170    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the City.

16.10.180    Using existing environmental documents.

16.10.190    SEPA and agency decisions.

16.10.200    Substantive authority.

16.10.210    Appeals.

16.10.220    Notice – Statute of limitations.

16.10.230    Definitions.

16.10.240    Categorical exemptions.

16.10.250    Agency compliance.

16.10.260    Fees.

16.10.270    Forms.


16.10.010 Authority.

The City adopts this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120 and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-904. This chapter contains the City’s SEPA procedures and policies. The SEPA rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, must be used in conjunction with this chapter. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.020 General requirements.

This section contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-040    Definitions

197-11-050    Lead agency

197-11-055    Timing of the SEPA process

197-11-060    Content of environmental review

197-11-070    Limitations on actions during SEPA process

197-11-080    Incomplete or unavailable information

197-11-090    Supporting documents

197-11-100    Information required of applicants

197-11-158    GMA project review – Reliance of existing plans and regulations

197-11-210    SEPA/GMA integration 

197-11-220    SEPA/GMA definitions

197-11-228    Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures

197-11-229    Timing of an integrated SEPA/GMA process

197-11-232    SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping

197-11-235    Documents

197-11-238    Monitoring

197-11-250    SEPA/Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA) integration

197-11-253    SEPA/lead agency for MTCA actions

197-11-256    Preliminary evaluation

197-11-259    Determination of nonsignificance for MTCA remedial actions

197-11-262    Determination of significance and EIS for MTCA remedial actions

197-11-265    Early scoping for MTCA remedial actions

197-11-268    MTCA interim actions

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.030 Additional definitions.

In addition to the definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799 and 197-11-220, when used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1) “Department” means any unit of the City established by ordinance, rule, or order.

(2) “SEPA rules” means Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the Department of Ecology.

(3) “Ordinance” means the ordinance, resolution, or other procedure used by the City to adopt regulatory requirements.

(4) “Early notice” means the City’s response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS) procedures). (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.040 Designation of responsible official.

(1) For those proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official will be the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee.

(2) For all proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official will make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the lead agency or responsible official by those sections of the SEPA rules that are listed in this chapter.

(3) The City will retain all documents required by the SEPA rules and make them available in accord with Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

(1) Any Department within the City receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action will forward the environmental documents to the responsible official for a determination of lead agency under WAC 197-11-050, 197-11-253, and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the responsible official is aware that another agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.

(2) When the City is the lead agency for a proposal, the responsible official will supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements and, if an EIS is necessary, will supervise preparation of the EIS.

(3) When the City is not the lead agency for a proposal, all Departments will use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decision on the proposal. No Department will prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the City may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.

(4) If the City receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-253 or 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 15 days of receipt of the determination, or the City will petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 15-day time period. The responsible official may initiate any such petition after approval of the City Council.

(5) The responsible official is authorized to make agreements as to the lead agency status of shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible official and any Department that will incur responsibilities as a result of such agreement approve the agreement.

(6) When making a lead agency determination for a private project, the responsible official will require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal.

(7) When the City is the lead agency for an MTCA remedial action, the Department of Ecology will be provided an opportunity under WAC 197-11-253(5) to review the environmental documents prior to public notice being provided. If the SEPA and MTCA documents are issued together with one public comment period under WAC 197-11-253(6), the City will decide jointly with the Department of Ecology who receives the comment letters and how copies of the comment letters will be distributed to the other agency. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.060 Transfer of lead agency status to a State agency.

For any proposal for a private project where the City would be the lead agency and for which one or more State agencies have jurisdiction, the City’s responsible official may elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a State agency. The State agency with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in WAC 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency and the City will be an agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the City’s responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate State agency with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the City will also give notice of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.070 Additional timing considerations.

(1) For nonexempt proposals, the determination of nonsignificance or, in the case where an EIS has been required, a final environmental impact statement (FEIS) for the proposal will accompany the staff recommendation, if any, in a quasi-judicial proceeding on a nonexempt application by the Hearing Examiner.

(2) For nonexempt legislative proposals, the DNS or draft EIS or other threshold determination and SEPA environmental documentation for the proposal shall accompany the City’s staff recommendation to the appropriate advisory body, such as the Planning Commission. (Ord. 17-16 § 2; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.080 Categorical exemptions (threshold determinations). 

This section contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a “probable significant, adverse environmental impact” requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This section also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS.

The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-300    Purpose

197-11-305    Categorical exemptions

197-11-310    Threshold determination required

197-11-315    Environmental checklist

197-11-330    Threshold determination process

197-11-335    Additional information

197-11-340    Determination of nonsignificance     (DNS)

197-11-350    Mitigated DNS

197-11-355    Optional DNS process

197-11-360    Determination of significance (DS) – Initiation of scoping

197-11-390    Effect of threshold determination

The city adopts the following section of the Revised Code of Washington by reference, as supplemented in this chapter:

RCW

43.21C.410    Battery charging and exchange station installation

(Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.090 Categorical exemptions (flexible thresholds).

(1) The City establishes the following exempt levels for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) and (d) based on local conditions:

(a) The construction or location of any single-family residential structures of nine or fewer dwelling units;

(b) The construction or location of any multifamily residential structures of 60 or fewer units located within the mixed housing/office (MHO), mixed commercial (MC), and general commercial (GC) downtown zoning districts and the R-18 multifamily zone;

(c) The construction of a barn, loafing shed, farm equipment storage building, produce storage or packing structure, or similar agricultural structure, covering 30,000 square feet, and to be used only by the property owner or his or her agent in the conduct of farming the property. This exemption shall not apply to feed lots;

(d) The construction of an office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage building with 12,000 square feet of gross floor area, and with associated parking facilities designated for 40 automobiles;

(e) The construction of a parking lot designated for 40 automobiles;

(f) Any landfill or excavation of 500 cubic yards throughout the total lifetime of the fill or excavation; and any fill or excavation classified as a Class I, II, or III forest practice under RCW 76.09.050 or regulations thereunder; provided, that the categorical exemption threshold shall be 250 cubic yards for any fill or excavation that occurs on a site that contains critical areas as defined in Chapter 18.65 CMC and the Shoreline Master Program, as amended.

(2) The City adopts the following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended regarding exemptions for nonproject proposals:

RCW

43.21C.450    Nonproject actions exempt from requirements of chapter

(3) Whenever the City establishes new exempt levels under this section, it will send them to the Department of Ecology, Headquarters Office, Olympia, Washington 98504, pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c). (Ord. 17-16 § 3; Ord. 08-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.100 Use of exemptions.

(1) Each Department that receives an application, or in the case of governmental proposals, the Department initiating the proposal, will forward the application to the responsible official for determination of whether the proposal is exempt. The determination that a proposal is exempt is final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The City will not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.

(2) In determining if a proposal is exempt, the responsible official will make certain the proposal is properly defined and will identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the responsible official will determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the responsible official’s consideration is exempt.

(3) If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the responsible official may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

(a) The responsible official will not give authorization for:

(i) Any nonexempt action;

(ii) Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or

(iii) Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;

(b) The responsible official may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and

(c) The responsible official may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.110 Environmental checklist.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, a completed environmental checklist, in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, must be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license or other approval not exempted in this chapter; except a checklist is not needed if the City and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The City will use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if the lead agency, for making the threshold determination.

(2) For private proposals, the City will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For City proposals, the Department initiating the proposal must complete the environmental checklist.

(3) The City may complete or revise all or part of the environmental checklist for a private proposal, if either of the following occurs:

(a) The City has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the applicant; or

(b) The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration.

(4) For projects submitted as planned actions under WAC 197-11-164, the City will use its existing environmental checklist form or may modify the environmental checklist form as provided in WAC 197-11-315. The modified environmental checklist form may be prepared and adopted along with or as part of a planned action ordinance, or developed after the ordinance is adopted. In either case, a proposed modified environmental checklist form must be sent to the Department of Ecology to allow at least a 30-day review prior to use. (Ord. 17-16 § 4; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.120 Mitigated determination of nonsignificance.

(1) As provided in this section and WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarification of, the proposal made by the applicant.

(2) An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a declaration of significance is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:

(a) Follow submission of an application and adequate environmental checklist; and

(b) Precede the City’s actual threshold determination for the proposal.

(3) The City should respond to the request for early notice within 15 working days. The response will:

(a) Be written;

(b) State whether the City currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific areas of concern that are leading to the City to consider a DS; and

(c) State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, refiling the environmental checklist and/or application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

(4) As much as possible, the City will assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

(5) When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the responsible official will base the threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and make the determination within 15 days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal:

(a) If the responsible official indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the City will issue and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2).

(b) If the responsible official indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the responsible official will make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.

(c) The applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to “control noise” or “prevent storm water runoff” are inadequate, whereas proposals to “muffle machinery to X decibel” or “construct 200-foot storm water retention pond at Y location” are adequate.

(d) Mitigation measures, which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS, may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.

(6) A mitigated DNS is issued under either WAC 197-11-340(2) requiring a 14-day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355, which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period of the notice of application.

(7) Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS will be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the City.

(8) If the City’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the responsible official will evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).

The responsible official’s written response under subsection (2) of this section will not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice will not bind the City to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.130 Environmental impact statement (EIS).

(1) This section contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-400    Purpose of EIS

197-11-402    General requirements

197-11-405    EIS types

197-11-406    EIS timing

197-11-408    Scoping

197-11-410    Expanded scoping

197-11-420    EIS preparation

197-11-425    Style and size

197-11-430    Format

197-11-435    Cover letter or memo

197-11-440    EIS contents

197-11-442    Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals

197-11-443    EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS

197-11-444    Elements of the environment

197-11-448    Relationship of EIS to other considerations

197-11-450    Cost-benefit analysis

197-11-455    Issuance of DEIS

197-11-460    Issuance of FEIS

(2) Regarding the preparation of an EIS in support of a planned action, the City adopts the following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington and Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

RCW

43.21C.440    Planned action – Defined – Authority of a county, city, or town – Community meetings

WAC

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review

(3) The City adopts by reference the following optional provisions for nonproject EIS preparation in the Revised Code of Washington. Unless specified in notices that the City is implementing these optional provisions, standard provisions in subsection (1) or (2) of this section shall apply.

RCW

43.21C.420    Comprehensive plans and development regulations – Optional elements – Nonproject environmental impact statements – Subarea plans – Transfer of development rights program – Recovery of expenses

43.21C.428    Recovery of expenses of nonproject environmental impact statements – Fees for subsequent development

(Ord. 17-16 § 5; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.140 Preparation of EIS (additional considerations).

(1) Preparation of draft and final EIS (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EIS (SEIS) is the responsibility of the responsible official. Before the City issues an EIS, the responsible official must be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and Chapter 197-11 WAC.

(2) The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS will be prepared by City staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the City or the applicant. If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the City will prepare the EIS, the responsible official will notify the applicant immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official will also notify the applicant of the City’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.

(3) The responsible official may require an applicant to provide information the City does not posses, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. This does not apply to information the City may request under another ordinance or statute.

(4) The following additional elements may optionally be addressed in an EIS to aid in decision-making at the direction of the SEPA responsible official, but do not add to the criteria for threshold determinations or perform any other function or purpose under this chapter consistent with WAC 197-11-448 and 197-11-450:

(a) Economy;

(b) Social policy analysis;

(c) Cost-benefit analysis. (Ord. 17-16 § 6; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.150 Commenting.

This section contains rules for consulting, commenting and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-500    Purpose

197-11-502    Inviting comment

197-11-504    Availability and cost of environmental documents

197-11-508    SEPA register

197-11-510    Public notice

197-11-535    Public hearings and meetings

197-11-545    Effect of no comment

197-11-550    Specificity of comments

197-11-560    FEIS response to comments

197-11-570    Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.160 Public notice.

(1) Whenever possible, the City will integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the City’s nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.

(2) Whenever the City issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) or a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3) the City will give public notice as follows:

(a) If an environmental document is issued concurrently with the notice of application, the public notice requirements for the notice of application in RCW 36.70B.110(4) will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements in WAC 197-11-510(1);

(b) If no public notice is otherwise required for the permit or approval, the City will give notice of the DNS or DS by:

(i) Posting the property, for site-specific proposals;

(ii) Notifying public or private groups, which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(iii) Sending notice to agency mailing lists (either general lists or lists for specific proposals for subject areas); or

(c) Whenever the City issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the City will state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.

(3) If a DNS is issued using the optional DNS process, the public notice requirements for a notice of application in RCW 36.70B.110(4), as supplemented by the requirements in WAC 197-11-355, will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements in WAC 197-11-510(b).

(4) Whenever the City issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5) or an SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents will be given by indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt license, and by at least one of the following:

(a) Posting the property, for site-specific proposals;

(b) Publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the County, City, or general area where the proposal is located;

(c) Notifying public or private groups, which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;

(d) Notifying the news media;

(e) Placing notices in appropriate regional, neighborhood, ethnic, or trade journals; and/or

(f) Publishing notice in agency newsletter and/or sending notice to agency mailing lists (either general lists or lists for specific proposals for subject areas); or

(g) Such other method as determined by the responsible official.

(5) Public notice for projects that qualify as planned actions will be tied to the underlying permit as specified in WAC 197-11-172(3) and meet requirements for notices to tribes and agencies with jurisdiction as provided in RCW 43.21C.440(3)(b).

(6) The City may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirement for the applicant’s proposal at applicant’s expense. (Ord. 17-16 § 7; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.170 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the City.

(1) The responsible official will be responsible for preparation of written comments for the City in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.

(2) The responsible official will be responsible for the City’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the City is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate Departments of the City. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.180 Using existing environmental documents.

This section contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA or NEPA for the City’s own environmental compliance. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review

197-11-600    When to use existing environmental documents

197-11-610    Use of NEPA documents

197-11-620    Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures

197-11-625    Addenda – Procedures

197-11-630    Adoption – Procedures

197-11-635    Incorporation by reference – Procedures

197-11-640    Combining documents

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.190 SEPA and agency decisions.

(1) This section contains rules (and policies) for SEPA’s substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This section also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-650    Purpose

197-11-655    Implementation

197-11-660    Substantive authority and mitigation

197-11-680    Appeals

(2) Administrative appeal procedures are addressed in CMC 16.10.210. (Ord. 17-16 § 8; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.200 Substantive authority.

(1) The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the City.

(2) The City may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:

(a) Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable significant adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

(b) Such conditions are in writing; and

(c) The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and

(d) The City has considered whether other local, State or Federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and

(e) Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (4) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.

(3) The City may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:

(a) A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in an FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

(b) A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and

(c) The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (4) of this section and identified in writing in the decision document.

(4) The City designates and adopts the following policies as the basis for the City’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

(a) The City will use all practicable means, consistent with other essential consideration of State policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the State and its citizens may:

(i) Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

(ii) Assure for all Washington safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

(iii) Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degrading, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

(iv) Preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our national heritage;

(v) Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

(vi) Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

(vii) Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

(b) The City recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

(c) The City adopts by reference the policies and regulations in the following documents:

(i) The City’s most recently adopted comprehensive plan, as amended;

(ii) The City’s zoning code (CMC Title 18), as amended;

(iii) The City’s subdivision code (CMC Title 17), as amended;

(iv) The City’s most recently adopted International Building Code, as amended;

(v) The City’s most recently adopted International Residential Code;

(vi) The City’s most recently adopted Uniform Plumbing Code, as amended;

(vii) The City’s most recently adopted International Mechanical Code, as amended;

(viii) The City’s most recently adopted International Fire Code, as amended;

(ix) The City’s most recently adopted International Existing Building Code;

(x) The City’s most recently adopted International Energy Conservation Code, as amended;

(xi) The City’s most recently adopted International Property Maintenance Code, as amended;

(xii) The City’s street, sidewalk, and bridges code (CMC Title 12), as amended;

(xiii) The City’s planning and development code (CMC Title 14), as amended;

(xiv) The City’s most recently adopted Shoreline Master Program, as amended;

(xv) The State Department of Health’s Water System Planning Handbook, as amended;

(xvi) The City’s stormwater manuals (CMC Title 13), as amended;

(xvii) The City’s current six-year transportation improvement program, as amended;

(xviii) The City’s current capital improvement program, as amended;

(xix) All other City-adopted land development ordinances and policies; and

(xx) The City’s current Design and Construction Standards. (Ord. 17-16 § 9; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 7; Ord. 52-02 § 2; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.210 Appeals.

(1) The City establishes the following administrative appeal procedures under RCW 43.21C.075 and WAC 197-11-680:

(a) Project Permits. Any agency or person may appeal the City’s procedural compliance with Chapter 197-11 WAC for issuance of the following. The appeal must be made to the Administrative Hearing Examiner within 14 days of the date of issuance. A decision involving a SEPA determination of nonsignificance which required public comments shall have the appeal period extended an additional seven days:

(i) A DNS;

(ii) A DS; or

(iii) A final EIS.

(b) Legislative Proposals. There is no administrative appeal of a DNS, DS, or final EIS adequacy associated with a legislative decision.

(2) Appeals of an environmental determination will be in the same manner as the project requiring the environmental determination.

(a) For any appeal under this section, the City will provide for a record that will consist of the following:

(i) Findings and conclusions;

(ii) Testimony under oath; and

(iii) A taped or written transcript.

(b) The City may require the appellant to provide an electronic transcript.

(c) The procedural determination by the responsible official will carry substantial weight in any appeal proceeding.

(3) The City will give official notice under WAC 197-11-680(5) whenever it issues a permit or approval for which a statute or ordinance established a time limit for commencing judicial appeal. (Ord. 17-16 § 10; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.220 Notice – Statute of limitations.

(1) The City, applicant for, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.

(2) The form of the notice must be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice will be published by the City Clerk, applicant, or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. (Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.230 Definitions.

This section contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended, and as supplemented:

WAC

197-11-700    Definitions

197-11-701    Act

197-11-704    Action

197-11-706    Addendum

197-11-708    Adoption

197-11-710    Affected tribe

197-11-712    Affecting

197-11-714    Agency

197-11-716    Applicant

197-11-718    Built environment

197-11-720    Categorical exemption

197-11-721    Closed record appeal

197-11-722    Consolidated appeal

197-11-724    Consulted agency

197-11-726    Cost-benefit analysis

197-11-728    County/City

197-11-730    Decision maker

197-11-732    Department

197-11-734    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS)

197-11-736    Determination of significance (DS)

197-11-738    Environmental impact statement (EIS)

197-11-740    Environment

197-11-742    Environmental checklist

197-11-744    Environmental document

197-11-746    Environmental review

197-11-750    Expanded scoping

197-11-752    Impacts

197-11-754    Incorporation by reference

197-11-756    Lands covered by water

197-11-758    Lead agency

197-11-760    License

197-11-762    Local agency

197-11-764    Major action

197-11-766    Mitigated DNS (MDNS)

197-11-768    Mitigation

197-11-770    Natural environment

197-11-772    National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)

197-11-774    Nonproject

197-11-775    Open record hearing

197-11-776    Phased review

197-11-778    Preparation

197-11-780    Private project

197-11-782    Probable

197-11-784    Proposal

197-11-786    Reasonable alternative

197-11-788    Responsible official

197-11-790    State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA)

197-11-792    Scope

197-11-793    Scoping

197-11-794    Significant

197-11-796    State agency

197-11-797    Threshold determination

197-11-799    Underlying governmental action

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.240 Categorical exemptions.

The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended and as supplemented in this chapter:

WAC 

197-11-800    Categorical exemptions

197-11-880    Emergencies

197-11-890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions 

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.250 Agency compliance.

This section contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating categorical exemptions that do not apply within critical areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-900    Purpose of this part

197-11-902    Agency SEPA policies

197-11-916    Application to ongoing actions

197-11-920    Agencies with environmental expertise

197-11-922    Lead agency rules

197-11-924    Determining the lead agency

197-11-926    Lead agency for governmental proposals

197-11-928    Lead agency for public and private proposals

197-11-930    Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction

197-11-932    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a County/City

197-11-934    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a City/County, and one or more State agencies

197-11-938    Lead agencies for specific proposals

197-11-940    Transfer of lead agency status to a State agency

197-11-942    Agreements on lead agency status

197-11-944    Agreements on division of lead agency duties

197-11-946    DOE resolution of lead agency disputes

197-11-948    Assumption of lead agency status

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.260 Fees.

(1) Threshold Determination. For every environmental checklist review, the City will collect a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination will not begin until payment of the fee. 

(2) Environmental Impact Statement. 

(a) As lead agency, the City shall charge a fee based on an hourly rate as set forth in the fee resolution for review of an EIS submitted by an applicant. 

(b) For all proposals requiring an EIS where the City is lead agency and the responsible official determines that the EIS will be prepared by City employees, the City will charge and collect a reasonable fee from the applicant to cover costs incurred by the City in the preparation of the EIS. If it is determined that an EIS is required, applicants will be advised of projected costs of the EIS prior to actual preparation and must post a bond or otherwise ensure payment of all such costs.

(c) The responsible official may determine that the City will contract directly with a consultant for preparation of environmental documents for activities initiated by some persons or entity other than the City. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any such costs and expenses, and must post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs. Such consultants will be selected by mutual agreement of the City and applicant after a call for bids.

(d) If the proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the responsible official will refund any fees collected under subsections (2)(a) or (b) of this section which remain after incurred costs are paid. (Ord. 20-07 § 91; Ord. 102-98 § 2)


16.10.270 Forms.

The City adopts the following provisions of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as now existing or as hereafter amended:

WAC

197-11-960    Environmental checklist

197-11-965    Adoption notice

197-11-970    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS)

197-11-980    Determination of significance (DS) and scoping notice

197-11-985    Notice of assumption of lead agency status

197-11-990    Notice of action

(Ord. 102-98 § 2)


Chapter 16.15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

16.15.010    Purpose.

16.15.020    Methods for reducing flood loss.

16.15.030    Definitions.

16.15.040    Lands to which this chapter applies.

16.15.045    Flood hazard area components.

16.15.050    Adoption of report and flood insurance rate map.

16.15.055    Determining other protected areas.

16.15.057    Stormwater management.

16.15.060    Penalty for noncompliance.

16.15.070    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

16.15.080    Interpretation.

16.15.090    Warning and disclaimer.

Article II. Administration

16.15.100    Development permit required.

16.15.110    Application for development permit.

16.15.120    Local administrator.

16.15.130    Local administrator – Duties.

16.15.140    Local administrator – Use of other base flood data.

16.15.150    Local administrator – Information to be obtained.

16.15.160    Local administrator – Alteration of watercourses.

16.15.170    Local administrator – Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

16.15.180    Variances and appeals.

16.15.190    Variances – Permissible conditions.

16.15.195    Exemptions.

16.15.197    Partial exemptions.

Article III. Flood Hazard Reduction – General Standards

16.15.200    Flood hazard reduction – Anchoring.

16.15.210    Flood hazard reduction – Construction materials and methods.

16.15.220    Flood hazard reduction – Utilities.

16.15.230    Flood hazard reduction – Subdivision proposals.

16.15.240    Flood hazard reduction – Review of building permits.

16.15.245    Flood hazard areas certification by surveyor.

Article IV. Flood Hazard Reduction – Specific Standards

16.15.250    Flood hazard reduction – Residential construction.

16.15.260    Flood hazard reduction – Nonresidential construction.

16.15.270    Flood hazard reduction – Manufactured homes.

16.15.280    Flood hazard reduction – Recreational vehicles.

16.15.285    AE and A1-30 Zones with base flood elevations but no floodways.

16.15.310    Critical facility.

Article V. Floodplain Protection – Specific Standards

16.15.315    Allowable development activities in all flood hazard area zones.

16.15.320    Floodplain and floodway fringe development standards and alterations.

16.15.330    Riparian buffer zone development standards and alterations. 

16.15.340    Zero-rise and FEMA floodway development standards and alterations.

16.15.350    FEMA floodway development standards and alterations.

16.15.360    Channel migration zones – Development standards and alterations.

Article I. General Provisions


16.15.010 Purpose.

(1) The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation resulting in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(a) To protect human life and health;

(b) To minimize the expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and typically undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(g) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

(h) To ensure that those who occupy special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions;

(i) To qualify the City of Covington for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP);

(j) To maintain the quality of surface waters and protect the natural channel and floodplain processes and functions that provide habitat for threatened and endangered species; and

(k) To minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological functions of natural watercourses and floodplains. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.020 Methods for reducing flood loss.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter sets forth methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;

(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood water;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which unnaturally divert flood water or increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.030 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Unless otherwise defined in this chapter the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable. If there is a conflict, the definitions in this section shall govern. 

(1) “Appeal” means a request for review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance therefrom.

(2) “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within the City which is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area’s designation on flood insurance rate maps always includes the letter A or V.

(3) “Base flood” means flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the “100-year flood”). The base flood is the special flood hazard area designated on flood insurance rate maps as Zone “A” or “V” including AE, AO, AH, A1-00, and VE.

(4) “Channel migration zone” or “CMZ” means those areas within the lateral extent of likely stream channel movement that are subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and shifts in the location of stream channels. “Channel migration zone” does not include areas that lie behind an arterial road, a public road serving as a sole access route, a State or Federal highway or a railroad. “Channel migration zone” may exclude areas that lie behind a lawfully established flood protection facility that is likely to be maintained by existing programs for public maintenance consistent with designation and classification criteria specified by public rule. When a natural geologic feature affects channel migration, the channel migration zone width will consider such natural constraints. The regulated channel migration zone includes the channel migration zone boundary and extends 50 feet landward in each direction from the stream.

(5) “Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

(6) “Development” or “development activity” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to buildings or other structures or mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials, or removal of more than five percent of the natural vegetation located within the area of special flood hazard. This includes construction, repair, or replacement of culverts, pipes, bridges, levees, bank stabilization, docks, revetments, walls, bulkheads, driveways, or roads.

(7) “Elevated building,” for insurance purposes, means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.

(8) “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.

(9) “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.

(10) “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source.

(11) “Flood insurance study” means the current effective official report provided by FEMA that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate maps, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

(12) “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

(13) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including any basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure which is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, located in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of CMC 16.15.250(2).

(14) “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

(15) “New construction” means any structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(16) “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.

(17) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(18) “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any other work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. “Permanent construction” does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling or the installation of streets and/or walkways or excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms or the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. With respect to a substantial improvement, the “actual start” of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(19) “Structure” means a walled and roofed building permanently constructed in or on the ground or over water, excluding fences six feet or less, and including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

(20) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(21) “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure: (a) before the improvement or repair is started; or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 

The term does not, however, include: (a) any project to improve a structure to correct precited existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

(22) “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

(23) “Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations and cannot exist in any other location. 

(24) “Water typing” means a system for classifying water bodies according to their size and fish habitat characteristics. The Washington Department of Natural Resources’ Forest Practices Water Typing classification system is hereby adopted by reference. The system defines four water types: 

(a) Type “S” = Shoreline: Streams that are designated “shorelines of the State,” including marine shorelines.

(b) Type “F” = Fish: Streams that are known to be used by fish or meet the physical criteria to be potentially used by fish. 

(c) Type “Np” = Nonfish Perennial streams.

(d) Type “Ns” = Nonfish Seasonal streams. (Ord. 13-17 § 2; Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 30-05 § 1; Ord. 23-00 § 1; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.040 Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard located within the City limits. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.045 Flood hazard area components.

(1) A flood hazard area consists of the following components:

(a) Floodplain;

(b) Floodway fringe;

(c) Riparian buffer zone (RBZ);

(d) Zero-rise floodway; 

(e) FEMA floodway; and

(f) Channel migration zone (CMZ).

These areas at times overlap. For the purpose of this chapter, the most restrictive development requirements shall apply. In addition, exceptions, if any, must apply to all the overlapping zones to be allowable and applicable. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.050 Adoption of report and flood insurance rate map.

(1) The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and incorporated areas,” dated March 30, 1998, as amended, with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. The flood insurance study is on file at Covington City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in CMC 16.15.140 shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under said section.

(2) The Director shall use the following for floodplain boundaries, regulatory floodway boundaries, and base flood elevations when determining a special flood hazard area:

(a) Flood insurance rate maps;

(b) Preliminary flood insurance rate maps;

(c) Letters of map amendment;

(d) Letters of map revision;

(3) When regulating development in special flood hazard areas mapped on the FIRM, the Director shall determine the base flood elevation for existing conditions using the following sources:

(a) Flood insurance rate maps;

(b) Flood insurance studies;

(c) Preliminary flood insurance rate maps;

(d) Preliminary flood insurance studies;

(e) Letters of map amendment;

(f) Letters of map revision;

(g) Historical flood hazard information;

(h) Flood studies prepared and approved by a recognized governmental agency, such as FEMA, the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, Washington State, or King County; or

(i) Best available data, as determined by the Director. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.055 Determining other protected areas.

(1) Channel migration zones (CMZ) are specified by public rule adopted by the Director. When channel migration zones have not been determined, they shall be the same as the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway. Waters with no defined floodway or CMZ will be considered exempt from this protected area requirement. An applicant for a development proposal may submit a critical area report to the Department to determine channel migration zone boundaries on a specific property if there is an apparent discrepancy between the site-specific conditions and the adopted channel migration zone. The regulated CMZ includes the channel migration zone boundary and extends 50 feet landward in each direction from the stream. 

(2) The riparian buffer zone (RBZ) is the area in the floodplain measured perpendicularly from the OHW line on each side of the watercourse landward. The stream type determines the distance. The RBZ does not extend past the floodplain boundary. The following water typing designations and distances shall be used to determine the applicable riparian buffer zone: 

(a) Type S streams that are designated “shorelines of the State”: 250 feet from the OHW line.

(b) Type F streams (fish bearing) streams greater than five feet wide and marine shorelines: 200 feet from the OHW line.

(c) Type F streams less than five feet wide and lakes: 150 feet from the OHW line.

(d) Type N (nonsalmonid-bearing) perennial and seasonal streams with unstable slopes: 225 feet from the OHW line.

(e) All other Type N (nonsalmonid-bearing) perennial and seasonal streams: 150 feet from the OHW line. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.057 Stormwater management.

(1) Stormwater management shall be provided for projects located within lands to which this chapter applies. Stormwater management facilities shall not be located within floodways or the CMZ. Stormwater management facilities may be located within special flood hazard areas or the RBZ, subject to approval by the City Engineer; provided, that the increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood does not exceed the limits of CMC 16.15.320(2).

(2) Stormwater management facilities shall be designed in accordance with CMC Title 13. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-09 § 21. Formerly 16.15.055)


16.15.060 Penalty for noncompliance.

Unless a variance is properly granted, no structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including but not limited to violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.

Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as deemed necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.070 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, the one which imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.080 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:

(1) Considered as minimum requirements;

(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.090 Warning and disclaimer.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. More extensive floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)

Article II. Administration


16.15.100 Development permit required.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in CMC 16.15.050. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes, and for all development. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.110 Application for development permit.

An application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City administrator and will include such information as is required by the local administrator, including but not limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. In addition, the following information shall be required from all applicants:

(1) In relation to mean sea level, the elevation of the lowest floor of all structures, including the basement;

(2) In relation to mean sea level, the elevation to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria set forth in CMC 16.15.260; and

(4) A description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.120 Local administrator.

The City Manager or his designee is hereby appointed to act as the local administrator of this chapter and, to that end, shall administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.130 Local administrator – Duties.

The duties of the local administrator shall include, but are not limited to:

(1) Reviewing all development permits to determine whether the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(2) Reviewing all development permits to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and

(3) Reviewing all development permits to determine whether the proposed development is located in the floodway and, if so, ensuring that the encroachment provisions of CMC 16.15.350(2) are satisfied. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.140 Local administrator – Use of other base flood data.

In order to administer CMC 16.15.250 through 16.15.285 when base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with CMC 16.15.050, the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any Federal, State or other source. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.150 Local administrator – Information to be obtained.

(1) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study or as set forth in CMC 16.15.140, the local administrator shall obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and, in addition, shall record whether or not said structures contain basements.

(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation is provided through the flood insurance study or is set forth in CMC 16.15.140, the local administrator shall:

(a) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which the structure was floodproofed; and

(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in CMC 16.15.110(3).

(3) The local administrator shall maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to and required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 23-00 § 2; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.160 Local administrator – Alteration of watercourses.

Whenever any watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the local administrator shall:

(1) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any such alteration or relocation and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and

(2) Require that maintenance be provided for within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that its flood carrying capacity is not diminished. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.170 Local administrator – Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

The local administrator shall make all necessary interpretations as to the exact location of the boundaries of any areas of special flood hazard. The FIRM boundary shall be the sole determinant for jurisdiction and application of this chapter. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 23-00 § 3; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.180 Variances and appeals.

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall hear and decide any appeal or request for a variance from the requirements of this chapter. Appeals and requests for variances shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. 

(2) The Hearing Examiner shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Appeals shall be heard in accordance with Chapter 14.45 CMC.

(3) Anyone aggrieved by the decision of the Hearing Examiner, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the King County Superior Court, as provided in the Land Use Petition Act.

(4) In passing upon such appeals and variance requests, the Hearing Examiner shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and, in addition:

(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City;

(e) The necessity of a waterfront location for the facility, if applicable;

(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and the floodplain management program for that area;

(i) The safety of access to the property for ordinary and emergency vehicles in times of flood;

(j) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.

(5) Upon due consideration of the factors set forth in subsection (4) of this section as well as the purposes of this chapter, the Hearing Examiner may, in his discretion, attach such conditions to the granting of any variance as he deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeals and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 01-09 § 16; Ord. 20-07 § 92; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.190 Variances – Permissible conditions.

(1) As interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program, a variance is based on the general zoning law principle that the variance pertains to a physical piece of property, is not personal in nature and does not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants or any economic or financial circumstances. A variance primarily pertains to small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

(2) A variance may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of any structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in this section, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

(3) A variance shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would thereby result.

(4) A variance shall only be issued upon:

(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(b) A determination that denial of the variance application would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(c) A determination that granting the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and

(d) A determination that, considering the flood hazard, the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief.

(5) In very limited circumstances, a variance to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing may be issued for a nonresidential building where it can be demonstrated that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria of this section, and otherwise complies with CMC 16.15.200 and 16.15.210.

(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be afforded written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.195 Exemptions.

The following activities and developments are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. All exempted activities shall use reasonable methods to avoid potential impacts to special flood hazard areas. An exemption from this chapter is not an endorsement to degrade a special flood hazard area, ignore risk from natural hazards, or otherwise limit the ability of the Director to identify and abate such actions that may cause degradation.

(1) Activities and development in response to emergencies that, in the opinion of the Director, threaten public health, safety or welfare; or that pose an immediate risk of damage to property and that require remedial or preventative action in a time frame too short to allow for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. In the event a person determines that the need to take emergency action is so urgent that there is insufficient time for review by the Department, such emergency action may be taken immediately. The person undertaking such action shall notify the Department within one working day of the commencement of the emergency activity. The Director will determine what, if any, mitigation shall be required to protect health, safety, welfare, and environment and to repair any resource damage. In such cases, permits shall be obtained retroactively. 

(2) Operation, maintenance, or repair of existing public improvements, utilities, public roads, parks, trails, or drainage systems if the activity does not further alter or increase impact to, or encroach further within, the special flood hazard area and there is no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed operation, maintenance, or repair, and no new clearing of native vegetation beyond routine pruning.

(3) Normal maintenance and repair.

(4) Recreation, education, and scientific research activities that do not require grading, native vegetation clearing, or placement of structures.

(5) Site reconnaissance necessary for preparing land use or building permit applications. Any disturbance of the special flood hazard area shall be the minimum necessary to conduct the site reconnaissance and the area shall be restored to its previous condition immediately.

(6) Removal by hand of invasive and noxious vegetation. Removal by hand does not include using mechanical equipment or the use of herbicides.

(7) Normal maintenance and continuation of existing landscaping and gardens that were legally established prior to City incorporation. This exemption shall be documented by photographs, statements, and/or other evidence provided by the applicant. The use of herbicide is not permitted under this exemption in wetlands and streams or their buffers for the control of invasive vegetation.

(8) Excavation of cemetery graves in an established cemetery where the approval of the plots predates the City’s participation in the NFIP or has an approved flood permit. Maintenance, operation, or repair of the cemetery graves as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of improvements. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.197 Partial exemptions.

The following activities are partial exemptions to the provisions of this chapter and require written approval from the Director. The Director may require supporting documentation, prepared by a qualified professional, to demonstrate compliance with partial exemptions: 

(1) Demolition of structures and impervious surfaces for restoration to pervious or landscaped areas, provided they are not a precursor to development. The applicant shall submit a temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan and apply for applicable demolition permit(s).

(2) Vegetation maintenance such as hazard tree removal, removal of nuisance vegetation, and limited pruning for view preservation. The applicant shall submit a vegetation maintenance plan prepared by a certified arborist or registered landscape architect that includes the following:

(a) A site plan at appropriate scale denoting the extent of the proposed vegetation maintenance activity;

(b) Tree and vegetation location, type, and caliper of each tree within the area subject to the proposed vegetation maintenance activity;

(c) Identification of methods of vegetation maintenance (limited to hand tools and hand powered tools); 

(d) Location of private septic systems if applicable; and

(e) Proposed tree and/or vegetation replacement shown on the site plan. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))

Article III. Flood Hazard Reduction – General Standards


16.15.200 Flood hazard reduction – Anchoring.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards for anchoring shall be complied with:

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

(2) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and, in addition, shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors and additional techniques referred to in the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.210 Flood hazard reduction – Construction materials and methods.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards for construction materials and methods shall be complied with:

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and

(3) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.220 Flood hazard reduction – Utilities.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards pertaining to utilities shall be complied with:

(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system;

(2) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the systems and, in addition, discharge from the systems into flood water;

(3) All on-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and

(4) Water wells for potable water shall not be located in the floodway or channel migration zone. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.230 Flood hazard reduction – Subdivision proposals.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards pertaining to subdivision proposals shall be complied with:

(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(4) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, such data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 23-00 § 4; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.240 Flood hazard reduction – Review of building permits.

In all areas of special flood hazard, where elevation data is not available through the flood insurance study or from some other authoritative source pursuant to CMC 16.15.140, an application for a building permit shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and may include, but is not limited to, the use of historical data, high water marks, and photographs of past flooding, where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.245 Flood hazard areas certification by surveyor.

(1) For all new structures or substantial improvements in a flood hazard area, the applicant shall provide a FEMA elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor licensed by the State of Washington documenting:

(a) The actual as-built elevation of the lowest floor, including basement; and

(b) The actual as-built elevation to which the structure is dry floodproofed, if applicable.

(2) The applicant shall submit a FEMA elevation certificate before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. For unoccupied structures, the applicant shall submit the FEMA elevation certificate before the issuance of the final letter of completion or temporary letter of completion, whichever occurs first. 

(3) The land surveyor shall indicate if the structure has a basement.

(4) The Department shall maintain the certifications required by this section for public inspection and for certification under the National Flood Insurance Program. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))

Article IV. Flood Hazard Reduction – Specific Standards


16.15.250 Flood hazard reduction – Residential construction.

In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided pursuant to CMC 16.15.050 or 16.15.140, the following provisions pertaining to residential construction shall be complied with:

(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including any basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; and

(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings, or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.260 Flood hazard reduction – Nonresidential construction.

In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided pursuant to CMC 16.15.050 or 16.15.140, the following provisions pertaining to nonresidential construction shall be complied with:

(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, or, alternatively, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(a) Be floodproofed so that below one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection based on his/her development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the local administrator as set forth in CMC 16.15.150(2).

(2) Nonresidential structures that are elevated and not floodproofed must meet the standards for space below the lowest floor set forth in CMC 16.15.250(2).

(3) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level, that is, a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.270 Flood hazard reduction – Manufactured homes.

In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided pursuant to CMC 16.15.050 or 16.15.140, the following provisions pertaining to manufactured homes shall be complied with:

(1) Any manufactured home which is to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH or AE on the City’s FIRM on sites which are: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation and, in addition, securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system so as to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

(2) Any manufactured home which is to be placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision located within Zones A1-30, AH or AE on the City’s FIRM and which is not subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall be elevated so that: (a) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; or (b) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and, in addition, securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system so as to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 30-05 § 2; Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.280 Flood hazard reduction – Recreational vehicles.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions pertaining to recreational vehicles shall apply:

(1) Meet the requirements of CMC 18.50.190;

(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system and attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached addition(s); or

(3) Meet the requirements of CMC 16.15.270 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)


16.15.285 AE and A1-30 Zones with base flood elevations but no floodways.

In areas with base flood elevations (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.310 Critical facility.

To the extent possible, the construction of any new critical facility shall be located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (100-year floodplain). Construction of any new critical facility shall be permissible within the special flood hazard area if no feasible alternative site is available. Any critical facility constructed within said area shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. To the extent possible, access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 100-98 § 1)

Article V. Floodplain Protection – Specific Standards


16.15.315 Allowable development activities in all flood hazard area zones.

(1) The development activities identified below are allowed within all zones, subject to review under this code:

(a) Maintenance, repair, or replacement of a dock or pier;

(b) Construction of new slope stabilization or maintenance of existing slope stabilization provided fill, native vegetation clearing, and encroachment limits are addressed;

(c) Clearing of nonnative, exotic or invasive vegetation by hand or other nonmechanical means;

(d) Maintenance or repair of an existing bridge or culvert;

(e) Replacement of a bridge or culvert, for public roads, subject to compliance with this section and for the purpose of betterment for flood control, stream habitat improvement, or fish passage;

(f) Maintenance, repair, or replacement of an existing flood protection facility, provided there is no increase or betterment. Improved facilities would be evaluated as new;

(g) Maintenance or repair of an outdoor public park facility or trail;

(h) Habitat enhancement or restoration; and

(i) Construction or expansion of stormwater or drainage conveyance systems. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.320 Floodplain and floodway fringe development standards and alterations.

In addition to other requirements of this chapter, the following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites within the floodplain and floodway fringe: 

(1) Development proposals and alterations shall not reduce the effective base flood storage volume of the floodplain. A development proposal shall provide compensatory storage if grading or other activity displaces any effective flood storage volume. Compensatory storage shall:

(a) Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations to that being displaced;

(b) Hydraulically connect to the source of flooding;

(c) Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as when the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before the flood season begins on September 30th for that year; and

(d) Occur on the site. The Director may approve equivalent compensatory storage off the site if legal arrangements, acceptable to the Department, are made to assure that the effective compensatory storage volume will be preserved over time;

(2) In all areas of special flood hazard, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

(3) A registered professional engineer shall design and certify all elevated construction and submit the design to the City prior to construction;

(4) Subdivisions, short subdivisions, and commercial development proposal binding site plans shall meet the following requirements:

(a) New building lots shall include 5,000 square feet or more of buildable land outside the floodplain. Structures and other development shall be located in this area;

(b) All utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are consistent with this section;

(c) A professional engineer shall identify base flood elevations in accordance with FEMA guidelines for all new lots;

(d) A development proposal shall provide adequate drainage in accordance with the stormwater manuals adopted in CMC Title 13; and 

(e) The face of the recorded subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan shall include the following for all lots:

(i) Building setback areas restricting structures to designated buildable areas;

(ii) Base flood data and sources and flood hazard notes including, but not limited to, base flood elevations, required flood protection elevations, the boundaries of the floodplain and the zero-rise floodway, if determined; and channel migration zone boundaries, if determined; and

(iii) Include the following notice:

Lots and structures located within flood hazard areas may be inaccessible by emergency vehicles during flood events. Residents and property owners should take appropriate advance precautions.

(5) If an existing lot does not have sufficient buildable area outside of the floodplain (5,000 square feet), the following shall apply:

(a) Structures must be located to the non-floodplain area to the extent practicable;

(b) If the lot has no buildable area outside of the floodplain, all structures and development must be sited to have the least impact on the floodplain and riparian habitat;

(c) All structures must be set back at least 15 feet from the RBZ and shall be sited as close to the 100-year floodplain boundary as possible;

(d) Creation of new impervious surfaces shall not exceed 10 percent of the surface area of the portion of the lot in the floodplain unless mitigation is provided to make the impervious area ineffective;

(e) Roads and access driveways to the site are not permitted in the floodplain, except if they are the sole and least impactful access to the site;

(f) No new stream crossings over Type S, F, or Np streams are allowed to provide access to floodprone sites;

(6) New development or improvements to the following publicly owned infrastructure in the floodplain shall meet the following standards:

(a) Public trails and nonmotorized travel ways shall be allowed in floodplains subject to the following:

(i) Trails are not allowed in CMZ or floodways;

(ii) Floodplain storage compensation requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met;

(iii) The facility is elevated above the base flood elevation, floodproofed, or signed for closure to protect public safety during flood events;

(iv) Low impact design measures are applied to the extent practicable to make the impervious surface ineffective;

(v) Removal of native vegetation is minimized and compliant with other City standards;

(b) Public road improvements at stream crossings or in floodplains shall be allowed in all floodplain zones subject to the following:

(i) Encroachment into the floodway does not exceed existing conditions;

(ii) Fill and encroachment into the floodplain are minimized to the extent practicable;

(iii) Floodplain storage compensation requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met;

(c) Stormwater management facilities shall be allowed in all floodplain zones subject to the following:

(i) Facilities are not allowed in the floodway or CMZ;

(ii) Fill and encroachment into the floodplain are minimized to the extent practicable;

(iii) Floodplain storage compensation requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met;

(iv) Removal of native vegetation is minimized and compliant with other City standards;

(7) Public and private utilities shall meet the following standards:

(a) Dry-proof new and replacement utilities including, but not limited to, sewage treatment and storage facilities, to, or elevate above, the flood protection elevation;

(b) Locate new on-site sewage disposal systems outside the floodplain. When there is insufficient soil or area outside the floodplain, new on-site sewage disposal systems are allowed only in the floodway fringe. Locate on-site sewage disposal systems in the floodway fringe to avoid:

(i) Impairment to the system during flooding;

(ii) Contamination from the system during flooding; 

(iii) Design all new and replacement water supply systems to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(iv) Above-ground utility transmission lines, except for electric transmission lines, are allowed only for the transport of nonhazardous substances; and

(v) Bury underground utility transmission lines transporting hazardous substances at a minimum depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood, as predicted by a civil engineer, and achieve sufficient negative buoyancy so that any potential for flotation or upward migration is eliminated;

(8) Critical facilities are only allowed within the floodway fringe, when a feasible alternative site is not available and the following standards are met:

(a) Elevate the lowest floor to the 500-year floodplain elevation or three or more feet above the base flood elevation, whichever is higher;

(b) Dry floodproof and seal structures to ensure that hazardous substances are not displaced by or released into flood waters;

(c) Elevate access routes to or above the base flood elevation from the critical facility to the nearest maintained public street or roadway. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.330 Riparian buffer zone development standards and alterations. 

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites within the RBZ, subject to the exceptions provided in CMC 16.15.315 and 16.15.320(6) and (7):

(1) The following development is not permitted in the RBZ: 

(a) New structures, including accessory buildings and nonresidential structures;

(b) New impervious surfaces;

(c) Removal of native vegetation;

(d) Grading, clearing, filling, or other related land disturbing activity, other than for approved restoration work.

(2) If an existing lot does not have sufficient buildable area outside of the RBZ (5,000 square feet), the following shall apply:

(a) Structures must be located to the non-RBZ area to the extent practicable;

(b) If the lot has no buildable area outside of the RBZ, all structures and development must be sited to have the least impact on the floodplain and riparian habitat;

(c) Other site development and nonresidential structures are not permitted in the RBZ;

(d) Roads and access driveways to the site are not permitted in the RBZ, except if they are the sole and least impactful access to the site. No new stream crossings are allowed to provide access to floodprone sites. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.340 Zero-rise and FEMA floodway development standards and alterations. 

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites within the zero-rise and FEMA floodways:

(1) The standards that apply to the zero-rise flood fringe also apply to the zero-rise floodway. The more restrictive standards apply where there is a conflict;

(2) A development proposal shall not increase the base flood elevation except as follows:

(a) Revisions to the flood insurance rate map are approved by FEMA, in accordance with 44 CFR 70, to incorporate the increase in the base flood elevation; and

(b) Appropriate legal documents are prepared and recorded in which all property owners affected by the increased flood elevations consent to the impacts on their property;

(3) If post and piling construction techniques are used, the following are presumed to produce no increase in base flood elevation and a critical areas report is not required to establish this fact:

(a) New residential structures outside the FEMA floodway on lots in existence before November 27, 1990, that contain less than 5,000 square feet of buildable land outside the zero-rise or FEMA floodway if the total building footprint of all existing and proposed structures on the lot does not exceed 2,000 square feet;

(b) Substantial improvements of existing residential structures in the zero-rise floodway, but outside the FEMA floodway, if the footprint is not increased; or

(c) Substantial improvements of existing residential structures that meet the standards for new residential structures in Article III of this chapter;

(4) When post or piling construction is not used, a critical areas report is required in accordance with CMC 16.15.110 demonstrating that the proposal will not increase the base flood elevation;

(5) During the flood season from September 30th to May 1st the following are not allowed to be located in the zero-rise or FEMA floodway:

(a) All temporary seasonal shelters, such as tents and recreational vehicles; and

(b) Staging or stockpiling of equipment, materials or substances that the Director determines may be hazardous to the public health, safety, or welfare;

(6) New residential structures and substantial improvements to existing residential structures or any structure accessory to a residential use shall meet the following standards:

(a) Locate the structures outside the zero-rise and FEMA floodway; 

(b) Locate the structures only on lots in existence before November 27, 1990, that contain less than 5,000 square feet of buildable land outside the zero-rise or FEMA floodway; and

(c) To the maximum extent practical, locate the structures the farthest distance from the channel, unless the applicant can demonstrate that an alternative location is less subject to risk;

(7) Public and private utilities are only allowed if:

(a) The Director determines that a feasible alternative site is not available;

(b) A waiver is granted by the Department of Public Health of Seattle-King County for new on-site sewage disposal facilities; 

(c) The utilities are dry floodproofed to or elevated above the flood protection elevation;

(d) Above-ground utility transmission lines, except for electrical transmission lines, are only allowed for the transport of nonhazardous substances; and

(e) Underground utility transmission lines transporting hazardous substances are buried at a minimum depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood, as predicted by a civil engineer, and achieve sufficient negative buoyancy so that any potential for flotation or upward migration is eliminated;

(8) Critical facilities, except for those listed in subsection (9) of this section, are not allowed within the zero-rise or FEMA floodway; and

(9) Structures and installations that are dependent upon the zero-rise floodway are allowed in the zero-rise floodway if the development proposal is approved by all agencies with jurisdiction and meet the development standards for the zero-rise floodway. These structures and installations may include, but are not limited to:

(a) Dams or diversions for water supply, flood control, irrigation or fisheries enhancement;

(b) Flood damage reduction facilities, such as levees, revetments and pumping stations, provided:

(i) That the new structural flood hazard reduction measures are only allowed where demonstrated to be necessary;

(ii) Nonstructural methods are infeasible and mitigation is provided to achieve no net loss, such facilities must be located landward of associated wetlands and buffer areas except where no alternative exists;

(c) Stream bank stabilization structures only if a feasible alternative does not exist for protecting structures, public roadways, flood protection facilities or sole access routes. Bank stabilization projects must meet the standards of the stormwater manuals adopted in CMC Title 13 and use bioengineering techniques to the maximum extent practical. An applicant may use alternative methods to the guidelines if the applicant demonstrates that the alternative methods provide equivalent or better structural stabilization, ecological and hydrological functions and salmonid habitat;

(d) Surface water conveyance facilities;

(e) Boat launches and related recreation structures;

(f) Bridge piers and bridge widening structures; provided, that the new abutments and piers are aligned with existing piers and abutments;

(g) Culvert replacements that upgraded to current fish passage standards; and

(h) Approved stream or wetland restoration projects including, but not limited to, fisheries enhancement projects. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.350 FEMA floodway development standards and alterations. 

Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood water which carries debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply to development proposals and alterations on sites within the FEMA floodway areas: 

(1) The standards that apply to the zero-rise floodway also apply to the FEMA floodway. The more restrictive standards apply where there is a conflict;

(2) A development proposal shall not increase the base flood elevation. Encroachments, including but not limited to fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed with standard engineering practice that said encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

(3) New residential or nonresidential structures are prohibited within the FEMA floodway;

(4) Reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within FEMA designated floodways, except for: (a) repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and (b) repairs, reconstruction of residential structures or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (i) before the repair or reconstruction is started; or (ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for improvement for a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimums necessary to assure safe living conditions or to be structures identified as historic places may be excluded in the 50 percent.

(5) If subsection (4) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements in an area designated as a floodway shall comply with all the applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of CMC 16.15.200 through 16.15.310. 

(6) If the footprint of the existing residential structure is not increased, substantial improvements of existing residential structures in the FEMA floodway meeting the requirements of this section are presumed to not increase the base flood elevation and do not require a critical areas report to establish this fact. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


16.15.360 Channel migration zones – Development standards and alterations. 

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites within CMZ that have been mapped and adopted by public rule: 

(1) The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations within the regulated channel migration zone: 

(a) Maintenance, repair or expansion of any use or structure is allowed if the existing structure’s footprint is not expanded towards any source of channel migration hazard, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the location is the least subject to risk;

(b) New primary dwelling units, accessory dwelling units or accessory living quarters, and required infrastructure, are allowed if: 

(i) The structure is located on a separate lot in existence on or before February 16, 1995; 

(ii) A feasible alternative location outside of the regulated CMZ is not available on-site; and 

(iii) To the maximum extent practical, the structure and supporting infrastructure is located the farthest distance from any source of channel migration hazard, unless the applicant can demonstrate that an alternative location is the least subject to risk;

(c) The subdivision of property is allowed within the portion of a regulated channel migration zone if: 

(i) All lots contain 5,000 square feet or more of buildable land outside of the regulated CMZ; 

(ii) Access to any lots does not cross the regulated CMZ; and 

(iii) All infrastructure is located outside the regulated CMZ. (Ord. 06-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

17.05    Purpose

17.10    Definitions

17.15    Administration

17.20    Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions

17.25    Final Plat and Final Short Plat Maps for Preliminarily Approved Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions

17.30    Binding Site Plans

17.35    Condominiums

17.40    Boundary Line Adjustment/Lot Consolidation


Chapter 17.05 PURPOSE

Sections:

17.05.010    Purpose.


17.05.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this title is to:

(1) Establish the authority and procedures for segregating land in the City of Covington.

(2) Define and regulate divisions of land that are exempt from the short subdivision or subdivision requirements.

(3) Ensure consistency with and implement the City of Covington comprehensive plan as amended in accordance with the Washington State Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.120.

(4) Require uniform monumenting of land subdivisions and conveyance by accurate legal description.

(5) Protect and preserve the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the standards established by the City of Covington and the State of Washington.

(6) Ensure consistency with Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.01.010))


Chapter 17.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.10.010    Acre.

17.10.020    Alteration.

17.10.030    Applicant.

17.10.040    Binding site plan.

17.10.050    Building envelope.

17.10.060    Building site.

17.10.070    Civil engineer.

17.10.080    Condominium.

17.10.090    Dedication.

17.10.100    Department.

17.10.110    Development Engineer.

17.10.120    Director.

17.10.130    Easement.

17.10.140    Engineered preliminary drainage plan.

17.10.150    Financial guarantee.

17.10.160    General site plan.

17.10.170    Homeowners’ association.

17.10.180    Improvements.

17.10.190    Innocent purchaser.

17.10.200    Land surveyor.

17.10.210    Lot.

17.10.215    Lot, flag.

17.10.220    Nonbuilding lot.

17.10.230    Ownership interest.

17.10.240    Parent parcel.

17.10.250    Plat, final.

17.10.260    Plat, preliminary.

17.10.270    Revisions.

17.10.280    Segregation.

17.10.290    Short plat, final.

17.10.300    Short plat, preliminary.

17.10.310    Short subdivision.

17.10.320    Subdivision.

17.10.330    Tract.

17.10.335    Definitions not listed.


17.10.010 Acre. 

“Acre” means an area of land equal to 43,560 square feet. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.010))


17.10.020 Alteration.

“Alteration” means the modification of a previously recorded plat, short plat, binding site plan, or any portion thereof that results in modifications to conditions of approval, the addition of new lots or more land, or the deletion of existing lots or the removal of plat or lot restrictions or dedications that are shown on the recorded plat. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.020))


17.10.030 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner, or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.030))


17.10.040 Binding site plan.

“Binding site plan” means a plan drawn to scale processed in accordance with CMC 17.30.010 through 17.30.060 and Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.040))


17.10.050 Building envelope. 

“Building envelope” means the area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on a lot. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.050))


17.10.060 Building site.

“Building site” means a parcel, consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof, that is capable of being developed under current Federal, State, and local statutes, including zoning and use provisions, dimensional standards, minimum lot area for construction, minimum lot width, shoreline master program provisions, sensitive area provisions, health and safety provisions. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.060))


17.10.070 Civil engineer. 

“Civil engineer” means an individual registered and licensed as a professional civil engineer in the State of Washington, pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.070))


17.10.080 Condominium. 

“Condominium” means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions as defined in Chapters 64.32 and 64.34 RCW. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners and unless a declaration, survey map and plans have been recorded pursuant to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.080))


17.10.090 Dedication. 

“Dedication” means the deliberate conveyance of land by an owner for any general and public uses, reserving no rights other than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses for which the property has been conveyed. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat, short plat or binding site plan showing the dedication thereon or quit claim deed. The acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat, short plat, binding site plan or quit claim deed for filing by the City. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.090))


17.10.100 Department. 

“Department” means the Community Development Department. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.100))


17.10.110 Development Engineer.

“Development Engineer” means the Director of the Community Development Department or his or her designee, authorized to oversee the review, conditioning, inspection and acceptance of right-of-way use permits, road and drainage projects constructed pursuant to permits administered by the Community Development Department and required pursuant to this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.110))


17.10.120 Director. 

“Director” means the Director of the Community Development Department or his or her designee. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.120))


17.10.130 Easement.

“Easement” means a right granted by a property owner to specifically named parties or to the public for the use of certain land for specified purposes that may include, but are not limited to, road access, pedestrian or bicycle pathways, minerals, utility easements, drainage and open space. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.130))


17.10.140 Engineered preliminary drainage plan. 

“Engineered preliminary drainage plan” means a preliminary plan, consistent with the stormwater manuals adopted pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC, that shows the locations, types and approximate sizes of the proposed drainage and conveyance facilities, including any required bioswales, wetponds or other water quality facilities. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 13-09 § 22; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.140))


17.10.150 Financial guarantee. 

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, compliance with this code or to warrant materials, workmanship of improvements and design and maintenance of same. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposits, surety bonds and other forms of financial security acceptable to the Director. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.150))


17.10.160 General site plan. 

“General site plan” means a site plan approved pursuant to this title that is not based on a recorded final planned unit development, a building permit, an as-built site plan for developed sites or a site development permit issued for the entire site. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.160))


17.10.170 Homeowners’ association.

“Homeowners’ association” means any combination or grouping of persons or any association, corporation or other entity that represents homeowners residing on property created by a short subdivision, subdivision or binding site plan. A homeowners’ association need not have any official status as a separate legal entity under the laws of the State of Washington. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.170))


17.10.180 Improvements.

“Improvements” means constructed appurtenances, including but not limited to road and drainage construction, utility installation, recreational features, lot grading prior to a building permit, plat monument signs, survey monuments. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.180))


17.10.190 Innocent purchaser. 

“Innocent purchaser” means an individual who has found by the City’s Hearing Examiner to have purchased real property for value and is also found to have had no knowledge of or complicity in the creation of a lot in violation of the provisions of this title. A purchaser applying for “innocent purchaser” status must provide the City with a statement, under oath, that he or she had no knowledge at any time prior to or during the sale that the lot had been or is being created in violation of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.190))


17.10.200 Land surveyor.

“Land surveyor” means an individual licensed as a land surveyor, in the State of Washington, pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.200))


17.10.210 Lot.

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property that has been created pursuant to the provisions of this title, or pursuant to any previous laws governing the subdivision, short subdivision or segregation of land. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.210))


17.10.215 Lot, flag.

“Lot, flag/panhandle” means an interior lot which gains public road access by means of a lot extension. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 03-04 § 1)


17.10.220 Nonbuilding lot.

“Nonbuilding lot” means a lot created and defined as a nonbuilding lot on the face of the plat or short plat for which improvements for the purpose of human habitation or occupancy are prohibited. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.220))


17.10.230 Ownership interest.

“Ownership interest” means having property rights as a fee owner or contract purchaser. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.230))


17.10.240 Parent parcel.

“Parent parcel” means each existing lot that is located within the perimeter of a proposed boundary line adjustment application. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.240))


17.10.250 Plat, final.

“Final plat” means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the County Office of Records and Elections and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.250))


17.10.260 Plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, blocks and other elements of a subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.260))


17.10.270 Revisions.

“Revisions” means a change prior to recording of a previously approved preliminary subdivision, preliminary short subdivision or binding site plan that includes, but is not limited to, the addition of new lots, tracts or parcels. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.270))


17.10.280 Segregation. 

“Segregation” means a division of land by any of the following means: subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.280))


17.10.290 Short plat, final. 

“Final short plat” means the final drawing of the short subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the County Office of Records and Elections and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.290))


17.10.300 Short plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary short plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed short subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, blocks and other elements of a short subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary short plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.300))


17.10.310 Short subdivision. 

“Short subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into nine or fewer lots, tracts, parcels or sites for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.310))


17.10.320 Subdivision. 

“Subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into 10 or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.320))


17.10.330 Tract. 

“Tract” means land reserved for specified uses including, but not limited to, reserve tracts, recreation, open space, sensitive areas, surface water retention, utility facilities and access. Tracts are not considered lots or building sites for purposes of residential dwelling construction. (Ord. 13-19 § 4; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.04.330))


17.10.335 Definitions not listed.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows. Unless otherwise defined in this chapter the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable. If there is a conflict, the definitions in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall govern. If a term is not defined within this chapter or defined within Chapter 18.20 CMC, the usual and customary meaning shall apply. (Ord. 13-19 § 4)


Chapter 17.15 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

17.15.010    Scope of chapter.

17.15.020    Adverse possession lawsuit – Consent or judgment required.

17.15.030    Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

17.15.040    Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

17.15.050    Recording map and legal descriptions.

17.15.060    Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

17.15.070    Determining and maintaining legal status of a lot.

17.15.080    Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

17.15.090    Determining innocent purchaser status.

17.15.100    Public street rights-of-way.

17.15.110    Limitations within future road corridors.

17.15.120    Affidavit of correction.

17.15.130    Vertical and horizontal survey controls.

17.15.140    Financial guarantees.

17.15.145    Subdivision review fees.

17.15.150    Application requirements for preliminary subdivisions, preliminary short subdivisions, boundary line adjustments/lot consolidations and preliminary binding site plans.

17.15.160    Minimum subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

17.15.170    Violations and enforcement.

17.15.180    Circumvention of zoning density prohibited.

17.15.190    Rules.

17.15.200    Electronic version – Required.


17.15.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains provisions general to the administration of land segregation. Any segregation of land is subject to the provisions of this title except as stated herein. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.010))


17.15.020 Adverse possession lawsuit – Consent or judgment required.

Applications for segregation allowed by this title concerning lands on which there is a pending lawsuit for adverse possession will not receive final approval without the consent of the adverse possession claimant or until a trial court judgment settling the lawsuit is entered. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.020))


17.15.030 Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

The transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency for road and utility purposes shall not be considered a segregation of land. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.030))


17.15.040 Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

The subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title shall not apply to:

(1) Divisions of lands for cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

(2) Divisions of land into lots or tracts each one of which is one-sixteenth of a section of land or larger, or 40 acres or larger if the land is not capable of description as a fraction of a section of land; provided, that for purposes of computing the size of a lot that borders on a street or road, the lot size shall be expanded to include that area that would be bounded by the center line of the road or street and the side lot lines of the lot running perpendicular to such center line; and further provided, that within the resource zones, each lot or tract shall be of a size that meets the minimum lot size requirements of CMC 18.30.040(A) for the respective zone.

(3) Divisions of land into lots or tracts that are one-one-hundred-twenty-eighth of a section, or five acres or larger only for the purpose of allowing fee simple purchase or deeding of such lots or tracts to public agencies.

(4) Divisions of land into lots or tracts consistent with RCW 58.17.040(7) for which a condominium binding site plan has been recorded in accordance with the binding site plan provisions set forth in this title.

(5) An adjustment of boundary lines in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(6) Divisions of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than mobile homes are permitted to be placed upon the land and for which the Director has approved a binding site plan for the use of the land as a mobile home park.

(7) Divisions of land by binding site plan into lots or tracts classified for industrial or commercial use consistent with the binding site plan provisions of this title. 

(8) Divisions of land by a public roadway or freeway, as defined by the City of Covington roadway functional classification system, that is planned, established, financed and constructed by a State or County or City agency after January 1, 2002. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.040)) 


17.15.050 Recording map and legal descriptions. 

The final recording map and legal description of a plat, short plat, boundary line adjustment or binding site plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC, Surveys and Recording, and be recorded with the County Office of Records and Elections as required by this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.050))


17.15.060 Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

Applications for approvals pursuant to this title shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable procedures of any combination of this title and Chapters 2.25, 14.30, 14.35, 14.40, and 14.45 CMC. Furthermore, applications for subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans may be approved, approved with conditions or denied in accordance with the following adopted City and State rules, regulations, plans and policies including, but not limited to:

(1) Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA);

(2) Chapter 58.17 RCW (Subdivisions);

(3) Chapters 36.70A and 36.70B RCW (Growth Management and Project Review);

(4) County Office of Records and Elections;

(5) CMC Title 13, Public Utilities;

(6) Repealed by Ord. 13-09;

(7) CMC Title 12 (Streets, Sidewalks and Bridges);

(8) Chapter 15.20 CMC (Fire Code);

(9) Chapter 16.10 CMC (SEPA); 

(10) CMC Title 18 (Zoning);

(11) Chapter 1.30 CMC (Code Enforcement);

(12) Chapter 16.05 CMC (Shoreline Master Program);

(13) Administrative rules adopted pursuant to this title;

(14) King County Board of Public Health rules and regulations;

(15) Approved utility comprehensive plans;

(16) City of Covington comprehensive plan;

(17) This title; 

(18) CMC Title 14. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-09 § 23; Ord. 02-09 § 7; Ord. 01-09 § 17; Ord. 20-07 § 93; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.060))


17.15.070 Determining and maintaining legal status of a lot. 

(1) A property owner may request that the Department determine whether a lot was legally segregated. A request for such a determination shall be accompanied by the fee for a Type 1 decision letter as set forth in the current fee resolution. The property owner shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that a lot was created in compliance with applicable State and local land segregation statutes or codes in effect at the time the lot was created including, but not limited to, demonstrating that the lot was created:

(a) Prior to June 9, 1937, and the lot has been:

(i) Provided with approved sewage disposal or water systems or roads; or

(ii) Conveyed as an individually described parcel to separate, noncontiguous ownerships through a fee simple transfer or purchase prior to October 1, 1972;

(iii) Recognized prior to October 1, 1972, as a separate tax lot by the County Assessor;

(b) Through a review and approval process recognized by the County for the creation of four lots or less from June 9, 1937, to October 1, 1972, or the subdivision process on or after June 9, 1937;

(c) Through the short subdivision process on or after October 1, 1972; or

(d) Through the following alternative means allowed by State statute or County code:

(i) For the raising of agricultural crops or livestock, in parcels greater than 10 acres, between September 3, 1948, and August 11, 1969;

(ii) For cemeteries or other burial plots, while used for that purpose, on or after August 11, 1969;

(iii) At a size five acres or greater, recorded between August 11, 1969, and October 1, 1972, and did not contain a dedication;

(iv) At a size 20 acres or greater, recognized prior to the effective date of this title; provided, however, for remnant lots not less than 17 acres and no more than one per quarter section;

(v) Upon a court order entered between August 11, 1969, to July 1, 1974;

(vi) Through testamentary provisions or the laws of descent after August 10, 1969;

(vii) Through an assessor’s plat made in accordance with RCW 58.18.010 after August 10, 1969;

(viii) As a result of deeding land to a public body after April 3, 1977, and that is consistent with City Code, access and Board of Health requirements (where applicable) so as to qualify as a building site pursuant to CMC 17.10.050; or

(ix) By a partial fulfillment deed pursuant to a real estate contract recorded prior to October 1, 1972, and no more than four lots were created per the deed. 

(2) In requesting a determination, the property owner shall submit evidence, deemed acceptable to the Department, such as:

(a) Recorded subdivisions or division of land into four lots or less;

(b) King County documents indicating approval of a short subdivision;

(c) Recorded deeds or contracts describing the lot or lots either individually or as part of a conjunctive legal description (e.g., Lot 1 and Lot 2); or

(d) Historic tax records or other similar evidence describing the lot as an individual parcel. The Department shall give great weight to the existence of historic tax records or tax parcels in making its determination.

(3) Once the Department has determined that the lot was legally created, the Department shall continue to acknowledge the lot as such, unless the property owner re-aggregates or merges the lot with another lot or lots in order to: 

(a) Create a parcel of land that would qualify as a building site; or

(b) Implement a deed restriction or condition a covenant or court decision.

(4) The Department’s determination shall not be construed as a guarantee that the lot constitutes a building site as defined in CMC 17.10.050.

(5) Re-aggregation of lots shall only be the result of a deliberate action by a property owner expressly requesting a permanent merger of two or more lots. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 20-07 § 94; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.070))


17.15.080 Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

Limitations placed on a nonbuilding lot may be removed and the lot recognized by the City as a building lot by approval of a subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan or alteration of a plat, short plat or binding site plan. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.080))


17.15.090 Determining innocent purchaser status. 

(1) An innocent purchaser of a parcel divided in violation of City of Covington subdivision requirements who files a notarized affidavit of innocent purchase with the Department on forms approved by the Director may seek to establish the parcel’s eligibility for development approvals and for lawful future conveyance; provided, that nothing herein is intended to exempt development on innocent purchaser lots from compliance with development standards of CMC Title 18. A request for such a determination shall be accompanied by the fee for a Type 1 decision letter as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) All contiguous parcels divided in violation of this title that are under common ownership at the time of application for innocent purchaser status shall be recognized only as a single lot.

(3) Innocent purchaser status shall not be granted to any individual or group more than once. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 20-07 § 95; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.090))


17.15.100 Public street rights-of-way.

Dedication or deeding to the City of right-of-way or a portion thereof for public streets shall be required within or along the boundaries of all binding site plans, subdivisions and short subdivisions or of any lot or lots within them, under the following circumstances, where facts support that such dedication is reasonably necessary as a result of the impact created by the proposed development or any future development:

(1) Where the six-year capital improvement plan or transportation needs report indicates the necessity of a new right-of-way or portion thereof for street purposes;

(2) Where necessary to extend or to complete the existing or future neighborhood street pattern;

(3) Where necessary to provide additions of right-of-way to existing right-of-way;

(4) Where necessary to comply with City street standards and/or City street plans;

(5) Where necessary to provide a public transportation system that supports future development of abutting property consistent with the City of Covington comprehensive plan or City of Covington zoning code; provided, that the right-of-way shall:

(a) Provide for vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and between neighborhoods;

(b) Provide local traffic alternatives to the use of arterial streets; 

(c) Reduce potential traffic impacts to existing residential access streets; and

(d) Provide future connectivity of transportation corridors. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.100))


17.15.110 Limitations within future road corridors. 

In order to allow for the development of future road corridors that would complete the public circulation system or that would provide a sole source of access for an abutting property, the City may limit improvements within specific areas of a proposed binding site plan, subdivision or short subdivision. These limitations may preclude the construction of buildings, driveways, drainage facilities or other improvements within the specified areas. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.110))


17.15.120 Affidavit of correction. 

(1) Any map page or document recorded with the County Office of Records and Elections, or its successor agency, under the provisions of this title that contains an error in fact or omission may be amended by an affidavit of correction. The following types of errors may be corrected by affidavit:

(a) Any courses, distances or elevations omitted from the recorded document;

(b) An error in any courses, distances or elevations shown on the recorded document;

(c) An error in the description of the real property shown on the recorded document;

(d) An error in the field location of any shown easement; or

(e) Any other error or omission where the error or omission is ascertainable from the data shown on the recorded document.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit changes in courses, distances or elevations for the purpose of redesigning lot or tract configurations.

(3) The affidavit of correction shall contain the seal and signature of the land surveyor making the correction.

(4) The affidavit of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property materially affected by the correction. The notarized signatures of the owners shall be required, if deemed necessary by the Department.

(5) The affidavit of correction form, as provided by the Department, shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval and shall include signatures of the Development Engineer, the Director of the Department, the King County Assessor and the Manager of the King County Records and Elections Division, or its successor agency. After Department approval, the affidavit shall be recorded with the King County Recorder’s Office or its successor agency. Submittals shall include payment of a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution, which shall include compensation for review and recording.

(6) Should a nonsurvey-related error occur on the recorded document as a result of information required to be placed on the document by the Department, an alternate land surveyor, as approved by the Director, may prepare the affidavit providing the original land surveyor has no objections. The seal and signature of the alternate land surveyor making the correction shall be affixed to the affidavit. A copy of the affidavit shall be mailed by the Department to the original land surveyor following recording. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 20-07 § 96; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.120))


17.15.130 Vertical and horizontal survey controls. 

(1) Vertical Requirements. The vertical datum on all engineering plans, plats, binding site plans and short plats shall be the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 and shall be tied to at least one King County or City of Covington survey control network benchmark. The benchmark will be shown on the plans. If a County or City survey control network benchmark does not exist within one-half mile of the subject property, or 250 feet or greater of total vertical difference exists between the starting benchmark and the project, an alternate vertical datum may be used.

(2) Horizontal Requirements. The horizontal component of all subdivisions, binding site plans and short subdivisions shall have the North American Datum of 1983/91 as its coordinate base and basis for bearings. All horizontal control for these projects shall be referenced to a minimum of two King County or City of Covington survey horizontal control monuments. If two horizontal control monuments do not exist within one mile of these projects, an alternate coordinate base and basis of bearings may be used. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.130))


17.15.140 Financial guarantees.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the Director is authorized to require all applicants that are issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14. Pursuant to RCW 58.17.130, an applicant may request recording of a subdivision prior to the completion of the construction of required improvements subject to the posting of a performance financial guarantee. Performance guarantees for subdivisions which record prior to completing all improvements shall be subject to the following requirements:

(1) A performance guarantee shall be posted with the Department in an amount equal to the Director’s estimate for such improvements as assurance that the applicant will, within two years from the date of recording of the final subdivision, complete the improvements in accordance with the requirements and to the satisfaction of the Development Engineer (as defined in this title or its successor);

(2) Requests for performance guarantees shall be in writing, shall be correlated with the original terms and conditions of preliminary approval, and shall be accompanied by a detailed schedule for completion of the improvements and conditions;

(3) Performance guarantees for improvements required pursuant to this title (or its successor) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the preliminary approval and approved construction plans, including corrective work necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

(4) Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall be posted with the Director:

(a) Prior to final construction approval and recording of the final plat when the applicant has constructed improvements in accordance with the approval of the Director and the Development Engineer; or

(b) Prior to final construction approval and the release of performance guarantees when the applicant has previously recorded the plat;

(5) Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall be released following a final maintenance and defect inspection and, if applicable, acceptance of the facilities for City maintenance. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 20-07 §§ 84, 97; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.140); Ord. 43-02 § 2)


17.15.145 Subdivision review fees. 

(1) Fees shall be collected to compensate the Department for reviewing subdivision, short subdivision, boundary line adjustments, and binding site plan applications (including commercial binding site plans) pursuant to the provisions of this title and the current fee resolution. Review fees may be collected for both initial review and for revisions.

(2) A fee, as outlined in the current fee resolution, shall be charged to help defray the costs associated with the traffic engineering review for all applications that increase trips or internal circulation to a project. 

(3) Engineering Plan Review. Engineering plan review includes engineering plan screening and intake; review of engineering plans for consistency with adopted design standards, guidelines, and conditions of preliminary approval; establishment of construction bond amounts; and administrative support for file updating and maintenance. Initial engineering plan review fees cover plan screening/intake and the first detailed engineering review of plans. Corrections and additions requiring additional engineering review shall be charged a resubmittal fee composed of a base handling fee and an hourly review fee. Post engineering approval revisions requiring plan resubmittal and additional engineering review shall be charged a resubmittal fee. Initial engineering review fees shall be collected upon plan submittal. The base handling portion of resubmittal fees shall be collected upon plan resubmittal. Hourly resubmittal fees shall be collected at the completion of engineering review and prior to engineering approval.

(4) Construction Inspection Fees. Construction inspection fees shall compensate the Department for the inspection of facilities required for final construction approval. Initial construction inspection fees shall cover inspections during the first 12 months from engineering plan approval and are payable upon engineering approval. Initial fees shall be based upon City of Covington’s estimate of construction costs. Annual construction inspection fees shall be charged an hourly rate for the inspection of facilities required after the first 12 months from engineering plan approval and until final construction approval. Annual construction inspection fees shall be charged only where the delay in final construction approval is not attributable to unwarranted delay by the Department. Supplemental inspection fees shall be charged for reinspection of facilities if the time period from construction approval to final facility acceptance exceeds 60 days. Supplemental inspection fees shall combine a base fee to cover file administration and hourly inspection fees, and shall be collected prior to facility acceptance. Supplemental construction inspection fees shall be charged only where the delay in final acceptance is not attributable to unwarranted delay by the Department.

(5) Final Approval Fees. Final approval fees compensate the Department for engineering review of the final recording forms and for final application review to assure compliance with all conditions of approval, including construction or bonding of required improvements, dedications, and drainage or sensitive areas depictions. Separate review fees shall be charged for any alterations to final approvals authorized by either this title or the current fee resolution.

(6) Post-Approval Site Maintenance Fees. Post-approval site maintenance fees compensate the Department for inspections necessary to assure that adequate post-approval maintenance of facilities has occurred and that facilities to be accepted for future City maintenance are free of defects. The maintenance/defect bond inspection fee shall consist of a base fee to cover file administration and updating, and a variable fee based on the bond amount to cover actual inspections.

(7) Additional Review Fees. In addition to the subdivision products review fees set forth in this section, other fees may also be applicable to individual subdivision product applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shoreline management, SEPA, right-of-way use, grading, drainage, or critical areas review fees. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 20-07 §§ 72, 79; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.28.010). Formerly 14.75.010; 14.100.040)


17.15.150 Application requirements for preliminary subdivisions, preliminary short subdivisions, boundary line adjustments/lot consolidations and preliminary binding site plans. 

The following application requirements shall be required in addition to those application requirements described in CMC 14.35.020:

(1) A title report issued within 30 days of application, showing all persons having an ownership interest, a legal description describing the exterior boundary of the application site and listing all encumbrances affecting the site.

(2) A map prepared by a land surveyor showing the following:

(a) Location of all physical and legal description encroachments affecting the boundary between the application site and the adjoining parcels. Encroachments may be from the application site onto the adjoining parcels or from the adjoining parcels onto the application site;

(b) Contours based upon topographic field survey. Contour intervals shall be at two-foot intervals when slopes are 15 percent or less and five-foot intervals for slopes exceeding 15 percent. The preliminary map shall contain notes indicating that contours are based upon field survey. A field topographic base map shall accompany the application. If approved by the Department, field survey may be waived for large areas of open space or extensive sensitive area tracts. Two temporary benchmarks must be shown within the application site along with the appropriate elevation and datum;

(c) A legal description of application site as shown in the title report;

(d) The proposed layout of lots, tracts, rights-of-way and easements, along with existing utilities and areas of proposed dedications;

(e) The purpose of any tracts and dedications proposed within the application site;

(f) All easements, listed in the title report, capable of being plotted on the map;

(g) Field-verified survey of location of all known sensitive areas including, but not limited to, streams, wetlands and steep slopes that may affect the proposal. Show the approximate 100-year floodplain of sensitive areas, where applicable;

(h) Name and full description of the proposal, including but not limited to a full description of all proposed land uses;

(i) North arrow, scale and date of map and revisions when applicable;

(j) Location of adjoining parcels and buildings within 100 feet of the site shall be shown and delineated by dashed lines. The zoning of the parcels shall also be identified;

(k) Name and location of all existing adjoining right-of-way along with the name and location of any adjoining or internal right-of-way proposed to be vacated with the proposal;

(l) A vicinity map; and

(m) An engineered preliminary drainage plan.

(3) A proposed binding site plan shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of subsection (2) of this section when the binding site plan is based on a recorded final planned unit development, building permit, as-built site plan for developed sites or a site development permit for the entire site. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 02-09 § 8; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.150))


17.15.160 Minimum subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

(1) Prior to final recording of a plat or short plat, the following minimum improvements shall be constructed consistent with the approved plans, except that the Director of Community Development may allow posting of a financial guarantee per this title and CMC Title 14, for that portion not completed, in the event that expiration of the plat or short plat is imminent or other extraordinary circumstances prevent the construction of such improvements:

(a) Drainage facilities and erosion control measures consistent with Chapter 13.25 CMC;

(b) Water mains and hydrant installed and fire flow available, as required;

(c) Streets graded to all lots within the subdivision or short subdivision and capable of providing access per the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC, current edition;

(d) Specific site improvements required by the preliminary subdivision approval ordinance or preliminary short subdivision approval decision;

(e) Delineation of sensitive areas that are to remain undeveloped;

(f) Temporary control monuments set by a land surveyor, located in conformance with this title, and in place at final inspection. Permanent monuments and control points shall be set and verified by a land surveyor within 90 days of the final lift of asphalt; and

(g) Improvements without which the Director determines a safety hazard would exist.

(2) The City shall have right of entry onto any lot, tract, easement or parcel that is part of the final plat or short plat to ensure compliance with the minimum subdivision improvements required in this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 27-16 § 11; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 98; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.160))


17.15.170 Violations and enforcement.

Any person or entity who violates any provision of this title shall, in addition to any remedies and sanctions provided for under State law, be subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 10-07 § 9; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.170))


17.15.180 Circumvention of zoning density prohibited.

A legal lot, which has been subject to a boundary line adjustment or created through a legally recognized land segregation process and is of sufficient land area to be subdivided at the density applicable to the lot, may be further segregated. However, such further segregation of the lot shall not be permitted if the total number of lots contained within the external boundaries of the lots subject to the original boundary line adjustment or the total number of lots contained within the external boundary of the parcel subject to the original land segregation exceed the density allowed under current zoning. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.180))


17.15.190 Rules. 

The Director is authorized to adopt rules to implement the provisions of this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.190))


17.15.200 Electronic version – Required. 

An electronic version of the approved plans and as-builts, in current version of CAD on a compact disk, is required for all final plat, final short plats, and binding site plans. (Ord. 13-19 § 5; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.08.200))


Chapter 17.20 SUBDIVISIONS AND SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Preliminary approval of subdivision.

17.20.030    Revisions of preliminary subdivisions.

17.20.040    Preliminary short subdivision – Approval time.

17.20.050    Limitations for short subdivisions.

17.20.060    Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions.


17.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify requirements for the segregation of land into short subdivisions, which are nine or fewer lots, and subdivisions, which are 10 or more lots, in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Covington laws, rules and regulations, including permit processing procedures required by Chapters 14.30 through 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 02-09 § 9; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.010))


17.20.020 Preliminary approval of subdivision. 

(1) Preliminary subdivision approval shall be effective for a period of 60 months. The permit applicant may apply for a single one-year extension to the preliminary approval, upon written application for an extension, payment of the fee for a request for extension as set forth in the current fee resolution, and being found to have fully complied with the conditions and requirements of the original approval. The application for extension may be made only after the first 48 months of the original preliminary subdivision approval, and no later than 60 days prior to its expiration.

(2) Preliminary subdivision approval shall be considered the basis upon which the applicant may proceed toward development of the subdivision and preparation of the final plat subject to all the conditions of the preliminary subdivision approval.

(3) If the final plat is being developed in divisions, and final plats for all of the divisions have not been recorded within the time limits provided in this section, preliminary subdivision approval for all unrecorded divisions shall become void. The preliminary subdivision for any unrecorded divisions must again be submitted to the Department with a new application, subject to the fees and regulations applicable at the time of submittal. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 20-07 § 99; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.020))


17.20.030 Revisions of preliminary subdivisions. 

Applications to revise subdivisions that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following:

(1) Major Revisions. Major revisions are those that result in any substantial changes as determined by the Department. An application for a major revision shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting, shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution, and shall be reviewed as a Type 3 land use decision pursuant to CMC 14.30.020. For the purpose of this section, substantial change includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space or changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary subdivision. 

(2) Minor Revisions. Approval of the following modifications by the Department shall be considered minor revisions, are not subject to additional fees, and shall not require a public hearing:

(a) Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary subdivision approval;

(b) Changes in lot dimensions that are consistent with CMC Title 18;

(c) A decrease in the number of lots to be created so long as the decrease allows for future compliance with the minimum density provisions of CMC Title 18, if applicable. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 20-07 § 100; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.030))


17.20.040 Preliminary short subdivision – Approval time.

Preliminary approval of a short subdivision shall be effective for a period of 60 months. The permit applicant may apply for a single one-year extension to the preliminary approval, upon written application for an extension, payment of the fee for a request for extension as set forth in the current fee resolution, and being found to have fully complied with the conditions and requirements of the original approval. The application for extension may be made only after the first 48 months of the original preliminary approval, and no later than 60 days prior to its expiration. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 20-07 § 101; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.040))


17.20.050 Limitations for short subdivisions. 

(1) A maximum of nine lots may be created by a single application.

(2) An application for further segregation may not be submitted within a period of five years after recording, except through the filing of a subdivision application, or unless the short subdivision contains fewer than nine lots, in which case an alteration application may be submitted to create a cumulative total of up to nine lots within the original short plat boundary.

(3) A maximum of nine lots may be created from two or more contiguous parcels with any common ownership interest. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.050))


17.20.060 Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions.

Applications to revise short subdivisions that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following: 

(1) Major Revisions. Major revisions are those that result in any substantial changes as determined by the Department. An application for a major revision shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting, shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution, and shall be reviewed as a Type 2 land use decision pursuant to CMC 14.30.020. For the purpose of this section, substantial change includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space or changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary short subdivision. 

(2) Minor Revisions. Approval of the following modifications by the Department shall be considered minor revisions, are not subject to additional fees:

(a) Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary short subdivision approval;

(b) Changes in lot dimensions that are consistent with CMC Title 18;

(c) A decrease in the number of lots to be created so long as the decrease allows for future compliance with the minimum density provisions of CMC Title 18, if applicable. (Ord. 13-19 § 6; Ord. 20-07 § 102; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.12.060))


Chapter 17.25 FINAL PLAT AND FINAL SHORT PLAT MAPS FOR PRELIMINARILY APPROVED SUBDIVISIONS AND SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.25.010    Purpose.

17.25.020    Phased development.

17.25.030    Final plat and final short plat review procedures.

17.25.040    Final plat and final short plat engineering plan review requirements.

17.25.050    Contents of final plat and final short plat.

17.25.060    Final forms.

17.25.070    Alterations of final plats.

17.25.080    Alterations of final short plats.

17.25.090    Vacations of a final plat or final short plat.


17.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify provisions that must be satisfied prior to the final approval and recording of final plat and final short plat maps for preliminarily approved subdivisions and short subdivisions. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.010))


17.25.020 Phased development. 

Portions of an approved preliminary subdivision may be processed separately by the Department for the purpose of recording divisions. All divisions shall be approved within the prescribed time limits for the preliminary subdivision, and all conditions of approval for each particular division must be met. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.020))


17.25.030 Final plat and final short plat review procedures.

(1) Following submittal and approval of the engineering plans, and upon the City’s inspection and determination that the site improvements required by CMC 17.15.160 have been substantially completed pursuant to the approved engineering plans, a final plat or final short plat shall be surveyed by a land surveyor and submitted to the Department for review and approval by the Development Review Division prior to recording. If more than one sheet is required, an index sheet shall be included that must show the entire segregation with road names and lot numbers;

(2) All final plats and final short plats shall conform to the conditions of preliminary subdivision or short subdivision approval;

(3) Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for land registered pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW shall be provided to the Department prior to recording along with a copy of the last real estate transaction for all adjoining unplatted parcels. Supplemental plat certificates shall be provided to the Department if the final plat or final short plat is not recorded within 30 days of the original certificate or supplemental certificate date;

(4) All applicable processing fees as set forth in the current fee resolution and any civil penalty assessed pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC against a site being reviewed under this section shall be paid prior to recording;

(5) A deposit to cover anticipated taxes and assessments is required for final plats pursuant to Chapter 58.08 RCW. A deposit, however, shall not be required for the filing of a final short plat. The applicant shall also provide certification from the King County Office of Finance that property taxes for the subject property are not delinquent prior to the issuance of a final approval;

(6) Proof of sewer and water availability, including any required water rights, shall be submitted to the Department and final Health Department approval shall be obtained prior to recording, if applicable;

(7) Upon approval by the Department, the final plat or short plat shall be recorded with the County Records and Elections Division; and 

(8) A typewritten copy of protective deed covenants shall accompany the final plat or short plat, if applicable. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 103; Ord. 10-07 § 10; Ord. 03-04 § 2; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.030))


17.25.040 Final plat and final short plat engineering plan review requirements. 

(1) Engineering plans for roads, drainage controls and other proposed or conditioned improvements shall be prepared, submitted and reviewed for approval by the Development Engineer prior to the commencement of on-site clearing or construction activities.

(2) Approval of the engineering details of the proposed sanitary sewer and water systems and other proposed public facilities by the applicable utility agency, Development Engineer and the King County Department of Public Health will be required prior to the approval of the final plat.

(3) Plans and technical information reports shall be submitted to the Department and prepared consistent with the requirements of the City of Covington Street Standards, Chapter 12.60 CMC, the stormwater manuals adopted pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC, and conditions of preliminary approval. Each plan set or document shall be stamped, signed and dated by a civil engineer.

(4) Prior to approval of engineering plans, the applicant shall post a site restoration guarantee consistent with the provisions of this title and CMC Title 14, and shall pay all applicable fees pursuant to this title and the current fee resolution. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 13-09 § 24; Ord. 20-07 § 104; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.040))


17.25.050 Contents of final plat and final short plat. 

The following information shall be shown on a final plat or final short plat:

(1) Name of subdivision and Department file number for final plats or Department file number for final short plats;

(2) Location by section, township and range, and by legal description;

(3) The signature and seal of the land surveyor;

(4) Survey map requirements as specified in Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW;

(5) Boundary of plat or short plat based on relative accuracy procedures or field traverse standards, and meeting or exceeding those standards specified in WAC 332-130-090;

(6) Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat or short plat, the address of each lot, and the exact location and widths of all alleys. The naming of a street shall conform to the City’s process for naming streets;

(7) Courses and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments that shall accurately describe the location of the plat or short plat;

(8) Municipal, township, County or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the plat or short plat distances and courses;

(9) All easements for rights-of-way, access and utility easements, NGPA areas, slope easements, flood elevations, wetland buffers, and building setback boundary lines (BSBL);

(10) Lots designated by number on the plat or short plat within the area of the lot, and tracts similarly designated by letter. Each tract shall be clearly identified with the ownership, purpose and maintenance responsibility;

(11) Blocks in numbered additions to plats bearing the same name may be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions;

(12) Accurate location of all existing and proposed permanent control monuments at each corner of the subdivision or short subdivision consistent with RCW 58.17.240 and at all road intersections and curve control points that fall within the pavement;

(13) A traverse line established along the shore not more than 20 feet landward of the ordinary high water line when a subdivision or short subdivision borders on a body of water. This line shall be labeled “plat traverse line” or “short plat traverse line,” as applicable, on the final plat or short plat documents;

(14) Accurate boundary delineation for any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, along with the purposes of the use indicated thereon, and the accurate delineation of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 

(15) The boundary description of the property being subdivided or short subdivided matching the description recorded in the most recent real estate transfer document encompassing the property. If the description is incorrect, a true and exact description shall be shown upon the plat or short plat together with the original description. The original description shall be labeled “original description” and the true and exact description shall be labeled “surveyor’s corrected description.” The surveyor’s corrected description shall be preceded by the verbiage: “The intent of the original description is to encompass all of the property described within the surveyor’s corrected description”;

(16) Dedication with notarized acknowledgments by all parties having an ownership interest, as required by RCW 58.17.165 and 19A.04.230, acknowledging the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas. Dedications by corporations shall include corporate acknowledgment and dedications by individuals shall include individual acknowledgment;

(17) Restrictions, title encumbrances and notes required by the conditions of approval;

(18) Certification by a land surveyor to the effect that the plat or short plat correctly represents a survey made by the surveyor, or under the surveyor’s direction, and that the existing monuments are located as shown on the final plat or final short plat;

(19) Approval and signature blocks for the Department, the County Office of Records and Elections;

(20) Approval of the City Manager or Director, as applicable, to the extent such approval is required; and

(21) Recording certificate required for the signature of the King County Records and Elections Division. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.050))


17.25.060 Final forms. 

(1) A final plat or final short plat shall be prepared on forms 18 inches by 24 inches in size, allowing for a two-inch border on one of the 18-inch sides, to allow for binding, and one-half-inch borders on the other three sides. The two-inch border will typically be on the top or left side depending on the configuration of the drawing.

(2) Forms shall be printed with materials acceptable for filing as specified in WAC 332-130-050 and be formatted consistent with forms provided by the Department. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.060))


17.25.070 Alterations of final plats. 

(1) Alterations shall be processed in accordance with RCW 58.17.215 through 58.17.218 and shall comply with regulations in effect at the time the alteration application was submitted. Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject subdivision to be altered or any portion to be altered. Requests for alterations shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution to compensate for review and recording.

(2) If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.

(3) Notice of alterations shall comply with the notice provisions of CMC Title 14. Mailing notification shall also include owners of each lot or parcel of property within the subdivision to be altered.

(4) An application shall be processed as a Type 3 permit pursuant to Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(5) After approval of an alteration, the applicant shall produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the final plat, to be processed in the same manner as set forth for final plats in this title. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 105; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.070))


17.25.080 Alterations of final short plats.

An applicant may request an alteration of a final short plat, subject to a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution to compensate for review and recording. Such alterations shall be consistent with the following requirements:

(1) Alterations shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new short subdivision application, as set forth in this chapter.

(2) Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject short plat to be altered or any portion to be altered.

(3) If the short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the short subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the short subdivision or portion thereof.

(4) Notice of alterations shall comply with the notice provisions of CMC Title 14.

(5) An alteration may be allowed to remove nonbuilding lot status on short subdivisions; provided, that no public dedications are required and original conditions of approval do not prohibit conversion of a nonbuilding lot to a building lot. Approval of such alteration requires completion of the original conditions of approval, and the application of new conditions for the lot, consistent with current standards, preparation of a new map page prepared by a land surveyor for recording and payment of all fees required for such review. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 106; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.080))


17.25.090 Vacations of a final plat or final short plat. 

(1) Plat and short plat vacations shall be processed as follows and in accordance with the provisions of RCW 58.17.212, subject to a fee for a request for vacation as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) All plat and short plat vacation applications shall be referred to the Hearing Examiner for public hearing and consideration.

(3) Applications for vacations of City streets may be processed pursuant to this chapter only when such vacations are proposed in conjunction with the vacation of the plat. Vacations limited to streets shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 35.79 RCW. (Ord. 13-19 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 107; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.16.090))


Chapter 17.30 BINDING SITE PLANS

Sections:

17.30.010    Purpose.

17.30.020    Applicability.

17.30.030    Requirements and limitations.

17.30.040    Alterations.

17.30.050    Vacations.

17.30.060    Recording.


17.30.010 Purpose. 

The purposes of this chapter are:

(1) To provide an alternative method for division of land for commercial and industrial zoned property, manufactured home parks, or condominiums;

(2) To allow the Director to modify interior lot-based or lot line requirements contained within the zoning, building, fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the City;

(3) To allow the Director to authorize sharing of open space, parking, access and other improvements among contiguous properties subject to the binding site plan; and

(4) To specify administrative requirements for binding site plans in addition to the procedural requirements of Chapters 14.30 through 14.45 CMC and in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Covington laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 02-09 § 10; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.010))


17.30.020 Applicability. 

(1) Any person seeking the use of a binding site plan process to divide property for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership of commercial or industrial zoned property, lease of manufactured homes or creation of condominium units is required to have an approved binding site plan prior to any property division, as provided for in Chapter 58.17, 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, and as required by this chapter. The binding site plan shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. A binding site plan for a condominium shall be based on a recorded final planned unit development, building permit, an as-built site plan for developed sites or a site development permit issued for the entire site or a general site plan showing the anticipated development plan for the entire site, notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 18.110.010 through 18.110.020.

(2) The site that is subject to the binding site plan shall consist of one or more contiguous lots.

(3) The site that is subject to the binding site plan may be reviewed independently for developed sites, concurrently with or subsequent to a site development permit application for undeveloped land or concurrently with or subsequent to a building permit application.

(4) The binding site plan process creates or alters lot lines and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. (Ord. 20-07 § 108; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.020))


17.30.030 Requirements and limitations. 

(1) The binding site plan shall ensure that the collective lots continue to function as one site with respect to, but not limited to, lot access, interior circulation, open space, landscaping, drainage facilities, facility maintenance and parking. 

(2) The binding site plan shall:

(a) Identify the areas and locations of all streets, addresses, roads, improvements, utilities, open spaces, sensitive areas, parking areas, landscaped areas, surveyed topography for preliminary map, water bodies and drainage features and building envelopes;

(b) Contain inscriptions or attachments setting forth such limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the Director or the Hearing Examiner; and

(c) Contain provisions requiring any development or division of land to be in conformance with the approved site plan.

(3) Conditions of use, maintenance and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access and other improvements shall be identified and enforced by covenants, easements or other similar mechanisms. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.030))


17.30.040 Alterations. 

(1) Alteration of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same process required for a new application as set forth in this chapter. Requests for alterations shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution.

(2) Changes to a building permit, planned unit development, subdivision or short subdivision, site development permit within a binding site plan area shall also require alteration of the binding site plan unless the Director determines that such changes are consistent with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. 20-07 § 109; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.040))


17.30.050 Vacations. 

(1) Vacation of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new binding site plan application, as set forth in this chapter. Requests for vacations shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. If a portion of a binding site plan is vacated, the property subject to the vacated portion shall constitute one lot unless the property is subsequently divided by an approved subdivision or short subdivision or another binding site plan.

(2) If a building permit or commercial site development permit is revised or expires, then the binding site plan shall be vacated unless the Director determines that the revision or expiration is consistent with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. 20-07 § 110; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.050))


17.30.060 Recording. 

(1) Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for registered land pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW shall be provided to the Department by the owner along with a copy of the last real estate transaction for all adjoining unplatted parcels.

(2) Prior to recording, the approved binding site plan shall be surveyed and the final recording forms shall be prepared by a land surveyor. A final binding site plan shall be prepared on forms 18 inches by 24 inches in size, allowing for a two-inch border on one of the 18-inch sides, to allow for binding, and one-half-inch borders on the other three sides. The two-inch border will typically be on the top or left side depending on the configuration of the drawing.

(3) The approved binding site plan recording documents shall include the following:

(a) Except for a binding site plan for a condominium, identification of lots by number on a binding site plan containing more than one lot. Tracts shall be similarly designated and each tract shall be clearly identified with the ownership and purpose;

(b) Signature and stamp of the land surveyor who prepared the binding site plan in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW;

(c) Reference to the recording number of the completed survey if the boundaries have been previously surveyed;

(d) Reference to all agreements or covenants required as a condition of approval;

(e) Notarized signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in the land being divided;

(f) Satisfaction of Health Department requirements (when applicable), unless previously approved on a recorded final planned unit development, a building permit, an as-built plan for developed sites or a site development permit for the entire site;

(g) Approval of the City of Covington Development Engineer;

(h) Approval of the Finance Director;

(i) Approval of the Director;

(j) Recording certificate required for signature of King County Records and Elections Division; and

(k) Department file number.

(4) A deposit to cover anticipated taxes and assessments is required for binding site plans pursuant to Chapter 58.08 RCW. The applicant shall be required to provide certification from the King County Office of Finance that property taxes for the subject property are not delinquent prior to issuance of a final approval.

(5) Lots, parcels or tracts created through the binding site plan procedure shall be legal lots of record. All provisions, conditions and requirements of the binding site plan shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or any other person acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any lot, parcel, or tract created pursuant to the binding site plan.

(6) No person shall sell, transfer or lease of any lot, tract or parcel created pursuant to the binding site plan that does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan or without binding site plan approval.

(7) The binding site plan shall set forth limitations and conditions, including irrevocable dedications of property and containing a provision that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved binding site plan. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.20.060))


Chapter 17.35 CONDOMINIUMS

Sections:

17.35.010    Purpose.

17.35.020    Final submittal requirements.

17.35.030    Notes.


17.35.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for review of a condominium survey map and plans for the precision and accuracy of the exterior boundary and legal description of the subject property, as shown on the final map. Such review shall be subject to a review fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 20-07 § 111; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.24.010))


17.35.020 Final submittal requirements. 

The following shall be submitted for approval of a condominium proposal:

(1) Two sets of prints of the final recording maps prepared in accordance with RCW 64.34.232;

(2) Legal description from title report dated within 30 days prior to recording;

(3) Boundary closure calculations and supporting surveys; and

(4) Copy of last real estate transaction for all adjoining unplatted parcels. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.24.020))


17.35.030 Notes. 

(1) The following notes shall be placed on the final condominium map page:

(a) Approval of the Community Development Department.

(b) The exterior boundary and legal description of this condominium meets or exceeds the review standards of the Department.

(c) The Department review consisted only of review of subsection (1)(a) of this section and does not constitute binding site plan approval as contemplated under RCW 58.17.040(7).

(2) A signature line for the Director shall appear following the notes required by this section. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.24.030))


Chapter 17.40 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT/LOT CONSOLIDATION

Sections:

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

17.40.030    Final approval and recording required.

17.40.040    Conceptual review.

17.40.050    Recording required.


17.40.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures and criteria for the review and approval of minor adjustments to boundary lines of legal lots or building sites in order to rectify defects in legal descriptions, to allow the enlargement or merging of lots to improve or qualify as a building site, to achieve increased setbacks from property lines or sensitive areas, to correct situations wherein an established use is located across a lot line, or for other similar purposes. Review and approval procedures shall be in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Covington laws, rules and regulations, including permit processing procedures required by Chapters 14.30 through 14.45 CMC, and shall be subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 02-09 § 11; Ord. 20-07 § 112; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.28.010))


17.40.020 Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

Adjustment of boundary lines between adjacent lots shall be consistent with the following review procedures, limitations and requirements of CMC Title 12 and the Design and Construction Standards adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC:

(1) Applications for boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed as a Type 1 permit as provided in Chapter 14.30 CMC. The review shall include examination for consistency with CMC Title 18, Chapter 16.05 CMC (Shoreline Master Program), applicable Board of Health regulations (if applicable), and, for lots which have already been developed, all adopted International Codes;

(2) Any adjustment of boundary lines must be approved by the Department prior to the transfer of property ownership between adjacent legal lots;

(3) A boundary line adjustment proposal shall not:

(a) Result in the creation of an additional lot or the creation of more than one additional building site;

(b) Result in a lot that does not qualify as a building site pursuant to this title;

(c) Relocate an entire lot from one parent parcel into another parent parcel;

(d) Reduce the overall area in a plat or short plat devoted to open space;

(e) Be inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for a recorded plat or short plat;

(f) Involve lots which do not have a common boundary; or

(g) Circumvent the subdivision or short subdivision procedures set forth in this title. Factors which indicate that the boundary line adjustment process is being used in a manner inconsistent with statutory intent include: numerous and frequent adjustments to the existing lot boundary, a proposal to move a lot or building site to a different location, and a large number of lots being proposed for a boundary line adjustment; 

(4) The elimination of lines between two or more lots for the purpose of creating a single lot that meets requirements as a building site shall in all cases be considered a minor adjustment of boundary lines and shall not be subject to the subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title; 

(5) Recognized lots in an approved site plan for a conditional use permit, special use permit, urban planned development, or commercial site development permit shall be considered a single site and no lot lines on the site may be altered by a boundary line adjustment to transfer density or separate lots to another property not included in the original site plan of the subject development;

(6) Lots that have been subject to a boundary line adjustment process that resulted in the qualification of an additional building site shall not be permitted to utilize the boundary line adjustment process again for five years to create an additional building site. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 27-16 § 12; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 8; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.28.020))


17.40.030 Final approval and recording required. 

(1) A title insurance certificate updated not more than 30 days prior to recording of the adjustment, which includes all parcels within the adjustment, must be submitted to the Department with boundary line adjustment final review documents. All persons having an ownership interest within the boundary line adjustment shall sign the final recording document in the presence of a notary public.

(2) Prior to final approval, documentation authorizing the transfer of property ownership shall be placed on the original boundary line map along with the legal descriptions of those portions of land being transferred when lots are under separate ownership. Lot lines within lots under the same ownership will be adjusted upon the recording of the boundary line adjustment.

(3) Final record-of-survey document must be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW. The document must contain a land surveyor’s certificate and a recording certificate.

(4) The final map page shall contain the following approval blocks:

(a) The King County Department of Assessments to be signed by the County Office of Records and Elections; and

(b) The Community Development Department, to be signed by the Director or his/her designee. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.28.030))


17.40.040 Conceptual review.

Prior to proceeding through the boundary line adjustment process, an applicant shall schedule a preapplication meeting. At that time the Department will perform a conceptual review based upon the information brought in by the applicant, two weeks prior to the meeting. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.28.040))


17.40.050 Recording required.

Verification that an approved boundary line adjustments has been recorded with the County Office of Records and Elections must be submitted to the City prior to issuance of any permit, or within one year of approval, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 53-02 § 2 (19A.28.050))

 


Title 18 ZONING

Chapters:

18.05    Zoning Code Adoption

18.10    Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration

18.15    Zones, Maps and Designations

18.20    Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions

18.25    Permitted Uses

18.30    Development Standards – Density and Dimensions

18.31    Downtown Development and Design Standards

18.33    Marijuana-Related Uses

18.35    Development Standards – Design Requirements

18.37    Development Standards and Design Requirements for Cottage Housing

18.40    Development Standards – Landscaping

18.45    Tree Preservation and Protection

18.47    Protection and Preservation of Landmarks, Landmark Sites and Districts

18.50    Development Standards – Parking and Circulation

18.55    Signs

18.60    Repealed

18.65    Critical Areas

18.70    Wireless Communication Facilities

18.70A    Small Wireless Facilities

18.75    Development Standards – Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services

18.80    Development Standards – Animals, Home Occupation, Home Industry

18.85    Nonconformance, Temporary Uses, and Re-Use of Facilities

18.90    Residential Density Incentives

18.95    Transfer of Residential Density Credits

18.100    Repealed

18.105    Repealed

18.110    Commercial Site Development Permits

18.114    Development Agreements

18.115    Repealed

18.120    Repealed

18.122    Repealed

18.125    Decision Criteria


Chapter 18.05 ZONING CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

18.05.010    Zoning code adopted.

18.05.020    Notification to tribes.

18.05.030    Transition to new code.

18.05.040    Drawings.

18.05.050    Periodic review.


18.05.010 Zoning code adopted.

Under the provisions of Article XI, Section 11 of the Washington State Constitution, this zoning code is adopted and declared to be the zoning code for the City of Covington until amended, repealed or superseded. This code also is enacted pursuant to and to implement the comprehensive plan in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.01.010))


18.05.020 Notification to tribes.

The City recognizes that many actions undertaken pursuant to this title, as amended, may impact treaty fishing rights of Federally recognized tribes. In order to honor and prevent interference with these treaty fishing rights and to provide for water quality and habitat preservation, the City shall provide notice to any Federally recognized tribes whose treaty fishing rights would be affected by an action undertaken pursuant to this title, including but not limited to: development of wetlands, stream and river banks, lakeshore habitat of water bodies, or development directly or indirectly affecting anadromous bearing water bodies, including the promulgation of plans, rules, regulations or ordinances implementing the provisions of this title, whether or not review of such actions is required under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.01.025))


18.05.030 Transition to new code. 

(1) Complete applications for conditional use permits, planned unit developments, binding site plans, right-of-way use permits, commercial site development permits, variances, unclassified use permits, or public agency and utility exceptions which were pending at the time this title took effect shall continue to be processed under those applicable zoning regulations governing review prior to implementation of this title except when a conditional use permit application has been submitted for a use that, under this title, no longer requires a conditional use permit, that conditional use permit shall not be a requirement for the vested development proposal. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this title, where approved, these permits shall continue to establish allowable uses on the property until permit expiration. Nothing in this subsection is intended to restrict otherwise vested applicant rights.

(2) Except for the requirements of CMC Title 19, any lot created by subdivision or short subdivision for which a complete subdivision or short subdivision application was submitted prior to adoption of this code may be developed pursuant to the standards in effect at the time of complete application. (Ord. 16-16 § 3; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.01.040))


18.05.040 Drawings.

The Department is hereby authorized after the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title to incorporate drawings as necessary for the purpose of illustrating concepts and regulatory standards contained in this title; provided, that the adopted provisions of the code shall control over such drawings. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.01.090))


18.05.050 Periodic review.

The Department shall submit an annual written report to the Council detailing issues relating to the implementation of the City of Covington zoning code and recommending amendments to address those issues. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.01.100))


Chapter 18.10 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

18.10.010    Title.

18.10.020    Purpose.

18.10.030    Conformity with this title required.

18.10.040    Minimum requirements.

18.10.050    Interpretation – General.

18.10.060    Interpretation – Standard industrial classification.

18.10.070    Interpretation – Zoning maps.

18.10.080    Administration and review authority.

18.10.090    Classification of right-of-way.


18.10.010 Title. 

This title shall be known as the City of Covington zoning code, hereinafter referred to as “this title.” (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.010))


18.10.020 Purpose.

The general purposes of this title are to:

(1) Encourage land use decision making in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of City of Covington and the State of Washington;

(2) Protect the general public health, safety, and welfare;

(3) Implement the City of Covington comprehensive plan’s policies and objectives and community vision statement through land use regulations;

(4) Provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

(5) Provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development; and

(6) Promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.030))


18.10.030 Conformity with this title required. 

(1) No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or otherwise changed except in conformance with this title.

(2) Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform to the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this title and CMC Title 17, Subdivisions.

(3) All land uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this title as well as any other applicable local, State or Federal law. Where a difference exists between this title and other County regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

(4) Where more than one part of this title applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.

(5) Temporary uses or activities, conducted during an emergency event, or training exercises conducted at emergency sites, designated pursuant to an emergency management plan, shall not be subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.040))


18.10.040 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.050))


18.10.050 Interpretation – General. 

(1) In case of inconsistency or conflict, regulations, conditions or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions or procedural requirements of general application.

(2) A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(3) In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, or implication between the text and any heading, caption, or illustration, the text and the permitted use tables in Chapter 18.25 CMC shall control, except for uses within the downtown zoning area, where CMC 18.31.080 shall control and uses within shoreline jurisdiction, where Chapter 16.05 CMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section or land use table.

(4) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this title, all words and terms used in this title shall have their customary meanings. (Ord. 09-19 § 7; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.060))


18.10.060 Interpretation – Standard industrial classification. 

(1) All references to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) are to the titles and descriptions found in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition, as amended, prepared by United States Office of Management and Budget which is hereby adopted by reference. The SIC is used, with modifications to suit the purposes of this title, to list and define land uses authorized to be located in the various zones consistent with the comprehensive plan land use map.

(2) The permitted use table and use determination process in CMC 18.31.080 shall apply to the downtown zone. The Director shall consider the direction in this chapter, but is not bound by this section or the SIC in making a use determination for proposals on properties in the downtown zone. 

(3) The SIC categorizes each land use under a general two-digit major group number, or under a more specific three- or four-digit industry group or industry number. A use shown on a land use table with a two-digit number includes all uses listed in the SIC for that major group. A use shown with a three-digit or four-digit number includes only the uses listed in the SIC for that industry group or industry. 

(4) An asterisk (*) in the SIC number column of a land use table means that the SIC definition for the specific land use identified has been modified by this title. The definition may include one or more SIC subclassification numbers, or may define the use without reference to the SIC. 

(5) The Director shall determine whether a proposed land use not specifically listed in a land use table or specifically included within a SIC classification is allowed in a zone. The Director’s determination shall be based on whether or not permitting the proposed use in a particular zone is consistent with the purposes of this title and the zone’s purpose as set forth in Chapter 18.15 CMC, by considering the following factors:

(a) The physical characteristics of the use and its supporting structures, including but not limited to scale, traffic and other impacts, and hours of operation;

(b) Whether or not the use complements or is compatible with other uses permitted in the zone; and

(c) The SIC classification, if any, assigned to the business or other entity that will carry on the primary activities of the proposed use. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.070))


18.10.070 Interpretation – Zoning maps.

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:

(1) Where boundaries are indicated as paralleling the approximate center line of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each adjacent boundary of the right-of-way. Nonroad-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owners lot;

(2) Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries;

(3) Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change the boundaries shall be considered to move with them; and

(4) If none of the rules of interpretation described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.080))


18.10.080 Administration and review authority. 

(1) The Hearing Examiner shall have authority to hold public hearings and make decisions and recommendations on subdivisions and other development proposals, and appeals, as set forth in Chapters 2.25, 14.30, 14.35, 14.40, and 14.45 CMC.

(2) The Director shall have the authority to grant, condition or deny applications for reasonable use permits, short plat applications, boundary line adjustments, and commercial site development permits, unless a public hearing is required as set forth in Chapter 14.30 CMC, in which case this authority shall be exercised by the Hearing Examiner.

(3) The Department shall have authority to grant, condition or deny commercial and residential building permits, grading and clearing permits, and temporary use permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(4) Except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this title, the Department shall have the sole authority to issue official interpretations of this title. (Ord. 11-17 § 1; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 01-09 § 18; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.090))


18.10.090 Classification of right-of-way. 

(1) Except when such areas are specifically designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, land contained in rights-of-way for streets or alleys, or railroads shall be considered unclassified.

(2) Within street or alley rights-of-way, uses shall be limited to street purposes as defined by law.

(3) Within railroad rights-of-way, allowed uses shall be limited to tracks, signals or other operating devices, movement of rolling stock, utility lines and equipment, and facilities accessory to and used directly for the delivery and distribution of services to abutting property.

(4) Where such right-of-way is vacated, the vacated area shall have the zone classification of the adjoining property with which it is first merged. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.02.110))


Chapter 18.15 ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

18.15.010    Zones and map designations established.

18.15.020    Zone and map designation purpose.

18.15.030    Repealed.

18.15.040    Urban separator zone.

18.15.050    Urban residential zone.

18.15.060    Neighborhood commercial zone.

18.15.070    Community commercial zone.

18.15.080    Downtown zone.

18.15.090    Regional commercial mixed-use zone.

18.15.100    Industrial zone.

18.15.110    Repealed.

18.15.120    Repealed.

18.15.130    Repealed.

18.15.140    Zoning maps and boundaries.


18.15.010 Zones and map designations established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this title, the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	Zoning Designations	Map Symbol

	Urban Separator	US (R-1)

	Urban Residential	R (base density in dwellings per acre)

	Neighborhood Commercial	NC

	Mixed Residential	MR

	Community Commercial	CC

	Downtown Zone	DN (further specified by district)

	Town Center District	TC

	Mixed Commercial District	MC

	General Commercial District	GC

	Mixed Housing/Office District	MHO

	Industrial	I

	Regional Commercial Mixed-Use	RCMU

(Ord. 11-17 § 2; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.010))


18.15.020 Zone and map designation purpose.

The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in the City. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.020))


18.15.030 Mineral zone. 

Repealed by Ord. 11-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.050))


18.15.040 Urban separator zone. 

(1) The purposes of the urban separator zone (US) are to phase growth and demand for urban services, and to reserve large tracts of land for possible future growth in portions of areas designated by the comprehensive plan for future urban growth while allowing reasonable interim uses of property; or to reflect designation by the comprehensive plan of a property or area as part of the urban growth area when a detailed plan for urban uses and densities has not been completed; or when the area has been designated as a site for future development or annexation. These purposes are accomplished by: 

(a) Allowing for limited residential growth, contiguous to existing urban public facilities; and 

(b) Requiring clustered residential developments, where feasible, to prevent establishment of uses and lot patterns which may foreclose future alternatives and impede efficient later development at urban densities. 

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in urban areas, designated by the comprehensive plan, when such areas do not have adequate public facilities and services or are not yet needed to accommodate planned growth, or do not yet have detailed land use plans for urban uses and densities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.070))


18.15.050 Urban residential zone.

(1) The purpose of the urban residential zone (R) is to implement comprehensive plan goals and policies for housing quality, diversity and affordability, and to efficiently use urban residential land, public services and energy. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Providing, in the R-1 (urban separator) through R-12 zones, for a mix of predominantly single detached dwelling units and other development types, with a variety of densities and sizes;

(b) Providing, in the R-18 (multifamily) zone, a mix of higher densities and greater variety of housing uses;

(c) Allowing only those accessory and complementary nonresidential uses that are compatible with urban residential communities;

(d) Establishing density designations to facilitate advanced area-wide planning for public facilities and services, and to protect environmentally sensitive sites from overdevelopment; and

(e) Providing, in the MR (mixed residential) zone, a variety of housing types at a range of densities not provided by the other urban residential zoning districts. These purposes are accomplished by allowing a mixture of residential uses while limiting nonresidential uses to neighborhood-serving commercial uses that are complementary and supportive of mixed density housing development.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate as follows:

(a) The urban separator (R-1) zone on or adjacent to lands with area-wide environmental constraints where development is required to cluster away from sensitive areas, on lands designated urban separators or wildlife habitat network where development is required to cluster away from the axis of the corridor on critical aquifer recharge areas, and on regionally and locally significant resource areas (RSRAs/LSRAs) or in well-established subdivisions of the same density, which are served at the time of development by public or private facilities and services adequate to support planned densities; and

(b) The R-4 through R-18 zones and the MR zone on lands that are predominantly environmentally unconstrained and are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.080))


18.15.060 Neighborhood commercial zone. 

The purpose of the neighborhood commercial zone (NC) is to provide convenient daily retail and personal services within a local neighborhood while minimizing impacts of commercial activities on nearby properties outside of the commercial center, and to provide for limited residential development. These purposes are accomplished by:

(1) Limiting nonresidential uses to those retail or personal services, which can serve the everyday needs of a local neighborhood;

(2) Excluding industrial, community commercial and community/regional business-scaled uses;

(3) Maximum building size is limited to 5,000 gross square feet. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.090))


18.15.070 Community commercial zone. 

(1) The purpose of the community commercial zone (CC) is to provide convenient daily retail and personal services for a limited service area and to minimize impacts of commercial activities on nearby properties outside of the commercial center, and to provide for limited residential development. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Limiting nonresidential uses to those retail or personal services, which can serve the everyday needs of a surrounding urban or rural residential area;

(b) Allowing for mixed-use (housing and retail/service) developments;

(c) Excluding industrial and community/regional business-scaled uses;

(d) Maximum building size is limited to 30,000 gross square feet.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in urban neighborhood commercial centers, on sites which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers when located in urban areas, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.095))


18.15.080 Downtown zone. 

The following zoning districts are established within the downtown zone to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by implementing the goals and policies adopted in the City of Covington Downtown Element of the Comprehensive Plan. The district intent statements define the specific purpose of each district. They shall be the policies of the City of Covington Downtown Element of the Comprehensive Plan, serve as a guide for determining the appropriate location of uses, help determine appropriate conditions for development within the downtown zone, and help the Director interpret the standards and provisions of this chapter.

(1) The town center district (TC) is the pedestrian-oriented core of downtown and allows the most intensive level of development. The emphasis of this district is on mixed-use development that includes pedestrian-oriented retail, high density residential development, and civic uses. The development of a walkable street grid and a central public gathering space are key objectives of this district. To meet goals for a pedestrian-oriented town center, limited large-format retail uses are permitted, and such uses are subject to a conditional use permit and additional design criteria provided in CMC 18.31.040. 

(2) The mixed commercial district (MC) is applied to the majority of the Covington downtown zone. This district encourages a mix of commercial and multi-story residential uses, public uses, and allows for large-format and auto-oriented retail, provided they meet pedestrian-oriented design standards that are more flexible than those applied to the town center district. Achieving a high level of connectivity with new and improved streets and trails is a major goal in this district.

(3) The general commercial district (GC) is applied to a limited area of the downtown and is intended to allow the widest range of uses, coupled with more limited design standards than other areas of downtown. Permitted uses include commercial and light industrial uses, offices, major transportation and utility facilities, and residential uses that are appropriately buffered to ensure compatibility. Development and design standards are less prescriptive and provide greater flexibility to accommodate the intended uses. 

(4) The mixed housing/office district (MHO) is applied to areas where infill development and redevelopment of low intensity areas with multifamily housing and office is encouraged. Residential uses that are encouraged in this district include townhouses, cottages, and low-rise multifamily. Office development and limited intensity neighborhood retail is also permitted. Development and design standards applied to this district require buffers, lower height limits and building scale that is appropriate to the size of the lot. Trail connections are also emphasized in this district. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.100))


18.15.090 Regional commercial mixed-use zone.

(1) The purpose of the regional commercial mixed-use zone (RCMU) is to provide regional-scale retail and service uses in a well designed urban village setting that may include a limited amount of high density residential uses. These purposes shall be accomplished by:

(a) Concentrating large-scale commercial uses to facilitate efficient provision of public services and to minimize incompatibilities with residential uses;

(b) Encouraging compact development to accommodate integrated open space and natural features, as well as recreational amenities;

(c) Allowing for both horizontal and vertical mixed-use development, including a mix of commercial and residential uses; and

(d) Other public benefits consistent with the comprehensive plan policies as approved by the city council.

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate in commercial centers with adequate access to the regional transportation network. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.15.100 Industrial zone. 

(1) The purpose of the industrial zone (I) is to provide for the location and grouping of industrial enterprises and activities involving manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, bulk handling and storage, research facilities, warehousing, power generation and heavy trucking. It is also a purpose of this zone to protect the industrial land base for industrial economic development and employment opportunities. These purposes are accomplished by:

(a) Allowing for a wide range of industrial and manufacturing uses;

(b) Establishing appropriate development standards and public review procedures for industrial activities with the greatest potential for adverse impacts; and 

(c) Limiting residential, institutional, commercial, office and other nonindustrial uses to those necessary for the convenience of industrial activities. 

(2) Use of this zone is appropriate where designated by the comprehensive plan and served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.130))


18.15.110 Map designation – Regional use designation. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.140))


18.15.120 Map designation – Special district overlay.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.160))


18.15.130 Map designation – Interim zoning.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.180))


18.15.140 Zoning maps and boundaries. 

(1) The location and boundaries of the zones defined by this chapter shall be shown and delineated on zoning maps adopted by ordinance.

(2) Changes in the boundaries of the zones, including application or amendment of interim zoning, shall be made by ordinance adopting or amending a zoning map.

(3) Zoning maps are available for public review at the Department of Community Development permit center during business hours. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.04.190))


Chapter 18.20 TECHNICAL TERMS AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.20.005    Scope of chapter.

18.20.007    Abandoned vehicle.

18.20.010    Accessory living quarters.

18.20.015    Accessory use, commercial/industrial.

18.20.020    Accessory use, residential.

18.20.025    Accessory use, resource.

18.20.026    Active recreation space.

18.20.027    Adjustment factor.

18.20.035    Adult entertainment business.

18.20.039    Agricultural drainage.

18.20.040    Agricultural product sales.

18.20.042    Agriculture training facility.

18.20.050    Airport/heliport.

18.20.053    AKART.

18.20.055    Alley.

18.20.056    Alteration.

18.20.057    Alternative water sources.

18.20.059    Amenity area.

18.20.060    Amusement arcades.

18.20.062    Ancillary wireless communication facility.

18.20.065    Animal, domestic.

18.20.066    Animal unit.

18.20.067    Antenna(s).

18.20.068    Antenna(s) array.

18.20.068.5    Antenna(s), flush-mounted.

18.20.070    Applicant.

18.20.072    Application rate.

18.20.072.5    Aquatic area.

18.20.072.8    Articulate.

18.20.073    Artist studio.

18.20.074    Asphalt plant.

18.20.075    Auction house.

18.20.077    Bank stabilization.

18.20.080    Base flood.

18.20.085    Base flood elevation.

18.20.087    Basement.

18.20.088    Basin plan.

18.20.089.3    Battery charging station.

18.20.089.6    Battery exchange station.

18.20.090    Bed and breakfast guesthouse.

18.20.095    Repealed.

18.20.096    Belt course.

18.20.097    Berm.

18.20.098    Best management practice.

18.20.100    Billboard.

18.20.105    Bioengineering.

18.20.110    Biologist, qualified.

18.20.112    Bog.

18.20.115    Book, stationery, video and art supply store.

18.20.120    Broadleaf tree.

18.20.122    Buffer, critical area.

18.20.123    Buffer and transition zone, downtown.

18.20.125    Building.

18.20.135    Building envelope.

18.20.140    Building facade.

18.20.145    Building, hardware and garden materials store.

18.20.146    Building height.

18.20.150    Bulk gas storage tanks.

18.20.155    Bulk retail.

18.20.157    Business services.

18.20.160    Campground.

18.20.162    Canopy.

18.20.165    Capacity, school.

18.20.168    Capital facilities plan, parks and recreation.

18.20.170    Capital facilities plan, school.

18.20.171    Capital facilities plan, transportation.

18.20.172    Catastrophic collapse.

18.20.175    Cattery.

18.20.180    Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.

18.20.181    Channel.

18.20.181.5    Channel edge.

18.20.182    Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

18.20.183    Repealed.

18.20.184    Repealed.

18.20.184.5    Channel migration zone.

18.20.184.8    Charging levels.

18.20.185    Church, synagogue or temple.

18.20.190    Classrooms, school.

18.20.195    Clearing.

18.20.205    Cogeneration.

18.20.207    Commercial recreation.

18.20.210    Communication facility, major.

18.20.215    Communication facility, minor.

18.20.217    Community identification sign.

18.20.220    Community residential facility (CRF).

18.20.223    Commuter parking lot.

18.20.225    Compensatory storage.

18.20.230    Conditional use permit.

18.20.235    Conference center.

18.20.240    Confinement area.

18.20.245    Consolidation.

18.20.247    Construction and trades.

18.20.250    Construction cost per student, school.

18.20.252    Conversion factor.

18.20.252.3    Cornice.

18.20.252.5    Craft sales.

18.20.253    Critical aquifer recharge area.

18.20.254    Critical area.

18.20.255    Critical drainage area.

18.20.260    Repealed.

18.20.262    Daily care.

18.20.265    Day care.

18.20.270    Deciduous.

18.20.275    Density credit, transfer (TDC).

18.20.280    Department.

18.20.285    Department and variety store.

18.20.290    Destination resort.

18.20.295    Developer or applicant.

18.20.300    Development activity.

18.20.305    Development agreement.

18.20.310    Development proposal.

18.20.315    Development proposal site.

18.20.320    Direct traffic impact.

18.20.325    Director.

18.20.327    Ditch.

18.20.329    Dormer.

18.20.330    Dormitory.

18.20.331    Repealed.

18.20.331.5    Repealed.

18.20.332    Drainage basin.

18.20.333    Drainage facility.

18.20.334    Drainage sub-basin.

18.20.334.3    Drive-through.

18.20.335    Drop box facility.

18.20.340    Drug store.

18.20.342    Duplex.

18.20.345    Dwelling unit.

18.20.350    Dwelling unit, accessory.

18.20.355    Dwelling unit, multifamily.

18.20.365    Dwelling unit, single-family attached.

18.20.370    Dwelling unit, single-family detached.

18.20.375    Earth station.

18.20.377    Ecosystem.

18.20.380    Effective radiated power.

18.20.385    Electric scooters and motorcycles.

18.20.385.3    Electric vehicle.

18.20.385.6    Electric vehicle charging station.

18.20.385.9    Electric vehicle charging station – Restricted.

18.20.385.12    Electric vehicle charging station – Public.

18.20.385.15    Electric vehicle infrastructure.

18.20.385.18    Electric vehicle parking space.

18.20.390    Electrical substation.

18.20.392    Emergency.

18.20.393    Emergency care facility.

18.20.395    Energy resource recovery facility.

18.20.397    Engineer, civil, geotechnical and structural.

18.20.400    Enhancement.

18.20.405    Equipment, heavy.

18.20.410    Erosion.

18.20.415    Erosion hazard area.

18.20.418    Essential public facility.

18.20.420    Evergreen.

18.20.425    Examiner.

18.20.427    Expansion.

18.20.430    Fabric shop.

18.20.433    Facade.

18.20.435    Facilities standard.

18.20.440    Factory-built commercial building.

18.20.445    Fairground.

18.20.450    Family.

18.20.451.5    Farmers’ market.

18.20.452    Feasible.

18.20.455    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway.

18.20.460    Feed store.

18.20.461    Federal Emergency Management Agency.

18.20.463    Fen.

18.20.465    Fence.

18.20.467    Financial guarantee.

18.20.468    Fire capital facilities and equipment plan.

18.20.468.5    Fire protection facilities.

18.20.469    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

18.20.470    Flood fringe, zero-rise.

18.20.475    Flood hazard area.

18.20.477    Flood hazard boundary map.

18.20.478    Flood hazard data.

18.20.480    Flood insurance rate map.

18.20.485    Flood insurance study for Covington.

18.20.490    Flood protection elevation.

18.20.492    Flood protection facility.

18.20.495    Floodplain.

18.20.500    Floodproofing, dry.

18.20.505    Floodway, zero-rise.

18.20.507    Floor area ratio (FAR).

18.20.510    Florist shop.

18.20.512    Footprint.

18.20.513    Footprint, development.

18.20.515    Repealed.

18.20.520    Forest practice.

18.20.521    Forest practice, Class IV-G nonconversion.

18.20.525    Forest product sales.

18.20.530    Forest research.

18.20.531    Fowl.

18.20.532    Fully accessible.

18.20.533    Fully contained community (FCC).

18.20.535    Furniture and home furnishings store.

18.20.536    Gable roof.

18.20.537    Gambling.

18.20.540    General business service.

18.20.545    Geologist.

18.20.550    Geotechnical engineer.

18.20.555    Golf course facility.

18.20.556    Government services.

18.20.557    Grade.

18.20.560    Grade span.

18.20.565    Grading.

18.20.570    Grazing area.

18.20.575    Ground cover.

18.20.575.5    Repealed.

18.20.576    Group assembly.

18.20.577    Habitat.

18.20.578    Habitat, fish.

18.20.580    Hazardous household substance.

18.20.582    Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipeline.

18.20.585    Hazardous substance.

18.20.590    Heavy equipment and truck repair.

18.20.595    Helistop.

18.20.596    Hip roof.

18.20.597    Repealed.

18.20.598    Repealed.

18.20.599    Historical flood hazard information.

18.20.599.5    Hive.

18.20.600    Hobby, toy, and game shop.

18.20.605    Home industry.

18.20.610    Home occupation.

18.20.611    Hospital.

18.20.613    Hotel.

18.20.615    Household pets.

18.20.620    Hydroelectric generation facility.

18.20.621    Impact fee.

18.20.621.1    Impact fee schedule.

18.20.622    Impacts.

18.20.625    Impervious surface.

18.20.627    Impoundment.

18.20.630    Improved public roadways.

18.20.632    Repealed.

18.20.635    Individual transportation and taxi.

18.20.636    Industrial, light.

18.20.637    Infiltration rate.

18.20.637.1    In-lieu fee program.

18.20.638    In-stream structure.

18.20.640    Interim recycling facility.

18.20.641    Interlocal agreement.

18.20.641.5    Invasive vegetation.

18.20.642    Irrigation efficiency.

18.20.645    Jail.

18.20.650    Jail farm.

18.20.655    Jewelry store.

18.20.658    Joint use driveway.

18.20.659    Joint use parking.

18.20.660    Kennel.

18.20.661    Kick plate.

18.20.662    Kitchen or kitchen facility.

18.20.665    Landfill.

18.20.667    Landscape water features.

18.20.670    Landscaping.

18.20.675    Landslide.

18.20.680    Landslide hazard area.

18.20.682    Large format retail trade and services.

18.20.683A    Letter of map amendment.

18.20.683B    Letter of map revision.

18.20.684    Level of service (LOS), fire.

18.20.685    Level of service (LOS), traffic.

18.20.690    Light equipment.

18.20.695    Livestock.

18.20.697    Livestock facility.

18.20.700    Livestock, large.

18.20.705    Livestock sales.

18.20.710    Livestock, small.

18.20.715    Loading space.

18.20.720    Log storage.

18.20.725    Lot.

18.20.727    Lot frontage.

18.20.730    Lot line, interior.

18.20.732    Low impact development.

18.20.733    Maintenance.

18.20.735    Manufactured home.

18.20.740    Manufactured home park.

18.20.741    Manufacturing, heavy.

18.20.742    Manufacturing, light.

18.20.743    Mapping partner.

18.20.744    Marijuana.

18.20.744.1    Marijuana processor.

18.20.744.2    Marijuana producer.

18.20.744.3    Marijuana retail outlet.

18.20.744.4    Marijuana retailer.

18.20.744.5    Marijuana-infused products.

18.20.744.6    Marijuana, useable.

18.20.745    Marina.

18.20.748    Market manager.

18.20.749    Mass.

18.20.750    Material error.

18.20.750.5    Medical office.

18.20.751    Microwave.

18.20.752    Mitigation.

18.20.753    Mitigation bank.

18.20.755    Mitigation banking.

18.20.757    Maximum extent practical.

18.20.760    Mixed-use development.

18.20.765    Monitoring.

18.20.770    Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales.

18.20.775    Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing.

18.20.780    Motor vehicle, boat and mobile home dealer.

18.20.782    Mulch.

18.20.783    Museum.

18.20.785    Repealed.

18.20.790    Native vegetation.

18.20.795    Repealed.

18.20.797    Net buildable area.

18.20.800    Nonconformance.

18.20.805    Nonhydroelectric generation facility.

18.20.810    Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).

18.20.815    Noxious weed.

18.20.816    Nursing and personal care facility.

18.20.817    Off-street required parking lot.

18.20.819    Open space.

18.20.820    Open-work fence.

18.20.825    Ordinary high water line.

18.20.827    Outdoor commercial.

18.20.829    Outdoor performance center.

18.20.830    Outpatient clinic.

18.20.831    Overburden-cover-to-seam-thickness ratio.

18.20.832    Overspray.

18.20.833    Parapet.

18.20.834    Parcel.

18.20.835    Park and recreation facilities.

18.20.840    Park service area.

18.20.845    Parking lot aisle.

18.20.850    Parking lot unit depth.

18.20.855    Parking space.

18.20.860    Parking space angle.

18.20.865    Party of record (POR).

18.20.870    Peak hour.

18.20.872    Pedestrian orientation.

18.20.873    Pedestrian walkway.

18.20.874    Performing arts center.

18.20.875    Permanent school facilities.

18.20.875.5    Person.

18.20.876    Personal service.

18.20.880    Personal medical supply store.

18.20.885    Pet shop.

18.20.890    Photographic and electronic shop.

18.20.893    Physical fitness/recreation club.

18.20.895    Repealed.

18.20.897    Repealed.

18.20.898    Preliminary flood insurance rate map.

18.20.899    Potable water.

18.20.899.3    Preapplication.

18.20.899.5    Preliminary flood insurance study.

18.20.899.6    Premises.

18.20.899.7    Prepared food sales.

18.20.900    Private.

18.20.905    Repealed.

18.20.908    Processed food sales.

18.20.910    Professional office.

18.20.912    Proportionate share.

18.20.915    Public agency.

18.20.920    Public agency animal control facility.

18.20.925    Public agency archive.

18.20.930    Office, public agency or utility.

18.20.935    Yard, public agency or utility.

18.20.940    Public agency training facility.

18.20.940.5    Public market.

18.20.941    Public road right-of-way structure.

18.20.942    Public street.

18.20.943    Public transportation amenities.

18.20.945    Repealed.

18.20.947    Rapid charging station.

18.20.950    Reasonable use.

18.20.955    Receiving site.

18.20.957    Reclamation.

18.20.960    Recreational vehicle (RV).

18.20.965    Recreational vehicle parks.

18.20.966    Recreation, indoor.

18.20.967    Recreation, outdoor.

18.20.970    Recyclable material.

18.20.972    Repealed.

18.20.973    Regional road maintenance guidelines.

18.20.975    Repealed.

18.20.980    Regional utility corridor.

18.20.985    Relocatable facilities cost per student.

18.20.990    Relocatable facility.

18.20.995    Relocation facilities.

18.20.997    Repair.

18.20.998    Replace.

18.20.999    Reseller.

18.20.999.5    Residence.

18.20.1000    Restoration.

18.20.1005    Retail, comparison.

18.20.1010    Retail, convenience.

18.20.1010.3    Retail trade and services.

18.20.1011    Retaining wall.

18.20.1012    Road amenities.

18.20.1012.5    Roadway.

18.20.1013    Runoff.

18.20.1015    Salmonid.

18.20.1016    Salmonid migration barrier.

18.20.1020    School bus base.

18.20.1025    School district.

18.20.1030    School district support facility.

18.20.1033    Schools, compulsory.

18.20.1035    Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high.

18.20.1040    Schools, secondary or high school.

18.20.1042    Scour.

18.20.1045    Seismic hazard areas.

18.20.1050    Self-service storage facility.

18.20.1055    Sending site.

18.20.1060    Senior citizen.

18.20.1062    Senior citizen assisted housing.

18.20.1065    Repealed.

18.20.1068    Service area.

18.20.1070    Setback.

18.20.1072    Shelter, animal.

18.20.1075    Shelters for temporary placement.

18.20.1080    Shooting range.

18.20.1083    Shoreline.

18.20.1084    Side channel.

18.20.1085    Sign.

18.20.1090    –

18.20.1166    Repealed.

18.20.1167    Significant tree.

18.20.1170    Site.

18.20.1172    Site area.

18.20.1175    Site cost per student.

18.20.1177    SITUS file.

18.20.1178    Slope.

18.20.1185    Soil recycling facility.

18.20.1190    Source-separated organic material.

18.20.1195    Special use permit.

18.20.1200    Specialized instruction school.

18.20.1210    Sporting goods store.

18.20.1215    Sports club.

18.20.1220    Stable.

18.20.1225    Standard of service, school districts.

18.20.1230    Steep slope hazard areas.

18.20.1231    Stormwater.

18.20.1232    Stormwater management facility.

18.20.1233    Stormwater manuals.

18.20.1235    Stream functions.

18.20.1240    Stream.

18.20.1245    Street.

18.20.1250    Street frontage.

18.20.1252    Street wall.

18.20.1255    Structure.

18.20.1256    Structure, electrical transmission.

18.20.1257    Structured parking.

18.20.1260    Student factor.

18.20.1265    Submerged land.

18.20.1266    Substantial improvement.

18.20.1267.3    Surface water.

18.20.1267.5    Repealed.

18.20.1268    Surface water discharge.

18.20.1268.5    System improvements.

18.20.1269    TDC.

18.20.1270    TDC amenities.

18.20.1271    TDC bank fund.

18.20.1272    TDC conversion ratio.

18.20.1273    TDC executive board.

18.20.1274    Temporary lodging/hotel.

18.20.1275    Temporary use permit.

18.20.1277    Theater.

18.20.1278    Theatrical production services.

18.20.1280    Tightline sewer.

18.20.1282    Tower, guy.

18.20.1283    Tower, lattice.

18.20.1283.5    Tower, monopole.

18.20.1284    Tower, wireless communication facility.

18.20.1284.5    Tower-mounted facilities.

18.20.1284.7    Townhouse/townhome.

18.20.1285    Trails.

18.20.1290    Transfer station.

18.20.1295    Transit base.

18.20.1305    Transitional housing facilities.

18.20.1315    Transmission line booster station.

18.20.1330    Transportation system management (TSM).

18.20.1331    Tree, hazard.

18.20.1332    Repealed.

18.20.1335    Ultimate roadway section.

18.20.1340    Repealed.

18.20.1345    Use.

18.20.1347    Utility corridor.

18.20.1348    Utility facility.

18.20.1349    Utilities, major or utility facility, major.

18.20.1350    Utilities, minor or utility facility, minor.

18.20.1351    Utility pole.

18.20.1352    Vactor waste.

18.20.1353    Vactor waste receiving facility.

18.20.1355    Variance.

18.20.1360    Vegetation.

18.20.1365    Vocational school.

18.20.1375    Warehousing and wholesale trade.

18.20.1380    Wastewater treatment facility.

18.20.1382    Repealed.

18.20.1385    Water dependent use.

18.20.1386    Wellhead protection area.

18.20.1390    Repealed.

18.20.1393    Repealed.

18.20.1394    Wetland creation.

18.20.1395    Wetland delineation.

18.20.1397    Wetland enhancement.

18.20.1400    Wetland, forested.

18.20.1405    Wetland functions.

18.20.1410    Wetland, isolated.

18.20.1415    Wetland.

18.20.1415.1    Wetland of high conservation value.

18.20.1416    Wetland re-establishment.

18.20.1417    Wetland rehabilitation.

18.20.1418    Wetland vegetation class.

18.20.1420    Wetpond.

18.20.1422    Wildlife.

18.20.1423    Wildlife habitat conservation area.

18.20.1424    Wildlife habitat network.

18.20.1425    Repealed.

18.20.1426    Wireless communication facility.

18.20.1427    Wireless communication facility, building-mounted.

18.20.1428    Wireless communication facility, concealed facility.

18.20.1429    Wireless communication facility equipment enclosure.

18.20.1429.1    Wireless communication facility equipment compound.

18.20.1429.2    Wireless communication facility, feed lines or coaxial cables.

18.20.1429.3    Wireless telecommunication carrier.

18.20.1430    Work release facility.

18.20.1432    Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle.

18.20.1435    Yard or organic waste processing facility.


18.20.005 Scope of chapter. 

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout the code and definitions of land uses listed in tables in Chapter 18.25 CMC. The definitions in this chapter supplement the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). See Chapter 18.10 CMC for rules on interpretation of the code, including use of these definitions. Development standards are found in Chapters 18.30 through 18.95 CMC. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.005))


18.20.007 Abandoned vehicle. 

An “abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle left upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of such property for a period of 24 hours or longer, except that a vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if its owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.007))


18.20.010 Accessory living quarters. 

“Accessory living quarters” means living quarters in an accessory building for the use of the occupant or persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use of guests of the occupant. Such quarters have no kitchen and are not otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.010))


18.20.015 Accessory use, commercial/industrial. 

“Accessory use, commercial/industrial” means: 

(1) A use that is subordinate and incidental to a commercial or industrial use, including but not limited to the following uses:

(a) Administrative offices;

(b) Employee exercise facilities;

(c) Employee food service facilities;

(d) Incidental storage of raw materials and finished products sold or manufactured on-site;

(e) Business owner or caretaker residence;

(f) Cogeneration facilities; 

(g) Ground maintenance facilities; and

(h) Electric vehicle charging stations.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.015))


18.20.020 Accessory use, residential. 

“Accessory use, residential” means:

(1) A use, structure, or activity which is subordinate and incidental to a residence including but not limited to the following uses: 

(a) Accessory living quarters and dwellings;

(b) Fallout/bomb shelters;

(c) Keeping household pets;

(d) On-site rental office; 

(e) Pools, private docks, piers;

(f) Antennas for private telecommunication services;

(g) Storage of yard maintenance equipment; 

(h) Storage of private vehicles, e.g., motor vehicles, boats, trailers or planes; 

(i) Greenhouses; or

(j) Electric vehicle charging stations.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.020))


18.20.025 Accessory use, resource.

“Accessory use, resource” means:

(1) A use, structure, or part of a structure, which is customarily subordinate and incidental to a resource use including, but not limited to, the following uses: 

(a) Housing of agricultural workers; or

(b) Storage of agricultural products or equipment used on site.

(2) Some accessory uses within the scope of this section may be defined separately to enable the code to apply different conditions of approval. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.025))


18.20.026 Active recreation space.

“Active recreation space” means recreation space that recognizes a higher level of public use than passive recreation space, and that will be developed for organized or intense recreation. Active recreation space includes both the active recreation uses and all necessary support services and facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.026))


18.20.027 Adjustment factor.

“Adjustment factor” means a factor that, when applied to the reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiently. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.027))


18.20.035 Adult entertainment business.

“Adult entertainment business” means an adult club, adult arcade or adult theater as those terms are defined in the adult entertainment licensing provisions in CMC Title 5. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.035))


18.20.039 Agricultural drainage.

“Agricultural drainage” means any stream, ditch, tile system, pipe or culvert primarily used to drain fields for horticultural or livestock activities. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.040 Agricultural product sales.

“Agricultural product sales” means the retail sale of items resulting form the practice of agriculture, including crops such as fruits, vegetables, grains, seed, feed, and plants, or animal products such as eggs, milk, and meat. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.040))


18.20.042 Agriculture training facility.

“Agriculture training facility” means an establishment developed for use by the property owner, its employees, and/or agricultural trainees for training activities which are related to or supportive of the agricultural use of the property and surrounding agricultural activities. Agriculture training facilities may include overnight lodging, meeting rooms, and educational activities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.042))


18.20.050 Airport/heliport.

“Airport/heliport” means any runway, landing area or other facility, excluding facilities for the primary use of the individual property owner which are classified as helistops, designed or used by public carriers or private aircraft for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including the following associated facilities:

(1) Taxiways;

(2) Aircraft storage and tie-down areas;

(3) Hangars;

(4) Servicing; and

(5) Passenger and air freight terminals. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.050))


18.20.053 AKART.

“AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment. AKART represents the most current methodology that can be reasonably required for preventing, controlling, or abating the pollutants associated with a discharge. The concept of AKART applies to both point and nonpoint sources of pollution. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.20.055 Alley. 

“Alley” means an improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designed for general traffic circulation. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.055))


18.20.056 Alteration.

“Alteration” means any human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact upon the existing condition of a critical area or its buffer. “Alteration” includes, but is not limited to, grading, filling, dredging, channelizing, applying herbicides or pesticides or any hazardous substance, discharging pollutants except storm water, grazing domestic animals, paving, constructing, applying gravel, modifying topography for surface water management purposes, cutting, pruning, topping, trimming, relocating or removing vegetation or any other human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact to existing vegetation, hydrology, fish or wildlife or their habitats. “Alteration” does not include passive recreation such as walking, fishing or any other similar activities. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.057 Alternative water sources.

“Alternative water sources” means stored rainwater, or treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for uses such as landscape irrigation. Such water is not considered potable. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.057))


18.20.059 Amenity area.

“Amenity area” means the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb and the clear walk zone of the sidewalk where trees, lighting, and street furnishings are often located. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.060 Amusement arcades. 

“Amusement arcades” means a building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games, or other such player-operator amusement devices (excluding juke boxes or gambling-related machines) are operated. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.060))


18.20.062 Ancillary wireless communication facility.

“Ancillary wireless communication facilities” means any facilities, component, part, equipment, mounting hardware, feed lines, or appurtenance associated with, attached to, or a part of a tower, pole, antenna, ancillary structures, equipment enclosures, or facilities equipment compound, and located within, above, or below the facilities equipment compound. Also includes any form of development associated with a wireless communications facility, including but not limited to foundations, concrete slabs on grade, guy anchors and transmission cable supports. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.065 Animal, domestic.

“Animal, domestic” means any animal other than livestock that lives and breeds in a tame condition including, but not limited to: dogs, cats, small birds, hares, rabbits, hamsters, guinea pigs, nonvenomous reptiles and amphibians, and other animals normally associated with a dwelling unit which are kept as household pets. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.065))


18.20.066 Animal unit.

“Animal unit” means one equine or bovine, two ponies, or five small livestock. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.067 Antenna(s).

“Antenna(s)” means an apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information services. For purposes of this definition, the term “antenna” does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under 47 CFR Part 15. (Ord. 03-19 § 4; Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.067))


18.20.068 Antenna(s) array.

“Antenna(s) array” means one or more antennas and their associated ancillary facilities that share a common attachment device, such as a mounting frame or mounting support. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.068.5 Antenna(s), flush-mounted.

“Antennas, flush-mounted” are antennas or antenna array attached directly to the face of the tower, pole, or building, such that no portion of the antenna extends above the height of the tower, pole, or building. Where a maximum flush mounting distance is given, that distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the support structure or building to the inside edge of the antenna. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.070 Applicant. 

“Applicant” means a property owner, a public agency or a public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement under RCW 8.08.040, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.070))


18.20.072 Application rate. 

“Application rate” means the depth of water applied to an area expressed in inches per hour. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.072))


18.20.072.5 Aquatic area.

“Aquatic area” means any nonwetland water feature including all shorelines of the State, rivers, streams, marine waters, inland bodies of open water including lakes and ponds, reservoirs and conveyance systems and impoundments of these features if any portion of the feature is formed from a stream or wetland and if any stream or wetland contributing flows is not created solely as a consequence of storm water pond construction. “Aquatic area” does not include water features that are entirely artificially collected or conveyed storm or wastewater systems or entirely artificial channels, ponds, pools or other similar constructed water features. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.072.8 Articulate.

“Articulate” means to give emphasis to or distinctly identify a particular building element. An articulated facade would be the emphasis of elements on the face of a wall including a change in setback, materials, texture, color, roof pitch, or height. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.073 Artist studio. 

“Artist studio” means an establishment providing a place solely for the practice or rehearsal of various performing or creative arts including, but not limited to, acting, dancing, singing, drawing, painting and sculpting. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.073))


18.20.074 Asphalt plant.

“Asphalt plant” means any facility involved in the manufacturing and/or distribution of asphalt concrete and similar products. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.075 Auction house. 

“Auction house” means an establishment where the property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend scheduled sales periods or events. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.075))


18.20.077 Bank stabilization.

“Bank stabilization” means an action taken to minimize or avoid the erosion of materials from the banks of rivers and streams. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.080 Base flood. 

“Base flood” means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.080))


18.20.085 Base flood elevation.

“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.085))


18.20.087 Basement.

“Basement” means for purposes of development proposals in a flood hazard area, any area of a building where the floor subgrade is below ground level on all sides. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.088 Basin plan.

“Basin plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and land use management regulations adopted by ordinance for managing surface and stormwater within the basin. (Ord. 26-16 § 12)


18.20.089.3 Battery charging station.

“Battery charging station” means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.089.6 Battery exchange station.

“Battery exchange station” means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.27 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.090 Bed and breakfast guesthouse.

“Bed and breakfast guesthouse” means a dwelling unit or accessory building within which bedrooms are available for paying guests. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.090))


18.20.095 Beehive. 

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.095))


18.20.096 Belt course.

“Belt course” means a molding or projecting course running horizontally along the face of a building. A course may be comprised of stone, tile, brick, or other material. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.097 Berm. 

“Berm” means a linear mound or series of mounds of sand and/or gravel generally paralleling the water at or landward of the line of ordinary high tide. Also, a linear mound used to screen an adjacent site, activity, or operation, such as a parking lot, from transmitting excess noise and glare. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.097))


18.20.098 Best management practice.

“Best management practice” means a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, physical structures, maintenance procedures and other management practices undertaken to reduce pollution or to provide habitat protection or maintenance. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.100 Billboard. 

“Billboard” means a sign, including both the supporting structural framework and attached billboard faces, used principally for advertising a business activity, use, product, or service unrelated to the primary use or activity of the property on which the billboard is located, excluding off-premises directional or temporary real estate signs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.100))


18.20.105 Bioengineering.

“Bioengineering” means the use of vegetation and other natural materials such as soil, wood and rock to stabilize soil, typically against slides and stream flow erosion. When natural materials alone do not possess the needed strength to resist hydraulic and gravitational forces, “bioengineering” may consist of the use of natural materials integrated with human-made fabrics and connecting materials to create a complex matrix that joins with in-place native materials to provide erosion control. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.110 Biologist, qualified. 

“Qualified biologist” means a person with training and experience in the scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise in streams, wetlands or lakes subject matter in accordance with WAC 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must have obtained a bachelor of science degree in the biological sciences from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent educational training and professional experience related to the subject of habitat or species. A qualified professional for wetlands must be a professional wetland scientist with at least two years of full-time work experience as a wetlands professional, including delineating wetlands using the Federal manual and supplements, preparing wetlands reports, conducting function assessments, and developing and implementing mitigation plans. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.110))


18.20.112 Bog.

“Bog” means a low-nutrient, acidic wetland with organic soils and characteristic bog plants, as described in Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington: 2014 Update (Washington State Department of Ecology Publication No. 14-06-29, Olympia, WA, October 2014 or as subsequently amended). (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.115 Book, stationery, video and art supply store. 

“Book, stationery, video and art supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of books and magazines, stationery, records and tapes, video and art supplies and is classified as a retail trade and service. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.115))


18.20.120 Broadleaf tree.

“Broadleaf tree” means a tree characterized by leaves that are broad in width and may include both deciduous and evergreen species. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.120))


18.20.122 Buffer, critical area. 

“Buffer” means a designated area contiguous to a steep slope or landslide hazard area intended to protect slope stability, attenuation of surface water flows and landslide hazards, or a designated area contiguous to and intended to protect and be an integral part of an aquatic area or wetland. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.122))


18.20.123 Buffer and transition zone, downtown.

“Buffer and transition zone” means an area provided to reduce impacts between two different land uses in the downtown zones. Buffer and transition zones are intended to mitigate undesirable views, noises or glare. They include but are not limited to plant materials, walls, fences and/or significant land area to separate uses. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.125 Building. 

“Building” means any structure having a roof. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.125))


18.20.135 Building envelope. 

“Building envelope” means area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on the lot. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.135))


18.20.140 Building facade.

“Building facade” means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.140))


18.20.145 Building, hardware and garden materials store. 

“Building, hardware and garden materials store” means an establishment engaged in selling lumber and other building materials, feed, or lawn and garden supplies including, but not limited to, uses located in SIC Major Group No. 52 – Building materials, hardware, garden supply, excluding mobile home dealers. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.145))


18.20.146 Building height.

“Building height” means the height of a structure measured from the average finished grade at a point five feet from the average building face to the finished roof surface, excluding parapets, equipment rooms, equipment enclosures, equipment penthouses, towers, window washing equipment, stairway penthouses and similar areas. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.150 Bulk gas storage tanks. 

“Bulk gas storage tanks” means a tank from which illuminating, heating, or liquefied gas is distributed by piping directly to individual users. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.150))


18.20.155 Bulk retail. 

“Bulk retail” means an establishment offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public, including limited sales to wholesale customers. These establishments offer a variety of lines of merchandise including but not limited to: food, building, hardware and garden materials, dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, drugs, auto supplies, hobby, toys, games, photographic, and electronics. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.155))


18.20.157 Business services.1

“Business services” means goods and services provided by specialized firms to other firms, including, but not limited to, accounting, design, maintenance, printing, and supply of temporary personnel, etc. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.160 Campground. 

“Campground” means an area of land developed for recreational use in temporary occupancy, such as: tents or recreational vehicles without hook-up facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.160))


18.20.162 Canopy.

“Canopy” means an architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is supported by the building to which it is attached. A canopy is comprised of a rigid structure over which a rigid covering is attached. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.165 Capacity, school. 

“Capacity, school” means the number of students a school district’s facilities can accommodate district-wide, based on the district’s standard of service, as determined by the school district. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.165))


18.20.168 Capital facilities plan, parks and recreation.

“Capital facilities, parks” means the facilities or improvements included in the most recent capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as subsequently amended and adopted by the City Council. Park and recreation facilities include those identified in the following documents, as amended:

(1) The capital facilities element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan;

(2) The parks and recreation element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan; and

(3) The rate study for park land impact fees. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D))


18.20.170 Capital facilities plan, school.

“Capital facilities plan, school” means a district’s facilities plan adopted by the Kent School District school board. (Ord. 16-16 § 4; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.170))


18.20.171 Capital facilities plan, transportation.

“Capital facilities plan, transportation” means the transportation capital facilities plan adopted by the City of Covington’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 16-16 § 5)


18.20.172 Catastrophic collapse. 

“Catastrophic collapse” means the collapse of the ground surface by overburden caving into underground voids created by mining. Catastrophic collapse does not include the effects from trough subsidence. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.172))


18.20.175 Cattery.

“Cattery” means a place where adult cats are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult cat is of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.175))


18.20.180 Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.

“Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum” means land or structures used for interment of the dead or their remains. For purposes of the code, pet cemeteries are considered a subclassification of this use. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.180))


18.20.181 Channel.

“Channel” means a feature that contains and was formed by periodically or continuously flowing water confined by banks. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.181.5 Channel edge.

“Channel edge” means the outer edge of the water’s bankfull width or, where applicable, the outer edge of the associated channel migration zone. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.182 Channel relocation and stream meander areas. 

“Channel relocation and stream meander areas” means those areas subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and shifts in the location of stream channels. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.182))


18.20.183 Channel migration hazard area, moderate.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.184 Channel migration hazard area, severe.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.184.5 Channel migration zone.

“Channel migration zone” means those areas within the lateral extent of likely stream channel movement that are subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion and shifts in the location of stream channels, as shown on Covington’s channel migration zone maps. “Channel migration zone” means the corridor that includes the present channel, the severe channel migration hazard area and the moderate channel migration hazard area. “Channel migration zone” does not include areas that lie behind an arterial road, a public road serving as a sole access route, a State or Federal highway or a railroad. “Channel migration zone” may exclude areas that lie behind a lawfully established flood protection facility that is likely to be maintained by existing programs for public maintenance consistent with designation and classification criteria specified by public rule. When a natural geologic feature affects channel migration, the channel migration zone width will consider such natural constraints. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.184.8 Charging levels.

“Charging levels” means the standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. The terms 1, 2, and 3 are the most common EV charging levels, and include the following specifications:

(1) Level 1 is considered slow charging. 

(2) Level 2 is considered medium charging. 

(3) Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.185 Church, synagogue or temple.

“Church, synagogue or temple” means a place where religious services are conducted, including those uses located in SIC Industry No. 866 and including accessory uses in the primary or accessory buildings such as religious education, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and clergy. This definition does not include facilities for training of religious orders. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.185))


18.20.190 Classrooms, school. 

“Classrooms, school” means educational facilities of the district required to house students for its basic educational program. The classrooms are those facilities the district determines are necessary to best serve its student population. Specialized facilities as identified by the district, including but not limited to gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, and childcare centers, shall not be counted as classrooms. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.190))


18.20.195 Clearing.

“Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, tipping, cutting, or removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means. This includes, but is not limited to, root removal and/or topsoil removal. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 08-13 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.195))


18.20.205 Cogeneration. 

“Cogeneration” means the sequential generation of energy and useful heat from the same primary source or fuel for industrial, commercial, or residential heating or cooling purposes. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.205))


18.20.207 Commercial recreation.

“Commercial recreation” means any recreational activity whose main purpose is to provide indoor or outdoor amusement or entertainment activities. This includes, but is not limited to, skating rinks, pool halls, water slides, miniature golf courses, arcades, bowling alleys, go-carts, batting cages, laser tag, skate park, basketball, ice/hockey rinks, etc. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.207))


18.20.210 Communication facility, major.

“Major communication facility” means a communication facility for transmission and reception of:

(1) UHF and VHF television signals; or 

(2) FM or AM radio signals. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.210))


18.20.215 Communication facility, minor.

“Minor communication facility” means a communication facility for transmission and reception of:

(1) Two-way and/or citizen band (CB) radio signals;

(2) Point-to-point microwave signals;

(3) Cellular radio signals;

(4) Signals through FM radio translators; or

(5) Signals through FM radio boosters under 10 watts effective radiated power (ERP). (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.215))


18.20.217 Community identification sign.

“Community identification sign” means a sign identifying the location of a community or geographic area such as unincorporated activity centers or rural towns designated by the comprehensive plan or communities recognized and delineated by a recognized unincorporated area Council. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.217))




18.20.220 Community residential facility (CRF).

“Community residential facility (CRF)” means living quarters meeting applicable Federal and State standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification which is classified in CMC 18.25.050 as health services. CRFs are further classified as follows:

(1) CRF-I: means nine to 10 residents and staff;

(2) CRF-II: 11 or more residents and staff.

If staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member for purposes of subclassifying CRFs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.220))


18.20.223 Commuter parking lot. 

“Commuter parking lot” means vehicle parking specifically for the purpose of access to a public transit system or for users of carpools or vanpools. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.223))


18.20.225 Compensatory storage.

“Compensatory storage” means new, excavated storage volume equivalent to any flood storage which is eliminated by building filling or grading within the floodplain. For the purpose of this definition, equivalent flood storage capacity is that which is replaced by equal volume between corresponding one-foot contour intervals which are hydraulically connected to the floodway through their entire depth. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.225))


18.20.230 Conditional use permit. 

“Conditional use permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate a permitted use on a particular property subject to conditions placed on the permitted use to ensure compatibility with nearby land uses. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.230))


18.20.235 Conference center. 

“Conference center” means an establishment developed primarily as a meeting facility, including only facilities for recreation, overnight lodging, and related activities provided for conference participants. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.235))


18.20.240 Confinement area. 

“Confinement area” is any open land area in which livestock are kept where the forage does not meet the definition of a grazing area. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.240))


18.20.245 Consolidation. 

“Consolidation” means the relocation to a consolidated transmission structure of the main transmit antennas of two or more FCC broadcast licensees which prior to such relocation utilized transmission structures located within a 1,500-foot radius of the center of the consolidated transmission structure to support their main transmit antennas. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.245))


18.20.247 Construction and trades.

“Construction and trades” means establishments that provide services related to construction of buildings and infrastructure, and other improvements to property. Such establishments include, SIC Major Group Nos. 15 through 17, and SIC Industry Group No. 078 – Landscape and horticultural services. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.247))


18.20.250 Construction cost per student, school.

“Construction cost per student, school” means the estimated cost of construction of a permanent school facility in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.250))


18.20.252 Conversion factor. 

“Conversion factor” means a number that converts the water budget allowance from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year or cubic feet per year. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.252))


18.20.252.3 Cornice.

“Cornice” means the molded and projecting horizontal member that crowns an architectural composition. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.252.5 Craft sales.

“Craft sales” means the sale of art and craft items crafted by the artist or crafter with his or her own hands, and sold directly by the artist or crafter. Such items do not include commercial kits, molds, patterns, plans, prefabricated forms, or mass-produced items. Craft sales shall be accessory to farmers’ and public markets; provided, that the items are produced in the State of Washington. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.253 Critical aquifer recharge area.

“Critical aquifer recharge area” means an area with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water where an aquifer that is a source of drinking water is vulnerable or susceptible to contamination that would affect the potability of water. This includes: 

(1) Category I critical aquifer recharge areas which are mapped areas that Covington determined are highly susceptible to ground water contamination and that are located within a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area; or 

(2) Category II critical aquifer recharge areas which are areas determined to have medium susceptibility to ground water contamination that is located within a sole source aquifer or within an area approved in accordance with Chapter 246-290 WAC as a wellhead protection area for a municipal or district drinking water system, or an area over a sole source aquifer for a private potable water well in compliance with Department of Ecology and Public Health standards, or are highly susceptible to ground water contamination and are not located in a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area; or 

(3) Category III critical aquifer recharge areas include those mapped areas that Covington has determined have low susceptibility to ground water contamination. 

Susceptibility to ground water contamination occurs where there is a combination of permeable soils, permeable subsurface geology, decreasing hydraulic head with depth. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.254 Critical area.

“Critical area” means any area that is required to be protected under the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW. The City’s “critical areas” include the following areas and their required buffers pursuant to Chapter 18.65 CMC: 

(1) Frequently flooded areas; 

(2) Critical aquifer recharge areas;

(3) Geologic hazard areas;

(4) Wetlands; and

(5) Wildlife habitat conservation areas, including streams. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.255 Critical drainage area. 

“Critical drainage area” means an area which has been formally determined by the City of Covington Surface Water Management Department to require more restrictive regulation than County-wide standards afford in order to mitigate severe flooding, drainage, erosion or sedimentation problems which result from the cumulative impacts of development and urbanization. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.255))


18.20.260 Critical facility.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 9; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.260))


18.20.262 Daily care. 

“Daily care” means medical procedures, monitoring and attention that are necessarily provided at the residence of the patient by the primary provider of daily care on a 24-hour basis. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.262))


18.20.265 Day care. 

“Day care” means an establishment for group care of nonresident adults or children.

(1) Day care shall include only SIC Industry No. 835 – Child day care services, SIC Industry No. 8322 – Adult day care centers, and the following:

(a) Adult day care, such as adult day health centers or social day care as defined by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services; 

(b) Nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools;

(c) Privately conducted kindergartens or prekindergartens when not a part of a public or parochial school; and

(d) Programs covering after-school care for school children.

(2) Day care establishments are subclassified as follows:

(a) Day care I – a maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period; and

(b) Day care II – over 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.265))


18.20.270 Deciduous. 

“Deciduous” means a plant species with foliage that is shed annually. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.270))


18.20.275 Density credit, transfer (TDC).

“Density credit, transfer (TDC)” means the ability to transfer potentially buildable dwelling units from an eligible sending site to an eligible receiving site as provided in this code. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.275))


18.20.280 Department. 

“Department” means the City of Covington Department of Community Development, Public Works or its successor agency. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.280))


18.20.285 Department and variety store.

“Department and variety store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel and accessories, home furnishings, housewares, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 53 – General merchandise;

(2) 5947 – Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops; and

(3) 5948 – Luggage and leather goods stores. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.285))


18.20.290 Destination resort. 

“Destination resort” means an establishment for resource-based recreation and intended to utilize outdoor recreational opportunities, including related services, such as food, overnight lodging, equipment rentals, entertainment and other conveniences for guests of the resort. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.290))


18.20.295 Developer or applicant. 

“Developer” or “applicant” means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed. (See Applicant, CMC 18.20.070.) (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.295))


18.20.300 Development activity.

“Development activity” means any residential construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand on public infrastructure. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.300))


18.20.305 Development agreement.

“Development agreement” means a recorded agreement between an applicant and City of Covington which incorporates the site plans, development standards, and/or other features of a development proposal. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.305))


18.20.310 Development proposal.

“Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the City of Covington relative to the use or development of land. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.310))


18.20.315 Development proposal site.

“Development proposal site” means the legal boundaries of the parcel or parcels of land for which an applicant has or should have applied for authority from City of Covington to carry out a development proposal. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.315))


18.20.320 Direct traffic impact.

“Direct traffic impact” means any increase in vehicle traffic generated by a proposed development, which results in additional daily vehicle trips on any roadway or intersection. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.320))


18.20.325 Director. 

“Director” means the Director of City of Covington Department of Community Development, or his or her designee. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.325))


18.20.327 Ditch.

“Ditch” means an artificial open channel used or constructed for the purpose of conveying water. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.329 Dormer.

“Dormer” means a structural element of a building that protrudes from the plane of a sloping roof surface. Dormers are used, either in original construction or as later additions, to create usable space in the roof of a building by adding headroom and usually also by enabling addition of windows. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.330 Dormitory. 

“Dormitory” means a residential building that provides sleeping quarters, but not separate dwelling units, and may include common dining, cooking and recreation or bathing facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.330))


18.20.331 Draft flood boundary work map.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.331.5 Drainage.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 26-16 § 13)


18.20.332 Drainage basin.

“Drainage basin” means a drainage area that drains to the Green River or other drainage area that drains directly to Puget Sound. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.333 Drainage facility.

“Drainage facility” means a feature, constructed or engineered for the primary purpose of providing drainage, that collects, conveys, stores or treats surface water. A drainage facility may include, but is not limited to, a stream, pipeline, channel, ditch, gutter, lake, wetland, closed depression, flow control or water quality treatment facility and erosion and sediment control facility. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 26-16 § 14; Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.334 Drainage sub-basin.

“Drainage sub-basin” means a drainage area identified as a drainage sub-basin in a City approved basin plan or, if not identified, a drainage area that drains to a body of water that is named and mapped and contained within a drainage basin. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.334.3 Drive-through.

“Drive-through” means any use that provides goods and services using a window or microphone while customers remain in their vehicle. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C)


18.20.335 Drop box facility. 

“Drop box facility” means a facility used for receiving solid waste and recyclable from off-site sources into detachable solid waste containers, including the adjacent areas necessary for entrance and exit roads, unloading and vehicle turnaround areas. Drop box facilities normally service the general public with loose loads and may also include containers for separated recyclable. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.335))


18.20.340 Drug store. 

“Drug store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics and related supplies, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 591 – Drug stores and proprietary stores;

(2) 5993 – Tobacco stores and stands; and

(3) 5999 – Cosmetics stores. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.340))


18.20.342 Duplex.

“Duplex” means a building containing two separate units with a common wall. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A))


18.20.345 Dwelling unit. 

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupants; dwelling units include but are not limited to bachelor, efficiency and studio apartments, factory-built housing and mobile homes. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.345))


18.20.350 Dwelling unit, accessory.

“Dwelling unit, accessory” means a separate, complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling, or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.350))


18.20.355 Dwelling unit, multifamily. 

“Dwelling unit, multifamily” means a dwelling unit contained in a building consisting of three or more dwelling units which may be stacked, or one or more dwellings included in a structure with nonresidential uses. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.355))


18.20.365 Dwelling unit, single-family attached. 

“Dwelling unit, single-family attached” means a building containing one dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and is attached to one or more other dwelling units by common walls. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.370). Formerly 18.20.370)


18.20.370 Dwelling unit, single-family detached.

“Dwelling unit, single-family detached” means a detached building containing one dwelling unit. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.365). Formerly 18.20.365)


18.20.375 Earth station.

“Earth station” means a communication facility which transmits and/or receives signals to and from an orbiting satellite using satellite dish antennas. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.375))


18.20.377 Ecosystem.

“Ecosystem” means the complex of a community of organisms and its environment functioning as an ecological unit. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.380 Effective radiated power. 

“Effective radiated power” means the product of the antenna power input and the numerical antenna power gain. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.380))


18.20.385 Electric scooters and motorcycles.

“Electric scooters and motorcycles” means any two-wheel vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries and produces zero emissions or pollution when stationary or operating. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.3 Electric vehicle.

“Electric vehicle” means any vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purpose. “Electric vehicle” includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle; (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and (4) a medium-speed electric vehicle. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.6 Electric vehicle charging station. 

“Electric vehicle charging station” means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. An electric vehicle charging station equipped with Level 1 or Level 2 charging equipment is permitted outright as an accessory use to any principal use. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.9 Electric vehicle charging station – Restricted. 

“Electric vehicle charging station – restricted” means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) privately owned and restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking, designated employee parking) or (2) publicly owned and restricted (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public). (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.12 Electric vehicle charging station – Public. 

“Electric vehicle charging station – public” means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) publicly owned and publicly available (e.g., park and ride parking, public library parking lot, on-street parking) or (2) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping center parking, non-reserved parking in multifamily parking lots). (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.15 Electric vehicle infrastructure.

“Electric vehicle infrastructure” means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.385.18 Electric vehicle parking space. 

“Electric vehicle parking space” means any marked parking space that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.390 Electrical substation.

“Electrical substation” means a site containing equipment for the conversion of high voltage electrical power transported through transmission lines into lower voltages transported through distribution lines and suitable for individual users. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.390))


18.20.392 Emergency. 

“Emergency” means an occurrence during which there is imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, or that poses an imminent risk of property damage or personal injury or death as a result of a natural or human-made catastrophe, as determined by the Director. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.392))


18.20.393 Emergency care facility.

“Emergency care facility” means any facility providing 24-hour emergency medical care. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.395 Energy resource recovery facility.

“Energy resource recovery facility” means an establishment for recovery of energy in a usable form from mass burning or refuse-derived fuel incineration, pyrolysis or any other means of using the heat of combustion of solid waste. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.395))


18.20.397 Engineer, civil, geotechnical and structural.

“Engineer, civil, geotechnical and structural” means: 

(1) “Civil engineer” means an engineer who is licensed as a professional engineer in the branch of civil engineering by the State of Washington under Chapter 18.43 RCW; 

(2) “Engineering geologist” means a licensed professional by the State of Washington meeting the requirements of Chapter 18.220 RCW; and 

(3) “Structural engineer” means an engineer who is licensed as a professional engineer in the branch of structural engineering by the State of Washington under Chapter 18.43 RCW. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.400 Enhancement. 

“Enhancement” means, for the purposes of critical area regulation, an action that improves the structure and functions of ecosystems and habitats associated with critical areas or their buffers. Enhancement results in a gain in some critical area function(s) but may also lead to a decline in other functions, but does not result in a gain in critical area extent. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.400))


18.20.405 Equipment, heavy. 

“Equipment, heavy” means high-capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or other materials, and mobile power units including, but not limited to:

(1) Carryalls;

(2) Graders;

(3) Loading and unloading devices;

(4) Cranes;

(5) Drag lines;

(6) Trench diggers;

(7) Tractors;

(8) Augers;

(9) Bulldozers;

(10) Concrete mixers and conveyers;

(11) Harvesters;

(12) Combines; or

(13) Other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by mechanical power as distinguished from manpower. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.405))


18.20.410 Erosion. 

“Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as the result of the movement of wind, water or ice. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.410))


18.20.415 Erosion hazard area. 

“Erosion hazard area” means an area underlain by soils that is subject to severe erosion when disturbed, including areas likely to become unstable, such as bluffs, steep slopes, and areas with unconsolidated soils. The soils subject to severe erosion include, but are not limited to, those classified as having a severe to very severe erosion hazard according to the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, the 1973 King County Soils Survey or any subsequent revisions or addition by or to these sources such as any occurrence of river wash (“Rh”) and any of the following when the soils occur on slopes inclined at 15 percent or more: 

(1) The Alderwood gravelly sandy loam (“AgD”); 

(2) The Alderwood and Kitsap soils (“AkF”); 

(3) The Beausite gravelly sandy loam (“BeD” and “BeF”); 

(4) The Kitsap silt loam (“KpD”); 

(5) The Ovall gravelly loam (“OvD” and “OvF”); 

(6) The Ragnar fine sandy loam (“RaD”); and 

(7) The Ragnar-Indianola Association (“RdE”). (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.415))


18.20.418 Essential public facility.

“Essential public facility” means a facility necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, a facility defined under the occupancy categories of “essential facilities,” “hazardous facilities,” “critical facilities” and “special occupancy structures” in the structural forces chapter or succeeding chapter in CMC Title 15. Critical facilities also include nursing and personal care facilities, schools, senior citizen assisted housing, public roadway bridges and sites that produce, use or store hazardous substances or hazardous waste, not including the temporary storage of consumer products containing hazardous substances or hazardous waste intended for household use or for retail sale on the site. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.420 Evergreen. 

“Evergreen” means a plant species with foliage that persists and remains green year-round. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.420))


18.20.425 Examiner. 

“Examiner” means the Hearing Examiner as established by Chapter 2.25 CMC. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.425))


18.20.427 Expansion.

“Expansion” means the act or process of increasing the size, quantity or scope. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.430 Fabric shop. 

“Fabric shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sewing supplies and accessories, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5949 – Sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores; and

(2) Awning shops, banner shops, and flag shops found in 5999. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.430))


18.20.433 Facade.

“Facade” means the portion of any exterior elevation of the building extending from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire length of the building. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.435 Facilities standard. 

“Facilities standard” means the space required by grade span, and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, which is needed in order to fulfill the educational goals of the school district as identified in the district’s capital facilities plan. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.435))


18.20.440 Factory-built commercial building.

“Factory-built commercial building” means any structure that is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than a building site; and designed or used for nonresidential human occupancy. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.440))


18.20.445 Fairground. 

“Fairground” means a site permanently designated and improved for holding a County fair, as provided in Chapters 15.76 and 36.37 RCW, or for holding similar events, including, but not limited to:

(1) Carnivals;

(2) Circuses;

(3) Expositions;

(4) Animal shows; and

(5) Exhibitions and/or demonstrations of farm and home products with accompanying entertainment and amusements. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.445))


18.20.450 Family.

“Family” means an individual; two or more persons related by blood or marriage; a group of two or more disabled residents protected under the Federal Housing Act Amendments, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit; a group of eight or fewer residents, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group living arrangement where eight or fewer residents receive supportive services such as counseling, foster care, or medical supervision at the dwelling unit by resident or nonresident staff. For purposes of this definition, minors living with parent shall not be counted as part of the maximum number of residents. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.450))


18.20.451.5 Farmers’ market.

“Farmers’ market” means a site where farmers sell locally grown, produced, caught, or gathered fruits, vegetables, herbs, nuts, honey, dairy products, eggs, poultry, mushrooms, meats, fish, flowers, nursery stock, and plants. One hundred percent of the items for sale under this definition must be grown, produced, caught, or gathered in the State of Washington. Up to 30 percent of a farmers’ market’s total number of vendor spaces may consist of resellers and/or accessory uses. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.452 Feasible.

“Feasible” means capable of being done or accomplished. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.455 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway.

“Federal Emergency Management Agency floodway” means the channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain that is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. (Ord. 14-05 § 3 [18.20.462]; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.455))


18.20.460 Feed store.

“Feed store” means an establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies directly related to the day to day activities of agricultural production. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.460))


18.20.461 Federal Emergency Management Agency.

“Federal Emergency Management Agency” means the independent Federal agency that, among other responsibilities, oversees the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.463 Fen.

“Fen” means a wetland that receives some drainage from surrounding mineral soil and includes peat formed mainly from Carex and marsh-like vegetation. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.465 Fence. 

“Fence” means a barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of:

(1) Masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or

(2) Wood, metal or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.465))


18.20.467 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, to ensure compliance with the City of Covington Municipal Code, and/or to warranty materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposit, and surety bonds, and or other forms of financial security acceptable to the Director. For the purposes of this title, the terms performance guarantee, maintenance guarantee, and defect guarantee are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.467))


18.20.468 Fire capital facilities and equipment plan.

“Fire capital facilities and equipment plan” means the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority’s (RFA’s) capital improvement plan adopted by the RFA’s governing board consisting of:

(1) An inventory of existing capital facilities and equipment owned by the RFA, their locations, and capacities.

(2) An identification of demands expected to be placed on existing fire protection facilities and equipment by the impacts of projected new development over a 20-year period.

(3) A forecast of future capital facilities and equipment necessary to meet the RFA’s adopted level of service with the increased service demand of future growth within the RFA.

(4) The proposed locations of expanded or new capital facilities and equipment and the associated timeline for construction or expansion.

(5) At least a six-year financing component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed for fire protection facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues.

(6) Any other long range projects planned by the RFA. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B))


18.20.468.5 Fire protection facilities.2

“Fire protection facilities” means fully equipped fire stations, administrative offices, training grounds and structures, maintenance facilities and other specialized facilities required for the RFA to locate, house or expedite the timely arrival of firefighting and emergency medical equipment necessary to deliver emergency response services within the RFA’s service area. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B))


18.20.469 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

“Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” are areas that have been identified as critically important to maintaining specific types of fish, wildlife, and plant species in Covington. Areas necessary for maintaining species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created as designated by WAC 365-190-130(2) or defined as habitats and species of local importance in Chapter 18.65 CMC, Article VI. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.20.470 Flood fringe, zero-rise. 

“Zero-rise flood fringe” means that portion of the floodplain outside of the zero-rise floodway. The zero-rise flood fringe is generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.470))


18.20.475 Flood hazard area. 

“Flood hazard area” means any area subject to inundation by the base flood or risk from channel migration including, but not limited to, an aquatic area, wetland or closed depression. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.475))


18.20.477 Flood hazard boundary map.

“Flood hazard boundary map” means the initial insurance map issued by FEMA that identifies, based on approximate analyses, the areas of the one percent annual chance, 100-year, flood hazard within the community. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.478 Flood hazard data.

“Flood hazard data” means data or any combination of data available from Federal, State or other sources including, but not limited to, maps, critical area studies, reports, historical flood hazard information, channel migration zone maps or studies or other related engineering and technical data that identify floodplain boundaries, regulatory floodway boundaries, base flood elevations, or flood cross sections. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.480 Flood insurance rate map. 

“Flood insurance rate map” means the insurance and floodplain management map produced by FEMA that identifies, based on detailed or approximate analysis, the areas subject to flooding during the base flood. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.480))


18.20.485 Flood insurance study for Covington.

“Flood insurance study for Covington” means the official report provided by FEMA that includes flood profiles and the flood insurance rate map. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.485))


18.20.490 Flood protection elevation. 

“Flood protection elevation” means an elevation that is one foot above the base flood elevation. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.490))


18.20.492 Flood protection facility.

“Flood protection facility” means a structure that provides protection from flood damage. Flood protection facility includes, but is not limited to, the following structures and supporting infrastructure: 

(1) Dams or water diversions, regardless of primary purpose, if the facility provides flood protection benefits; 

(2) Flood containment facilities such as levees, dikes, berms, walls and raised banks, including pump stations and other supporting structures; and 

(3) Bank stabilization structures, often called revetments. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.495 Floodplain.

“Floodplain” means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood, synonymous with 100-year floodplain. The land area susceptible to being inundated by stream-derived waters with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The limits of this area are based on flood regulation ordinance maps or a reasonable method that meets the objectives of the SMA (WAC 173-22-030(2)). (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.495))


18.20.500 Floodproofing, dry. 

“Dry floodproofing” means adaptations that make a structure that is below the flood protection elevation watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of and with sufficient strength to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including buoyancy. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.500))


18.20.505 Floodway, zero-rise.

“Zero-rise floodway” means the channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain that is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without any measurable increase in base flood elevation. 

(1) For the purpose of this definition, “measurable increase in base flood elevation” means a calculated upward rise in the base flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 feet, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and changed conditions directly attributable to alterations of the topography or any other flow obstructions in the floodplain. “Zero-rise floodway” is broader than that of the FEMA floodway but always includes the FEMA floodway. 

(2) “Zero-rise floodway” includes the entire floodplain unless a critical areas report demonstrates otherwise. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.505))


18.20.507 Floor area ratio (FAR).

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the gross floor area of all buildings permitted on a lot divided by the area of the lot. The permitted building floor area is calculated by multiplying the maximum FAR specified by the zoning district by the total area of the parcel. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.510 Florist shop.

“Florist shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of flowers and plants, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5992 – Florists; and

(2) 5999 – Artificial flowers. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.510))


18.20.512 Footprint.

“Footprint” means the area encompassed by the foundation of a structure including building overhangs if the overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches beyond the foundation and excluding uncovered decks. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.513 Footprint, development.

“Footprint, development” means the area encompassed by the foundations of all structures including paved and impervious surfaces. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.515 Forest land. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.515))


18.20.520 Forest practice.

“Forest practice” means any forest practice as defined in RCW 79.06.020. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.520))


18.20.521 Forest practice, Class IV-G nonconversion.

“Forest practice, Class IV-G nonconversion” means a Class IV general forest practice, as defined in WAC 222-16-050, on a parcel for which there is a City-approved long-term forest management plan. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.525 Forest product sales. 

“Forest product sales” means the sale of goods produced, extracted, consumed, gathered or harvested from a forest including, but not limited to:

(1) Trees;

(2) Wood chips;

(3) Logs;

(4) Fuel wood;

(5) Cones;

(6) Christmas trees;

(7) Berries;

(8) Herbs; or

(9) Mushrooms. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.525))


18.20.530 Forest research. 

“Forest research” means the performance of scientific studies relating to botany, hydrology, silviculture, biology and other branches of science in relation to management of forest lands, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 8731 – Commercial physical and biological research;

(2) 8733 – Noncommercial research organizations; and

(3) 8734 – Testing laboratories. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.530))


18.20.531 Fowl.

“Fowl” means domesticated Anseriformes (such as ducks, geese, swans, and similar) and Galliformes (such as chickens, turkeys, pheasants, and similar) which are legally held in captivity. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.532 Fully accessible. 

“Fully accessible” means a building, structure or facility (public or private) that is in compliance with the Federal provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, including the supplemental Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.533))


18.20.533 Fully contained community (FCC).

“Fully contained community (FCC)” means a site-specific development project consisting of conceptual site plan(s), development standards, processing and other elements, and which is consistent with the criteria provided in RCW 36.70A.350. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.533))


18.20.535 Furniture and home furnishings store. 

“Furniture and home furnishings store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of household furniture and furnishings for the home, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 57 – Home furniture, furnishings, and equipment stores, except Industry Group No. 573; and

(2) Baby carriages, cake decorating supplies, hot tubs, picture frames (ready-made), swimming pools (above-ground, not site-built), telephone stores and typewriter stores found in 5999. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.535))


18.20.536 Gable roof.

“Gable roof” means a double sloping roof with a ridge and a triangular wall section, i.e., a gable, at each end bounded by the two roof slopes. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.537 Gambling. 

“Gambling” means staking or risking something of value upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under the person’s control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding that the person or someone else will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. Gambling does not include fishing derbies as defined by State law, pari-mutuel betting as authorized by Chapter 67.16 RCW, bona fide business transactions valid under the law of contracts including, but not limited to, contracts for the purchase or sale at a future date of securities or commodities, and agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including, but not limited to, contracts of indemnity or guarantee and life, health, or accident insurance. In addition, a contest of chance which is specifically excluded from the definition of lottery under this chapter shall not constitute gambling. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.537))


18.20.540 General business service. 

“General business service” means an establishment engaged in providing services to businesses or individuals, with no outdoor storage or fabrication, including only uses located in SIC Major Group Nos.:

(1) 60 – Depository institutions;

(2) 61 – Nondepository credit institutions;

(3) 62 – Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services;

(4) 63 – Insurance carriers;

(5) 65 – Real estate, except 653 (real estate agents and directors);

(6) 67 – Holding and other investment offices;

(7) 7299 – Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified;

(8) 73 – Business services, except Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(a) 7312 – Outdoor advertising services; and

(9) 86 – Membership organizations, including administrative offices of organized religions found in 8661, but excluding churches and places of worship. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.540))


18.20.545 Geologist. 

“Geologist” means a person who holds a current license as a geologist or engineering geologist from the Washington State Geologist Licensing Board. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.545))


18.20.550 Geotechnical engineer.

“Geotechnical engineer” means a practicing geotechnical/civil engineer licensed as a professional civil engineer by the State of Washington who has at least four years of professional employment as a geotechnical engineer. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.550))


18.20.555 Golf course facility. 

“Golf course facility” means a recreational facility, under public or private ownership, designed and developed for golf activities with accessory uses including, but not limited to:

(1) A driving range;

(2) Miniature golf;

(3) Pro shops;

(4) Caddyshack buildings;

(5) Swimming pools, tennis courts and other related recreational facilities;

(6) Restaurants;

(7) Office and meeting rooms; and

(8) Related storage facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.555))


18.20.556 Government services.

“Government services” means a use or facility of any unit of government that provides a direct service to people. This definition excludes jails, parks, transit centers, park and rides, utility yards, sewage treatment plants, schools, golf courses and airports. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.557 Grade.

“Grade” means the elevation of the ground surface.

“Existing grade,” “finish grade” and “rough grade” are defined as follows:

(1) “Existing grade” means the grade before grading;

(2) “Finish grade” means the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan; and

(3) “Rough grade” means the grade that approximately conforms to the approved plan. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.560 Grade span. 

“Grade span” means the categories into which a district groups its grades of students; i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.560))


18.20.565 Grading. 

“Grading” means the physical manipulation of the earth’s surface and/or drainage pattern in preparation for an intended use or activity. “Grading” means any excavation, filling, removing the duff layer or any combination thereof. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.565))


18.20.570 Grazing area. 

“Grazing area” means any open land area used to pasture livestock in which suitable forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.570))


18.20.575 Ground cover. 

“Ground cover” means living plants designed to grow low to the ground (generally one foot or less) and intended to stabilize soils and protect against erosion. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.575))


18.20.575.5 Ground water.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 26-16 § 15)


18.20.576 Group assembly.

“Group assembly” means any facility that provides for the regular assembly of individuals for entertainment or social purposes. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.577 Habitat.

“Habitat” means the locality, site and particular type of environment occupied by an organism at any stage in its life cycle. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.578 Habitat, fish.

“Habitat, fish” means habitat that is used by fish at any life stage at any time of the year including potential habitat likely to be used by fish. “Fish habitat” includes habitat that is upstream of, or landward of, human-made barriers that are currently used by fish or could be accessible to, and could be used by, fish upon removal of the barriers. This includes off-channel habitat, flood refuges, channels, streams and wetlands. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.580 Hazardous household substance.

“Hazardous household substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.580))


18.20.582 Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipeline.

“Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipeline” means hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines as defined by RCW 81.88.040 and WAC 480-93-005. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.582))


18.20.585 Hazardous substance. 

“Hazardous substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.585))


18.20.590 Heavy equipment and truck repair.

“Heavy equipment and truck repair” means the repair and maintenance of self-powered, self-propelled or towed mechanical devices, equipment and vehicles used for commercial purposes, such as tandem axle trucks, graders, backhoes, tractor trailers, cranes, lifts, but excluding automobiles and pick-up trucks under 10,000 pounds, recreational vehicles, boats and their trailers. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.590))


18.20.595 Helistop. 

“Helistop” means an area on a roof or on the ground used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or cargo but not including fueling service, hangers, maintenance or overhaul facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.595))


18.20.596 Hip roof.

 “Hip roof” means a roof that slopes down to the eaves on all four sides without gables. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.597 Historic resource. 

Repealed by Ord. 16-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.597))


18.20.598 Historic resource inventory.

Repealed by Ord. 16-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.598))


18.20.599 Historical flood hazard information.

“Historical flood hazard information” means information that identifies floodplain boundaries, regulatory floodway boundaries, base flood elevations, or flood cross-sections including, but not limited to, photos, video recordings, high water marks, survey information or news agency reports. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.599.5 Hive.

“Hive” means a manufactured receptacle or container prepared for the use of bees that includes movable frames, combs, and substances deposited into the hive by bees. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.600 Hobby, toy, and game shop.

“Hobby, toy, and game shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of toys, games, hobby and craft kits, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5945 – Hobby, toy and game shops; and 

(2) 5999 – Autograph and philatelist supply stores, coin shops, and stamps, philatelist-retail (except mail order). (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.600))


18.20.605 Home industry. 

“Home industry” means a limited-scale sales, service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or residential accessory building, or in a barn or other resource accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the site as a residence. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.605))


18.20.610 Home occupation.

“Home occupation” means a limited-scale service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the site as a residence. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.610))


18.20.611 Hospital.

“Hospital” means a building designed and used for medical or surgical diagnosis, treatment and housing of persons under the care of doctors and nurses and including ancillary uses such as cafeterias, florists and patient- and visitor-related services. Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes and clinics are not included. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.613 Hotel.

“Hotel” means an establishment in which temporary lodging or temporary boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all guest rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. Guest rooms must be accessed from an interior hallway. The use may include ancillary uses, such as, but not limited to, a restaurant, lounge, meeting rooms, banquet rooms, swimming pool, and convention facilities. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.615 Household pets. 

“Household pets” means small animals that are kept within a dwelling unit. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.615))


18.20.620 Hydroelectric generation facility.

“Hydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity using water sources. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.620))


18.20.621 Impact fee.

“Impact fee” means a payment of money authorized by State law and this code to be imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. Impact fees include, but are not limited to, transportation impact fees, park impact fees, fire impact fees and school impact fees. “Impact fees” do not include fees imposed to cover the costs of processing applications, inspecting and reviewing plans or other information required to be submitted for purpose of evaluation of an application, or inspecting or monitoring development activity. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 20-07 § 66; Ord. 43-02 § 2 (27.04.025). Formerly 14.55.090)


18.20.621.1 Impact fee schedule.

“Impact fee schedule” means the table of impact fees to be charged per unit of development, computed by the formulas adopted under CMC Title 19, indicating the standard fee amount per dwelling unit or per commercial development that shall be paid as a condition of development within the City. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B))


18.20.622 Impacts.

“Impacts” means the effects or consequences of actions. “Environmental impacts” are effects upon the elements of the environment listed in WAC 197-11-444. (Ord. 20-07 § 113; Ord. 14-05 § 3. Formerly 18.20.621)


18.20.625 Impervious surface.

“Impervious surface” means a nonvertical surface artificially covered or hardened so as to prevent or impede the percolation of water into the soil mantle at natural infiltration rates including, but not limited to, roofs, swimming pools and areas that are paved, graveled or made of packed or oiled earthen materials such as roads, walkways or parking areas. “Impervious surface” does not include landscaping and surface water flow control and water quality treatment facilities. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.625))


18.20.627 Impoundment.

“Impoundment” means a body of water collected in a reservoir, pond or dam or collected as a consequence of natural disturbance events. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.630 Improved public roadways.

“Improved public roadways” means public road rights-of-way that have been improved with at least two travel lanes and are maintained by either City of Covington or the State of Washington. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.630))


18.20.632 Improvement.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 26-16 § 16)


18.20.635 Individual transportation and taxi.

“Individual transportation and taxi” means an establishment engaged in furnishing individual or small group transportation by motor vehicle, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 412 – Taxicabs; and

(2) 4119 – Local passenger transportation, not elsewhere classified. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.635))


18.20.636 Industrial, light.

“Industrial, light” means any use engaged in small-scale production, manufacturing, fabrication or distribution, and considered less intensive because such uses do not result in noise, odor, toxic chemicals or other activities posing a hazard to public health and safety. May also include supporting office and retail activities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.637 Infiltration rate. 

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed in inches per hour. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.637))


18.20.637.1 In-lieu fee program.

“In-lieu fee program” as defined in the Federal Rule published in April 2008, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (the Corps) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is:

A program involving the restoration, establishment, enhancement, and/or preservation of aquatic resources through funds paid to a governmental or non-profit natural resources management entity to satisfy compensatory mitigation requirements. Similar to a mitigation bank, an in-lieu fee program sells compensatory mitigation credits to permittees whose obligation to 

provide compensatory mitigation is then transferred to the in-lieu program sponsor.

(Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.20.638 In-stream structure.

“In-stream structure” means anything placed or constructed by humans within a stream or river waterward of the ordinary high water mark that either causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction, or modification of water flow including, but not limited to, weirs, culverts, fill and natural materials and excluding dikes, levees, revetments and other bank stabilization facilities. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.640 Interim recycling facility. 

“Interim recycling facility” means a site or establishment engaged in collection or treatment of recyclable materials, which is not the final disposal site, and including:

(1) Drop boxes;

(2) Source-separated, organic waste processing facilities; and

(3) Collection, separation and shipment of glass, metal, paper or other recyclables. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.640))


18.20.641 Interlocal agreement.

“Interlocal agreement” means any agreement between the City and the County or any municipal utility district, fire district, regional fire authority, or school district or any other City or governmental agency. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.641))


18.20.641.5 Invasive vegetation.

“Invasive vegetation” means a plant species listed as obnoxious weeds on the noxious weed list adopted King County or State of Washington. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.642 Irrigation efficiency. 

“Irrigation efficiency” means is the coefficient of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. This coefficient is derived from actual measurements and an evaluation of the general characteristics of the type of irrigation system and management practices proposed. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.642))


18.20.645 Jail. 

“Jail” means a facility operated by a governmental agency; designed, staffed and used for the incarceration of persons for the purposes of punishment, correction and rehabilitation following conviction of an offense. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.645))


18.20.650 Jail farm. 

“Jail farm” means a farm or camp on which persons convicted of minor law violations are confined and participate in agriculture and other work activities of the facility. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.650))


18.20.655 Jewelry store.

“Jewelry store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of a variety of jewelry products, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5944 – Jewelry stores; and

(2) Gem stones and rock specimens found in 5999. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.655))


18.20.658 Joint use driveway. 

“Joint use driveway” means a jointly owned and/or maintained vehicular access to two residential or commercial properties. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.658))


18.20.659 Joint use parking.

“Joint use parking” or “shared parking” means required parking stalls shared by two or more uses with the approval of the City. Joint use parking can be appropriate when different operational characteristics of the land uses allow the parking stalls to be available for each use when there is demand. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.660 Kennel. 

“Kennel” means a place where adult dogs are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult dog is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.660))


18.20.661 Kick plate.

“Kick plate” means a plate applied to the face of the lower rail of a door or sidelight to protect against abrasion or impact loads. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.662 Kitchen or kitchen facility. 

“Kitchen” or “kitchen facility” means an area within a building intended for the preparation and storage of food and containing:

(1) An appliance for the refrigeration of food;

(2) An appliance for the cooking or heating of food; and

(3) A sink. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.662))


18.20.665 Landfill. 

“Landfill” means a disposal site or part of a site at which refuse is deposited. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.665))


18.20.667 Landscape water features.

“Landscape water features” means a pond, pool or fountain used as a decorative component of a development. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.667))


18.20.670 Landscaping. 

“Landscaping” means live vegetative materials required for a development. Said materials provided along the boundaries of a development site is referred to as perimeter landscaping. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.670))


18.20.675 Landslide. 

“Landslide” means episodic downslope movement of a mass including, but not limited to, soil, rock or snow. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.675))


18.20.680 Landslide hazard area. 

“Landslide hazard area” means an area subject to severe risk of landslide, based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include any areas susceptible to landslide because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure hydrology, or other factors, and include, at a minimum, the following:

(1) An area with a combination of:

(a) Slopes steeper than 15 percent of inclination;

(b) Impermeable soils, such as silt and clay, interbedded with granular soils, such as sand and gravel; and

(c) Springs or seasonal ground water seepage;

(2) Areas of historic failures such as: 

(a) An area that has shown movement during the Holocene epoch, which is from 10,000 years ago to the present, or that is underlain by mass wastage debris from that epoch;

(b) Those areas delineated by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a significant limitation for building site development;

(c) Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the United States Geological Survey or Washington Department of Natural Resources;

(3) An area potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion or undercutting by wave action including stream channel migration zones;

(4) An area that shows evidence of or is at risk from snow avalanches;

(5) An area located in a canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows, or catastrophic flooding, or deposition of stream-transported sediments;

(6) Any area with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of bedrock. See also CMC 18.20.1230, Steep slope hazard areas;

(7) Slopes having gradients steeper than 80 percent subject to rockfall during seismic shaking. See also CMC 18.20.1230, Steep slope hazard areas;

(8) Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.680))


18.20.682 Large format retail trade and services. 

“Large format retail” means a retail establishment greater than 100,000 square feet for all structures that offers the sale of goods to the general public, including limited sales to wholesale customers. These uses typically require high parking to building floor area ratios and serve a regional market. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.682))


18.20.683A Letter of map amendment.

“Letter of map amendment” means an official determination by FEMA that a property has been inadvertently included in an area subject to inundation by the base flood as shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.683B Letter of map revision.

“Letter of map revision” means a letter issued by FEMA to revise the flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map and flood insurance study for a community to change base flood elevations, and floodplain and floodway boundary delineation. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.684 Level of service (LOS), fire.

“Level of service (LOS), fire” means the standards adopted by the Regional Fire Authority for the delivery of fire and emergency medical response services, as set forth in the RFA’s adopted Standard of Cover and reflected in the capital facilities and equipment plan. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B))


18.20.685 Level of service (LOS), traffic.

“Level of service (LOS), traffic” means a quantitative measure of traffic congestion identified by a declining letter scale (A-F) as calculated by the methodology contained in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual Special Report 209, or current edition, or as calculated by another method approved by the Department of Community Development. LOS “A” indicates free flow of traffic with no delays while LOS “F” indicates jammed conditions or extensive delay. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.685))


18.20.690 Light equipment. 

“Light equipment” means hand-held tools and construction equipment, such as chain saws, wheelbarrows and post-hole diggers. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.690))


18.20.695 Livestock. 

“Livestock” means any domestic equines, sheep, goats, bovines, llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches, and swine, or similar animals. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.695))


18.20.697 Livestock facility.

“Livestock facility” means an accessory building used to house livestock. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.700 Livestock, large. 

“Livestock, large” means livestock with a weight of 200 pounds or more. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.700))


18.20.705 Livestock sales. 

“Livestock sales” means the sale of livestock, but not including auctions. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.710))


18.20.710 Livestock, small. 

“Livestock, small” means livestock weighing less than 200 pounds. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.705))


18.20.715 Loading space. 

“Loading space” means a space for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading cargo or passengers. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.715))


18.20.720 Log storage. 

“Log storage” means a facility for the open or enclosed storage of logs, which may include repair facilities for equipment used on-site or operations offices. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.720))


18.20.725 Lot. 

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created pursuant to CMC Title 17, Subdivisions. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.725))


18.20.727 Lot frontage.

“Lot frontage” means the shortest distance between the sides of the lot along the boundary abutting the street or private road. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.730 Lot line, interior. 

“Lot line, interior” means lot lines that delineate property boundaries along those portions of the property which do not abut a street. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.730))


18.20.732 Low impact development.

“Low impact development (LID)” is a stormwater management, site design, and engineering approach that strives to mimic pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation, and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. Specific LID practices and standards are identified and referenced in Chapter 13.25 CMC and CMC Titles 12 and 18. (Ord. 26-16 § 17; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.733 Maintenance.

“Maintenance” means the usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation from a lawfully established condition without any expansion of or significant change from that originally established condition. Activities within landscaped areas within areas subject to native vegetation retention requirements may be considered “maintenance” only if they maintain or enhance the canopy and understory cover. “Maintenance” includes repair work but does not include replacement work. When maintenance is conducted specifically in accordance with the Regional Road Maintenance Endangered Species Act Program Guidelines, the definition of “maintenance” in the glossary of those guidelines supersedes the definition of “maintenance” in this section. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.735 Manufactured home.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 32 body feet or more in length; or when erected on site, is 300 square feet or more in area; which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities; which contains plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems; and shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this section, or of Chapter 296-150M WAC, except the size requirements for which the manufacturer voluntarily complies with the standards and files the certification required by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.755))


18.20.740 Manufactured home park.

“Manufactured home park” means a development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.760))


18.20.741 Manufacturing, heavy.

“Manufacturing, heavy” means land uses characterized by larger size facilities engaged in the processing of raw materials or parts into finished products. Such facilities may have a higher degree of negative environmental impacts due to the processes employed and operations. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.742 Manufacturing, light.

“Manufacturing, light” means land uses characterized by small size facilities where no heavy manufacturing or specialized industrial processes takes place. Typical light manufacturing activities include printing, material testing, and assembly components. Such facilities usually employ less than 100 persons. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.743 Mapping partner.

“Mapping partner” means any organization or individual that is involved in the development and maintenance of a draft flood boundary work map, preliminary flood insurance rate map or flood insurance rate map. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.744 Marijuana.

“Marijuana” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(v), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.1 Marijuana processor.

“Marijuana processor” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(x), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.2 Marijuana producer.

“Marijuana producer” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(y), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.3 Marijuana retail outlet.

“Marijuana retail outlet” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(oo), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.4 Marijuana retailer.

“Marijuana retailer” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(bb), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.5 Marijuana-infused products.

“Marijuana-infused products” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(cc), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.744.6 Marijuana, useable.

“Marijuana, useable” or “useable marijuana” shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101(tt), as currently adopted and hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-16 § 5)


18.20.745 Marina.

“Marina” means an establishment providing docking, moorage space and related activities limited to the provisioning or minor repair of pleasure boats and yachts, and accessory facilities including, but not limited to:

(1) Showers;

(2) Toilets; and

(3) Self-service laundries. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.735))


18.20.748 Market manager.

“Market manager” means one who oversees the general operations of a farmers’ or public market, which may include: acting as the applicant for a required temporary use permit; acting as the main contact with the City; ensuring compliance with State and municipal law and health regulations; overseeing the setup, operation, and closing of the market each day; recruiting vendors; collecting payment; and promoting the market. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.749 Mass.

“Mass” means the physical volume or bulk of a solid body. The mass of a building is its three-dimensional form, bulkiness and relationship to exterior spaces. During the design process, massing is one of many aspects of form considered by an architect or designer and can be the result of both exterior and interior design considerations. Architectural massing can be used to identify a building entry, denote a stairway or simply create visual depth to soften the visual mass of the overall structure. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.750 Material error.

“Material error” means substantive information upon which a permit decision is based that is submitted in error or is omitted at the time of permit application. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.740))


18.20.750.5 Medical office. 

“Medical office” means a facility that provides diagnosis and outpatient care on a routine basis but is unable to provide prolonged in-house medical or major surgical care. Medical clinics are included in this definition. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.751 Microwave. 

“Microwave” means electromagnetic waves with a frequency range of 300 megahertz (MHz) to 300 gigahertz (GHz). (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.745))


18.20.752 Mitigation. 

“Mitigation” means sequentially avoiding impacts, minimizing impacts and action taken to compensate for unavoidable adverse impacts to the environment resulting from a development activity or alteration. Mitigation, in the following sequential order of preference, is: 

(1) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(2) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts;

(3) Rectifying the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project;

(4) Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

(5) Compensating for the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat conservation areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

(6) Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation and taking remedial action when necessary.

Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.750))


18.20.753 Mitigation bank.

“Mitigation bank” means a property that has been protected in perpetuity and approved by appropriate County, State and Federal agencies expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts through any combination of restoration, creation or enhancement of wetlands and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands and wetland buffers or protection of other aquatic or wildlife resources. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.751))


18.20.755 Mitigation banking.

“Mitigation banking” means a system for providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized wetland impacts of development in City of Covington in which credits are generated through restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of wetlands, and in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands, wetland buffers, and/or other aquatic resources. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.752))


18.20.757 Maximum extent practical.

“Maximum extent practical” means the highest level of effectiveness that can be achieved through the use of best available science or technology. In determining what the “maximum extent practical is” the City shall consider, at a minimum, the effectiveness, engineering feasibility, commercial availability, safety and cost of the measures. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.760 Mixed-use development.

“Mixed-use development” means a combination of residential and nonresidential uses within the same building or site as part of an integrated development project with functional interrelationships and coherent physical design. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.753))


18.20.765 Monitoring. 

“Monitoring” means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on biologic, hydrologic and geologic systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation through the collection and analysis of data for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems, functions and features including, but not limited to, gathering baseline data. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.765))


18.20.770 Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales. 

“Monuments, tombstones, and gravestones sales” means the retail sale of custom stonework products including only uses located in SIC Industry No. 5599 – Monuments, finished to custom order, tombstones and gravestones finished. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.770))


18.20.775 Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing.

“Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing” means fabricating or assembling complete passenger automobiles, trucks, commercial cars and buses, motorcycles, and bicycles, including only uses located in SIC Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 371 – Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment; and

(2) 375 – Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.780))


18.20.780 Motor vehicle, boat and mobile home dealer.

“Motor vehicle, boat and mobile home dealer” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of new and/or used automobiles, motor homes, motorcycles, trailers, boats or mobile homes, including only uses located in SIC Major Group and Industry Group Nos.:

(1) 55 – Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations except:

(a) 553 – Auto and home supply stores;

(b) 554 – Gasoline service stations; and

(2) Aircraft dealers found in 5599:

(a) 527 – Mobile home dealers; and

(b) Yacht brokers found in 7389. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.775))


18.20.782 Mulch.

“Mulch” means any material such as leaves, bark, straw left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.782))


18.20.783 Museum.

“Museum” means any establishment open to the public where works of art, scientific specimens, or other objects of permanent value are kept and displayed. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.785 Municipal water production.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.785))


18.20.790 Native vegetation.

“Native vegetation” means plant species indigenous to the Puget Sound region that reasonably could be expected to naturally occur on the site. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.790))


18.20.795 Naturalized species. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.795))


18.20.797 Net buildable area.

“Net buildable area” means the “site area” less the following areas:

(1) Areas within a project site that are required to be dedicated for public rights-of-way in excess of 60 feet in width; 

(2) Critical areas and their buffers to the extent they are required by Chapter 18.65 CMC to remain undeveloped; 

(3) Areas required for storm water control facilities other than facilities that are completely underground, including, but not limited to, retention or detention ponds, biofiltration swales and setbacks from such ponds and swales; 

(4) Areas required to be dedicated or reserved as on-site recreation areas; 

(5) Regional utility corridors; and 

(6) Other areas, excluding setbacks, required to remain undeveloped. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.797))


18.20.800 Nonconformance.

“Nonconformance” means any use, improvement or structure established in conformance with City of Covington rules and regulations in effect at the time of establishment that no longer conforms to the range of uses permitted in the site’s current zone or to the current development standards of the code due to changes in the code or its application to the subject property. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.800))


18.20.805 Nonhydroelectric generation facility.

“Nonhydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity by nuclear reaction, burning fossil fuels, or other electricity generation methods. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.805))


18.20.810 Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). 

“Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER)” means electromagnetic radiation of low photon energy unable to cause ionization. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.810))


18.20.815 Noxious weed.

“Noxious weed” means a plant species that is highly destructive, competitive or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices, limited to any plant species listed on the State noxious weed list in Chapter 16-750 WAC, regardless of the list’s regional designation or classification of the species. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.815))


18.20.816 Nursing and personal care facility.

“Nursing and personal care facility” means any facility which provides convalescent or chronic care for 24 consecutive hours for three or more patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who by reason of illness or infirmity are unable to properly care for themselves. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.817 Off-street required parking lot.

“Off-street required parking lot” means parking facilities constructed to meet the off-street parking requirements of Chapters 18.31 and/or 18.50 CMC for land uses located on a lot separate from the parking facilities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.817))


18.20.819 Open space. 

“Open space” means areas left predominately in a natural state to create urban separators and greenbelts, sustain native ecosystems, connect and increase protective buffers for environmentally critical areas, provide a visual contrast to continuous development, reinforce community identity and aesthetics, or provide links between important environmental or recreational resources. Open space functions as protection of natural resources and biodiversity, recreation spaces, support for economic development opportunities, development of neighborhood gathering spaces, promotion of public health benefits and civic and cultural infrastructure. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.819))


18.20.820 Open-work fence.

“Open-work fence” means a fence in which the solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute no more than 50 percent of the total surface area. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.820))


18.20.825 Ordinary high water line.

“Ordinary high water line (OHWL)” is defined by WAC 77-55-011(16) and means the mark on the shores of all water (e.g., lakes and streams) that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual and so long continued in ordinary years as to mark upon the soil or vegetation a character distinct from the abutting upland; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water line cannot be found, the “ordinary high water line” adjoining saltwater is the line of mean higher high water and “ordinary high water line” adjoining freshwater is the elevation of the mean annual flood. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.825))


18.20.827 Outdoor commercial.

“Outdoor commercial” means a commercial use where the majority of activity occurs outside a permanent structure. “Outdoor commercial” does not include “farmers’ markets” defined in CMC 18.20.451.5 or “public market” as defined in CMC 18.20.940.5. (Ord. 04-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.829 Outdoor performance center.

“Outdoor performance center” means an establishment for the performing arts with open-air seating for audiences. Such establishments may include related services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.830). Formerly 18.20.830)


18.20.830 Outpatient clinic.

“Outpatient clinic” means a building designed and used for medical or surgical diagnosis, and treatment of persons under the care of doctors and nurses. No housing of patients is provided at such a facility. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.831 Overburden-cover-to-seam-thickness ratio. 

“Overburden-cover-to-seam-thickness ratio” means the thickness as measured from the ground surface to the top of the abandoned mine working divided by the extracted thickness of the coal seam, expressed as a ratio. A 10-foot extracted coal seam will have a 10:1 overburden-cover-to-seam-thickness ratio at a depth of 100 feet and a 15:1 overburden-cover-to-seam-thickness ratio at a depth of 150 feet. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.831))


18.20.832 Overspray. 

“Overspray” means irrigation water applied beyond the landscape area. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.832))


18.20.833 Parapet.

A parapet is a low wall projecting from the edge of a platform, terrace, or roof. Parapets may rise above the cornice of a building. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.834 Parcel.

“Parcel” means the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which is documented for property tax purposes and given a tax lot number by the King County Assessor. (Ord. 26-16 § 18)


18.20.835 Park and recreation facilities.

“Park and recreation facilities” means a site designed or developed for recreational use by the public, including those dedicated parklands, developed parks and associated improvements so designated in the parks and recreation element of the City’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.835))


18.20.840 Park service area.

“Park service area” means a geographic area in which a defined set of park facilities provides service to development within the area. The entire area within the City limits is the park service area. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.840))


18.20.845 Parking lot aisle.

“Parking lot aisle” means that portion of the off-street parking area used exclusively for the maneuvering and circulation of motor vehicles and in which parking is prohibited. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.845))


18.20.850 Parking lot unit depth.

“Parking lot unit depth” means the linear distance within which one parking aisle is flanked by accessible rows of parking stalls as measured perpendicular to the parking aisle. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.850))


18.20.855 Parking space. 

“Parking space” means an area accessible to vehicles, improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of parking a motor vehicle. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.855))


18.20.860 Parking space angle. 

“Parking space angle” means the angle measured from a reference line, generally the property line or center line of an aisle, at which motor vehicles are to be parked. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.860))


18.20.865 Party of record (POR). 

“Party of record (POR)” means a person who has submitted written comments, testified, asked to be notified or is the sponsor of a petition entered as part of the official City record on a specific development proposal. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.865))


18.20.870 Peak hour.

“Peak hour” means the hour during the morning or afternoon when the most critical level of service occurs for a particular roadway or intersection. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.870))


18.20.872 Pedestrian orientation.

“Pedestrian orientation” means designing the built environment with the needs of humans who are walking in mind. Key elements include building height, bulk and placement; streetscape, sidewalk design and connections; and mix and type of land uses. The result should be a walkable community that reinforces urban design goals for the neighborhood. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.873 Pedestrian walkway.

“Pedestrian walkway” means a surfaced walkway, separate from the traveled portion of a right-of-way or parking lot/driving aisle. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.874 Performing arts center.

“Performing arts center” means any facility consisting of stages and seating for the live performance of theatrical or musical works. Ancillary uses such as concessions and gift shops may be included in this use. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.875 Permanent school facilities.

“Permanent school facilities” means facilities of a school district with a fixed foundation which are not relocatable facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.875))


18.20.875.5 Person.

“Person” means any individual, firm, association, co-partnership, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. (Ord. 26-16 § 19)


18.20.876 Personal service.

“Personal service” means any use that provides services involving the care of a person or of a person’s apparel. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.880 Personal medical supply store.

“Personal medical supply store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, and artificial limbs, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.: 

(1) 5995 – Optical goods stores; and

(2) 5999 – Hearing aids and orthopedic and artificial limb stores. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.880))


18.20.885 Pet shop.

“Pet shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of pets, small animals, pet supplies, or grooming of pets, including only uses located in SIC Industry No. 5999 – Pet shops. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.885))


18.20.890 Photographic and electronic shop.

“Photographic and electronic shop” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of cameras and photographic supplies, and a variety of household electronic equipment, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5946 – Camera and photographic supply stores;

(2) 5999 – Binoculars and telescopes;

(3) 5731 – Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores; and

(4) 5734 – Computer and computer software stores. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.890))


18.20.893 Physical fitness/recreation club.

“Physical fitness/recreation club” means a small-scale private facility, often with a specific physical fitness focus such as, but not limited to: exercise equipment, small group exercise, indoor cycling, climbing, martial arts, personal training, dance, and yoga. “Physical fitness/recreation club” does not include “shooting range” as defined in CMC 18.20.1080. (Ord. 06-19 § 1; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.895 Plant associations of infrequent occurrence.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.895))


18.20.897 Plant factor. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.897))


18.20.898 Preliminary flood insurance rate map.

“Preliminary flood insurance rate map” means the initial map issued by FEMA for public review and comment that delineates areas of flood hazard. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.899 Potable water.

“Potable water” means water suitable for human consumption. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.899))


18.20.899.3 Preapplication.

“Preapplication” means the meeting(s) or form(s) used by an applicant for a development permit to present initial project intentions to the Department of Community Development or its successor agency. “Preapplication” does not mean application. (Ord. 26-16 § 20)


18.20.899.5 Preliminary flood insurance study.

“Preliminary flood insurance study” means the preliminary report provided by FEMA for public review and comment that includes flood profiles, text, data tables and photographs. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.899.6 Premises.3

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. (Ord. 26-16 § 21)


18.20.899.7 Prepared food sales.

“Prepared food sales” means the sale of freshly made foods, available for sale and immediate consumption on site. Prepared food sales shall be accessory to farmers’ and public markets. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.900 Private.

“Private” means solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their guests is a private garage. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.900))


18.20.905 Private storm water management facility. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.905))


18.20.908 Processed food sales.

“Processed food sales” means the sale of fresh food products that have been personally prepared and processed by a seller on property that they own or lease. Processed foods shall include meats, seafood, ciders, baked goods, jams, etc., that have value added through hands-on processing. Processed food sales shall be accessory to farmers’ and public markets, provided they have been prepared in the State of Washington. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.910 Professional office. 

“Professional office” means an office used as a place of business by licensed professionals or persons in other generally recognized professions which use training or knowledge of a technical, scientific or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and which does not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.910))


18.20.912 Proportionate share.

“Proportionate share” means that portion of the cost of public facility improvements and facilities that is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of new development. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 16-16 § 6)


18.20.915 Public agency.

“Public agency” means any agency, political subdivision or unit of local government of this State including, but not limited to, municipal corporations, special purpose districts and local service districts, any agency of the State of Washington, the United States or any State thereof or any Indian tribe recognized as such by the Federal government. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.915))


18.20.920 Public agency animal control facility.

“Public agency animal control facility” means a facility for the impoundment and disposal of stray or abandoned small animals. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.920))


18.20.925 Public agency archive. 

“Public agency archive” means a facility for the enclosed storage of public agency documents or related materials, excluding storage of vehicles, equipment, or similar materials. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.925))


18.20.930 Office, public agency or utility.

“Office, public agency or utility” means an office for the administration of any governmental or utility activity or program, with no outdoor storage and including, but not limited to, uses located in SIC Major Group, Industry Group and Industry Nos.:

(1) 91 – Executive, legislative, and general government, except finance;

(2) 93 – Public finance, taxation, and monetary policy;

(3) 94 – Administration of human resource programs;

(4) 95 – Administration of environmental quality and housing program;

(5) 96 – Administration of economic programs;

(6) 972 – International affairs;

(7) 9222 – Legal counsel and prosecution; and

(8) 9229 – Public order and safety. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.930))


18.20.935 Yard, public agency or utility.

“Yard, public agency or utility” means a facility for open or enclosed storage and repair and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials, including ancillary office to support said use. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.935))


18.20.940 Public agency training facility.

“Public agency training facility” means an establishment or school for training State and local law enforcement, fire safety, National Guard or transit personnel and facilities including but not limited to:

(1) Dining and overnight accommodations;

(2) Classrooms;

(3) Shooting ranges;

(4) Auto test tracks; and

(5) Fire suppression simulations. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.940))


18.20.940.5 Public market.

“Public market” means a site where farmers and/or resellers sell not less than 50 percent locally grown, produced, caught, or gathered fruits, vegetables, herbs, nuts, honey, dairy products, eggs, poultry, mushrooms, meats, fish, flowers, nursery stock, and plants. Up to 50 percent of a public market’s total number of vendor spaces may consist of resellers and/or accessory uses. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.941 Public road right-of-way structure.

“Public road right-of-way structure” means the existing, maintained, improved road right-of-way or railroad prism and the roadway drainage features including ditches and the associated surface water conveyance system, flow control and water quality treatment facilities and other structures that are ancillary to those facilities including catch-basins, access holes and culverts. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.942 Public street.

“Public street” means any public or private road or access easement intended to provide public access to any lot/development, but excluding any service road or internal driving aisles (e.g., within parking lots). “Public street” includes the street and all other improvements inside the publicly owned right-of-way. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.943 Public transportation amenities.

“Public transportation amenities” means transfer of development credits (TDC) amenities financed by public transportation funds that shall provide transportation improvement or programs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.943))


18.20.945 Radio frequency. 

Repealed by Ord. 09-12. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.945))


18.20.947 Rapid charging station. 

“Rapid charging station” means an industrial grade electrical outlet that allows for faster recharging of electric vehicle batteries through higher power levels and that meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.20.950 Reasonable use.

“Reasonable use” means a legal concept articulated by Federal and State courts in regulatory taking cases. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.950))


18.20.955 Receiving site.

“Receiving site” means land for which allowable residential density is increased over the base density permitted by the underlying zone, by virtue of permanently securing and dedicating to the City of Covington, or another qualifying agency, the development potential of an associated sending site. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.955))


18.20.957 Reclamation.

“Reclamation” means the final grading and restoration of a site to re-establish the vegetative cover, soil stability and surface water conditions to accommodate and sustain all permitted uses of the site and to prevent and mitigate future environmental degradation. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.960 Recreational vehicle (RV).

“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a motorized vehicle designed primarily for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use which has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle, including but not limited to:

(1) Travel trailers;

(2) Camping trailers;

(3) Tent trailers;

(4) Truck campers;

(5) Camper vans;

(6) Motor homes; and

(7) Multi-use vehicles. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.960))


18.20.965 Recreational vehicle parks.

“Recreational vehicle parks” means the use of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites, including hook up facilities, are located for occupancy by the general public of recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.965))


18.20.966 Recreation, indoor.

“Recreation, indoor” means a large-scale indoor recreational use such as, but not limited to: skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs and fitness centers providing a wide variety of sport and fitness services, multi-court gymnasiums not accessory to an educational institution, multi-court racket clubs, sports arenas, large pools and similar uses. “Recreation, indoor” does not include “shooting range” as defined in CMC 18.20.1080. (Ord. 06-19 § 1; Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.967 Recreation, outdoor.

“Recreation, outdoor” means golf courses, tennis courts, athletic fields, pools, skate parks, and similar uses. “Recreation, outdoor” does not include “shooting range” as defined in CMC 18.20.1080. (Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.970 Recyclable material. 

“Recyclable material” means a nontoxic, recoverable substance that can be reprocessed for the manufacture of new products. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.970))


18.20.972 Reference evapotranspiration (Eto).

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.972))


18.20.973 Regional road maintenance guidelines.

“Regional road maintenance guidelines” means the National Marine Fisheries Service-published Regional Road Maintenance Endangered Species Act Program Guidelines. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.975 Regional storm water management facility. 

Repealed by Ord. 26-16. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.975))




18.20.980 Regional utility corridor. 

“Regional utility corridor” means a right-of-way tract or easement other than a street right-of-way which contains transmission lines or pipelines for utility companies. Right-of-way tracts or easements containing lines serving individual lots or developments are not regional utility corridors. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.980))


18.20.985 Relocatable facilities cost per student. 

“Relocatable facilities cost per student” means the estimated cost of purchasing and siting a relocatable facility in a school district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.985))


18.20.990 Relocatable facility. 

“Relocatable facility” means any factory-built structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is designed to be used as an education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities, to meet the needs of service areas within a district or to cover the gap between the time that families move into new residential developments and the date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.990))


18.20.995 Relocation facilities. 

“Relocation facilities” means housing units within City of Covington that provide housing to persons who have been involuntarily displaced from other housing units within City of Covington as a result of conversion of their housing unit to other land uses. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.995))


18.20.997 Repair.

“Repair” means to fix or restore to sound condition after damage. “Repair” does not include replacement of structures or systems. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.998 Replace.

“Replace” means to take or fill the place of a structure, fence, deck or paved surface with an equivalent or substitute structure, fence, deck or paved surface that serves the same purpose. “Replacement” may or may not involve an expansion. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.999 Reseller.

“Reseller” means one who buys fruits, vegetables, herbs, nuts, honey, dairy products, eggs, poultry, mushrooms, meats, fish, flowers, nursery stock, and plants directly from the farmer that grew, produced, caught, or gathered the item, transports it to a market, and resells it directly to the consumer. (Ord. 09-09 § 3)


18.20.999.5 Residence.

“Residence” means a building designed and/or used to house a single family. The definition of “residence” shall include trailers on an individual lot and multifamily and condominium units. (Ord. 26-16 § 22)


18.20.1000 Restoration.

“Restoration” means, for purposes of critical areas regulation, an action that re-establishes the structure and functions of a critical area or any associated buffer that has been altered. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1000))


18.20.1005 Retail, comparison. 

“Retail, comparison” provides for the sale of comparison good and services and is centrally located in the community or region. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1005))


18.20.1010 Retail, convenience. 

“Retail, convenience” provides for daily living goods, is easy to access and use and is close to residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1010))


18.20.1010.3 Retail trade and services.

“Retail trade and services” means any use that provides for the sale of goods and services for both local and regional markets. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.1011 Retaining wall. 

“Retaining wall” means any wall used to resist the lateral displacement of any material. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1011))


18.20.1012 Road amenities. 

“Road amenities” means transfer of development credits (TDC) amenities financed by road CIP or operating funds that shall provide transportation improvements or programs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1011A))


18.20.1012.5 Roadway.

“Roadway” means the maintained areas cleared and graded within a road right-of-way or railroad prism. For a road right-of-way, “roadway” includes all maintained and traveled areas, shoulders, pathways, sidewalks, ditches and cut and fill slopes. For a railroad prism, “roadway” includes the maintained railbed, shoulders, and cut and fill slopes. “Roadway” is equivalent to the “existing, maintained, improved road right-of-way or railroad prism” as defined in the regional road maintenance guidelines. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1013 Runoff. 

“Runoff” means that portion of water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that flows over the surface or just below the surface from where it fell and is found in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes and wetlands as well as shallow ground water. (Ord. 26-16 § 23; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1012))


18.20.1015 Salmonid. 

“Salmonid” means a member of the fish family Salmonidae, including, but not limited to: 

(1) Chinook, coho, chum, sockeye and pink salmon; 

(2) Rainbow, steelhead and cutthroat salmon, which are also known as trout; 

(3) Brown trout; 

(4) Brook, bull trout, which is also known as char, and Dolly Varden char; 

(5) Kokanee; and 

(6) Pygmy whitefish. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1015))


18.20.1016 Salmonid migration barrier.

“Salmonid migration barrier” means an in-stream blockage that consists of a natural gradient drop (no human influence) with an uninterrupted slope greater than 100 percent (45-degree angle and height in excess of 11 vertical feet) with anadromous salmon-bearing waters or a height of three vertical feet within resident trout-only bearing waters. Culverts and weirs meet the definition, yet are subject to the Director’s determination of whether the barrier must be removed or may remain, based on factors including impacts to existing systems and significant expense. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1020 School bus base. 

“School bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repairs and maintenance of coaches and other vehicles of a school transit system. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1020))


18.20.1025 School district. 

“School district” means the Kent School District. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1025))


18.20.1030 School district support facility.

“School district support facility” means uses (excluding schools and bus bases) that are required for the operation of a school district. This term includes school district administrative offices, centralized kitchens, and maintenance or storage facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1030))


18.20.1033 Schools, compulsory.4

“Schools, compulsory” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the state of Washington, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.1035 Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high.

“Schools, elementary, and middle/junior high” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades kindergarten through nine, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1035))


18.20.1040 Schools, secondary or high school.

“Schools, secondary or high school” means institutions of learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the Education Code of the State of Washington in grades nine through 12, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums and athletic facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1040))


18.20.1042 Scour.

“Scour” means the erosive action of running water in streams, which excavates and carries away material from the bed and banks. “Scour” includes earth and solid rock material. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1045 Seismic hazard areas.

“Seismic hazard areas” means those areas in City of Covington subject to severe risk of earthquake damage as a result of ground movement, ground displacement, or soil liquefaction in areas underlain by cohesionless soils of low density and usually in association with a shallow ground water table or of other seismically induced settlement. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1045))


18.20.1050 Self-service storage facility.

“Self-service storage facility” means an establishment containing separate storage spaces that are leased or rented as individual units. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1050))


18.20.1055 Sending site. 

“Sending site” means land designated in Chapter 18.95 CMC as capable of providing a public benefit if permanently protected by virtue of having its zoned development potential transferred to another property. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1055))


18.20.1060 Senior citizen. 

“Senior citizen” means a person aged 62 or older. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1060))


18.20.1062 Senior citizen assisted housing.

“Senior citizen assisted housing” means housing in a building consisting of two or more dwelling units or sleeping units restricted to occupancy by at least one senior citizen per unit, and may include the following support services, as deemed necessary:

(1) Food preparation and dining areas;

(2) Group activity areas;

(3) Medical supervision; and

(4) Similar activities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1062))


18.20.1065 Sensitive areas. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1065))


18.20.1068 Service area.

“Service area” means the incorporated areas of the City of Covington. (Ord. 26-16 § 24)


18.20.1070 Setback. 

“Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a specified line such as a lot, easement or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1070))


18.20.1072 Shelter, animal.

“Shelter, animal” means a facility that is used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization or person devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.20.1075 Shelters for temporary placement.

“Shelters for temporary placement” means housing units within City of Covington that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed four weeks. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1075))


18.20.1080 Shooting range. 

“Shooting range” means a facility designed to provide a confined space for safe target practice with firearms, archery equipment, or other weapons whether open to the public, open only to private membership, open to organizational training such as law enforcement, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1080))




18.20.1083 Shoreline.

“Shoreline” means those lands defined as shorelines of the State in the Shorelines Management Act of 1971, Chapter 90.58 RCW, as amended or updated. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1084 Side channel.

“Side channel” means a channel that is secondary to and carries water to or from the main channel of a stream or the main body of a lake, including a back-watered channel or area and oxbow channel that is still connected to a stream by one or more above-ground channel connections or by inundation at the base flood. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1085 Sign. 

“Sign” means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that uses graphics, symbols, or written copy and is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising, identification or informative purposes. (Ord. 08-18 § 4 (Exh. B); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1085))


18.20.1090 Sign, awning.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1090))


18.20.1095 Sign, changing message center.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1095))


18.20.1100 Sign, community bulletin board.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1100))


18.20.1105 Sign, directional. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1105))


18.20.1110 Sign, freestanding. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1110))


18.20.1115 Sign, fuel price. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1115))


18.20.1120 Sign, incidental. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1120))


18.20.1125 Sign, indirectly illuminated. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1125))


18.20.1130 Sign, monument.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1130))


18.20.1135 Sign, off-premises directional. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1135))


18.20.1140 Sign, on-premises.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1140))


18.20.1145 Sign, permanent residential development identification.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1145))


18.20.1150 Sign, portable.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1150))


18.20.1155 Sign, projecting. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1155))


18.20.1160 Sign, time and temperature. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1160))


18.20.1165 Sign, wall. 

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1165))


18.20.1166 Significant gap in service, wireless communications.

Repealed by Ord. 03-19. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1167 Significant tree.

“Significant tree” means an existing healthy tree that is not a hazard tree (i.e., a tree that does not have a high probability of imminently falling due to a debilitating disease or structural defect) and that when measured has a minimum diameter of six inches DBH or larger. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1167))


18.20.1170 Site.

“Site” means a single lot, or two or more contiguous lots that are under common ownership or documented legal control, used as a single parcel for a development proposal in order to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1170))


18.20.1172 Site area.

“Site area” means the total horizontal area of a project site. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1172))


18.20.1175 Site cost per student. 

“Site cost per student” means the estimated cost of a site in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s facilities standard per grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1175))


18.20.1177 SITUS file. 

“SITUS file” means information on an individual parcel of land, including its size, known extent of existing development, known environmental constraints, approval conditions and other site-specific information, contained in the computerized permitting and land parcel data base of the Department of Public Works or its successor agencies. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1177))


18.20.1178 Slope.

“Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1185 Soil recycling facility. 

“Soil recycling facility” means an establishment engaged in the collection, storage and treatment of contaminated soils to remove and re-use organic contaminants. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1185))


18.20.1190 Source-separated organic material.

“Source-separated organic material” means vegetative material, scrap lumber or wood, or other materials that provide a source for recycled or composted products. This does not include chemically treated wood products and/or toxic organic substances. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1190))


18.20.1195 Special use permit. 

“Special use permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate a regional land use at a particular location, subject to conditions placed on the proposed use to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1195))


18.20.1200 Specialized instruction school.

“Specialized instruction school” means establishments engaged in providing specialized instruction in a designated field of study, rather than a full range of courses in unrelated areas; including, but not limited to:

(1) Art;

(2) Dance;

(3) Music;

(4) Cooking;

(5) Driving; and

(6) Pet obedience training. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1200))


18.20.1210 Sporting goods store.

“Sporting goods store” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of sporting goods and equipment, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 5941 – Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops; and

(2) 5999 – Tent shops and trophy shops. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1210))


18.20.1215 Sports club.

“Sports club” means an establishment engaged in operating physical fitness facilities and sports and recreation clubs, including only uses located in SIC Industry Nos.:

(1) 7991 – Physical fitness facilities; and

(2) 7997 – Membership sports and recreation clubs. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1215))


18.20.1220 Stable. 

“Stable” means a structure or facility in which horses or other livestock are kept for:

(1) Boarding;

(2) Training;

(3) Riding lessons;

(4) Breeding;

(5) Rental; or

(6) Personal use. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1220))


18.20.1225 Standard of service, school districts.

“Standard of service, school districts” means the standard adopted by each school district which identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of classrooms, the types of facilities the district believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the school district. The district’s standard of service shall not be adjusted for any portion of the classrooms housed in relocatable facilities which are used as transitional facilities or for any specialized facilities housed in relocatable facilities. Except as otherwise defined by the school board pursuant to a board resolution, transitional facilities shall mean those facilities that are used to cover the time required for the construction of permanent facilities; provided, that the “necessary financial commitments” as defined in Chapter 18.75 CMC are in place to complete the permanent facilities called for in the capital plan. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1225))


18.20.1230 Steep slope hazard areas. 

“Steep slope hazard area” means an area on a slope of 40 percent inclination or more within a vertical elevation change of at least 20 feet. For the purpose of this definition, a slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and is measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief. Also for the purpose of this definition: 

(1) The “toe” of a slope means a distinct topographic break in slope that separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes inclined at 40 percent or more. Where no distinct break exists, the “toe” of a slope is the lowermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet; and 

(2) The “top” of a slope is a distinct topographic break in slope that separates slopes inclined at less than 40 percent from slopes inclined at 40 percent or more. Where no distinct break exists, the “top” of a slope is the uppermost limit of the area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1230))


18.20.1231 Stormwater.5

“Stormwater” means runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events, including surface runoff and drainage. (Ord. 26-16 § 25)


18.20.1232 Stormwater management facility.

“Stormwater management facility” means constructed facilities that collect, convey, treat, detain or retain stormwater runoff. Stormwater management facilities may include, but are not limited to, such elements as concrete gutters, catch basins, manholes, storm pipe, ditches, swales, low impact development best management practices, water quality and flow control structures, and other facilities as approved by the city’s stormwater management program. (Ord. 26-16 § 27)


18.20.1233 Stormwater manuals.

“Stormwater manuals” means the manuals, regulations, and standards adopted in CMC Title 13. (Ord. 26-16 § 28)


18.20.1235 Stream functions. 

“Stream functions” means natural processes performed by streams including functions which are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, such as purifying water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for ground water aquifers, moderating surface and storm water flows and maintaining the free flowing conveyance of water, sediments and other organic matter. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1235))


18.20.1240 Stream. 

“Stream” means an aquatic area where surface water produces a channel, not including a wholly artificial channel, unless it is: 

(1) Used by salmonids; 

(2) Used to convey a stream that occurred naturally before construction of the artificial channel; or

(3) A route that conveys surface water that can be classified as a Type S, F, Np or Ns in the Washington State Water Typing System in accordance with Chapter 222-16 WAC. (Ord. 13-09 § 25; Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1240))


18.20.1245 Street. 

“Street” means a public or recorded private thoroughfare providing pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1245))


18.20.1250 Street frontage. 

“Street frontage” means any portion of a lot or combination of lots which directly abut a public right-of-way. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1250))


18.20.1252 Street wall.

“Street wall” means the frontage of a development proposal site that abuts a public street. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.1255 Structure. 

“Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water; excluding fences six feet or less in height, decks less than 18 inches above grade, paved areas, and structural or nonstructural fill. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1255))


18.20.1256 Structure, electrical transmission.

“Structure, electrical transmission” means any facility (including a pole or a tower) owned by an electric utility that supports electrical lines that carry a voltage of at least 115kV. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1257 Structured parking.

“Structured parking” means providing parking within a structure below, at or above grade in a manner such that vehicles are not visible from the public street. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.1260 Student factor. 

“Student factor” means the number derived by a school district to describe how many students of each grade span are expected to be generated by a dwelling unit. Student factors shall be based on district records of average actual student generated rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five years prior to the date of the fee calculation; if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, districts with similar demographics, or County-wide averages must be used. Student factors must be separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and for grade spans. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1260))


18.20.1265 Submerged land.

“Submerged land” means any land at or below the ordinary high water mark of an aquatic area. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1265))


18.20.1266 Substantial improvement.

“Substantial improvement” means: 

(1) (a) Any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 

(i) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(ii) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

(b) For purposes of this definition, the cost of any improvement is considered to begin when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building begins, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure; and 

(2) Does not include either: 

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 

(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the State or local inventory of historic resources. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1270))


18.20.1267.3 Surface water.

“Surface water” means all water naturally open to the atmosphere (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, streams, impoundments, seas, estuaries, etc.) and all springs, wells, or other collectors which are directly influenced by surface water. (Ord. 26-16 § 29)


18.20.1267.5 Surface water conveyance system.

Repealed by Ord. 26-16. (Ord. 13-09 § 26; Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1268 Surface water discharge.

“Surface water discharge” means the flow of surface water into receiving water or another discharge point. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1268.5 System improvements.

“System improvements” means public facilities that are included in the City’s capital facilities plan and are designed to provide service to service areas within the City, in contrast to project improvements. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 16-16 § 7)


18.20.1269 TDC.

“TDC” means transfer of development credits. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1273))


18.20.1270 TDC amenities. 

“TDC amenities” means improvements or programs that are implemented to facilitate increased densities on or near receiving sites inside cities or in the urban unincorporated area. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1273A))


18.20.1271 TDC bank fund. 

“TDC bank fund” means the fund established under Chapter 18.95 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1273B))


18.20.1272 TDC conversion ratio. 

“TDC conversion ratio” means the ratio by which development credits purchased from a sending site are converted into additional development capacity for use on a receiving site. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1273C))


18.20.1273 TDC executive board.

“TDC executive board” means the board established under Chapter 18.95 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1273D))


18.20.1274 Temporary lodging/hotel.

“Temporary lodging/hotel” means an establishment that provides temporary sleeping accommodations, and may also include ancillary uses such as restaurant, lounge, banquet rooms and convention facilities. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.20.1275 Temporary use permit. 

“Temporary use permit” means permit to allow a use of limited duration and/or frequency, or to allow multiple related events over a specified period. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1275))


18.20.1277 Theater. 

“Theater” means an establishment primarily engaged in the indoor exhibition of motion pictures or of live theatrical presentations. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1277))


18.20.1278 Theatrical production services.

“Theatrical production services” means an establishment engaged in uses located in SIC Industry No. 792 – Theatrical producers (except motion picture), bands, orchestras, and entertainers, except establishments primarily engaged in providing live theatrical presentations, such as road companies and summer theaters. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1278))


18.20.1280 Tightline sewer.

“Tightline sewer” means a sewer trunk line designed and intended specifically to serve only a particular facility or place, and whose pipe diameter should be sized appropriately to ensure service only to that facility or place. It may occur outside the local service area for sewers, but does not amend the local service area. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1280))


18.20.1282 Tower, guy.

“Tower, guy” means a tower that is supported with cable and ground anchors to secure and steady the tower. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1283 Tower, lattice.

“Tower, lattice” means a tapered style of tower that consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple legs and cross-bracing and metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas or similar antenna devices. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1283.5 Tower, monopole.

“Tower, monopole” means a freestanding tower that is composed of a single shaft, usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of tower is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices. These facilities are mounted to a foundation that rests on or in the ground. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1284 Tower, wireless communication facility.

“Tower, wireless communication facility” means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopoles. The term includes, without limitation, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower structures. The term does not include utility poles originally constructed for the use of small wireless facilities. (Ord. 03-19 § 4; Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1284.5 Tower-mounted facilities.

“Tower-mounted facilities” means a wireless communication facility that is mounted to a tower. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1284.7 Townhouse/townhome.

“Townhouse/townhome” is defined as a single-family dwelling unit in a group of two or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. Each townhouse/townhome shall be on a separate lot. (Ord. 02-20 § 2 (Att. A))


18.20.1285 Trails. 

“Trails” means manmade pathways designed and intended for use by pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and/or recreational users. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1285))


18.20.1290 Transfer station.

“Transfer station” means a staffed collection and transportation facility used by private individuals and route collection vehicles to deposit solid waste collected off-site into larger transfer vehicles for transport to permanent disposal sites, and may also include recycling facilities involving collection or processing for shipment. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1290))


18.20.1295 Transit base.

“Transit base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches, light rail trains, and other vehicles of a public transit system. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1295))


18.20.1305 Transitional housing facilities.

“Transitional housing facilities” means housing units within City of Covington owned by public housing authorities, nonprofit organizations or other public interest groups that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed 24 months in conjunction with job training, self sufficiency training, and human services counseling; the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1305))


18.20.1315 Transmission line booster station.

“Transmission line booster station” means an establishment containing equipment designed to increase voltage of electrical power transported through transmission and/or distribution lines to compensate for power loss due to resistance. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1315))


18.20.1330 Transportation system management (TSM).

“Transportation system management (TSM)” means low-cost projects that can be implemented in a short time frame designed to increase the efficiency of existing transportation facilities. This also includes transit and/or ride sharing measures to decrease single occupancy vehicle trips. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1330))


18.20.1331 Tree, hazard.

“Tree, hazard” means any tree, as determined by a certified arborist, with a structural defect, combination of defects or disease resulting in structural defect that, under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site, will result in the loss of a major structural component of that tree in a manner that will: 

(1) Damage a residential structure or accessory structure, place of employment or public assembly or approved parking for a residential structure or accessory structure or place of employment or public assembly; 

(2) Damage an approved road or utility facility; or 

(3) Prevent emergency access in the case of medical hardship. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1332 Trough subsidence.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1332))


18.20.1335 Ultimate roadway section.

“Ultimate roadway section” means a designation by City of Covington that the maximum roadway or intersection capacity has been reached and further right-of-way acquisition and/or improvements are not feasible to increase peak hour vehicle capacity. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1335))


18.20.1340 Undeveloped parcel.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 26-16 § 31)


18.20.1345 Use. 

“Use” means activity or function carried out on an area of land, or in a building or structure located thereon. Any use subordinate or incidental to the primary use on a site is considered an accessory use. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1345))


18.20.1347 Utility corridor.

“Utility corridor” means a narrow strip of land containing underground or above-ground utilities and the area necessary to maintain those utilities. A “utility corridor” is contained within and is a portion of any utility right-of-way or dedicated easement. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1348 Utility facility.

“Utility facility” means a facility for the distribution or transmission of services, including: 

(1) Telephone exchanges; 

(2) Water pipelines, pumping or treatment stations; 

(3) Electrical substations; 

(4) Water storage reservoirs or tanks; 

(5) Municipal ground water well-fields; 

(6) Regional surface water flow control and water quality facilities; 

(7) Natural gas pipelines, gate stations and limiting stations; 

(8) Propane, compressed natural gas and liquefied natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users; 

(9) Wastewater pipelines, lift stations, pump stations, regulator stations or odor control facilities; and 

(10) Communication cables, electrical wires and associated structural supports. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1350). Formerly 18.20.1350)


18.20.1349 Utilities, major or utility facility, major.

“Utilities, major” or “utility facility, major” means utilities consisting of trunk lines or mains that serve neighborhoods, areas and cities. Examples include solid waste handling and disposal sites, water transmission lines, water storage facilities, sewage treatment facilities and mains, power generating or transmission facilities, gas storage and transmission facilities and stormwater mains and regional facilities. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 01-11 § 1)


18.20.1350 Utilities, minor or utility facility, minor.

“Utilities, minor” or “utility facility, minor” means utilities consisting of small-scale distribution and collection facilities connected directly to development within the shoreline area. Examples include local power, telephone, cable, gas, water, sewer and stormwater service lines. (Ord. 09-19 § 8; Ord. 01-11 § 1)


18.20.1351 Utility pole.

“Utility pole” means a structure designed and used primarily for the support of electrical wires, telephone wires, television cable, traffic signals, or lighting for streets, parking areas, or pedestrian paths. (Ord. 03-19 § 4; Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1352 Vactor waste. 

“Vactor waste” means liquid or solid waste material collected from catch basins, retention/detention facilities or drainage pipes. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1352))


18.20.1353 Vactor waste receiving facility.

“Vactor waste receiving facility” means a facility where vactor waste is brought for treatment and storage prior to final disposal. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1353))


18.20.1355 Variance. 

“Variance” means an adjustment in the application of standards of a zoning code to a particular property. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1355))


18.20.1360 Vegetation. 

“Vegetation” means any and all plant life growing at, below or above the soil surface. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1360))


18.20.1365 Vocational school. 

“Vocational school” means establishments offering training in a skill or trade to be pursued as a career. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1365))


18.20.1375 Warehousing and wholesale trade.

“Warehousing and wholesale trade” means establishments involved in the storage and/or sale of bulk goods for resale or assembly, excluding establishments offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public which is classified as a retail use in CMC 18.25.070. These establishments shall include only SIC Major Group Nos. 50 and 51 and SIC Industry Group Nos. 422 and 423. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1375))


18.20.1380 Wastewater treatment facility.

“Wastewater treatment facility” means a plant for collection, decontamination and disposal of sewage, including residential, industrial and agricultural liquid wastes, and including any physical improvement within the scope of the definition of “water pollution control facility” set forth in WAC 173-90-015(4) as amended. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1380))


18.20.1382 Water budget.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1382))


18.20.1385 Water dependent use.

“Water dependent use” means a land use which can only exist when the interface between wet meadows, grazed land and water provides the biological or physical conditions necessary for the use. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1385))


18.20.1386 Wellhead protection area.

“Wellhead protection area” (WHPA) means the portion of a well’s, wellfield’s, or spring’s zone of contribution defined using WHPA criteria established by the Washington Department of Health. (Ord. 09-19 § 8)


18.20.1390 Wet meadow, grazed or tilled. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1390))


18.20.1393 Wetland complex.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1394 Wetland creation.

“Wetland creation” means, for purposes of wetland mitigation, the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics present to develop a wetland on an upland or deepwater site, where a wetland did not previously exist. Wetland creation results in a gain in wetland acres. Activities to create a wetland typically involve excavation of upland soils to elevations that will produce a wetland hydroperiod, create hydric soils and support the growth of hydrophytic plant species. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1395 Wetland delineation. 

“Wetland delineation” means identifying the line delineating the outer edge of a wetland, in accordance with the approved Federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplement. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1395))




18.20.1397 Wetland enhancement.

“Wetland enhancement” means the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a wetland site to heighten, intensify or improve specific functions or to change the growth state or composition of the vegetation present. Wetland enhancement results in a change in some wetland functions and may lead to a decline in other wetland functions, but does not result in a gain in wetland acres. Enhancement is undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, flood water retention or wildlife habitat. Wetland enhancement activities typically consist of planting vegetation, controlling nonnative or invasive species, modifying site elevations or the proportion of open water to influence hydroperiods or some combination of these. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1400 Wetland, forested. 

“Wetland, forested” means a wetland that is dominated by mature woody vegetation or a wetland vegetation class that is characterized by woody vegetation at least 20 feet tall. (Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1400))


18.20.1405 Wetland functions. 

“Wetland functions” means natural processes performed by wetlands including functions which are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for ground water aquifers and moderating surface and storm water flows, as well as performing other functions including, but not limited to, those set forth in 33 CFR 320.4(b)(2), 1988. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1405))


18.20.1410 Wetland, isolated. 

“Wetland, isolated” means a wetland which is hydrologically isolated from other aquatic resources, as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). Isolated wetlands may perform important functions and are protected by State law (Chapter 90.48 RCW) whether or not they are protected by Federal law. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1410))


18.20.1415 Wetland.

“Wetland” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.

Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including but not limited to irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of construction of a road, street or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands, intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversions of wetlands. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1415))


18.20.1415.1 Wetland of high conservation value.

“Wetland of high conservation value” means a wetland that has been identified by scientists from the Washington Natural Heritage Program (WNHP) as an important ecosystem for maintaining plant diversity in Washington State. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.20.1416 Wetland re-establishment.

“Wetland re-establishment” means, for purposes of wetland mitigation, the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of returning natural or historic functions to a former wetland. Re-establishment results in rebuilding a former wetland and results in a gain in wetland acres [and functions]. Activities could include removing fill, plugging ditches, or breaking drain tiles. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1417 Wetland rehabilitation.

“Wetland rehabilitation” means, for purposes of wetland mitigation, the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of repairing natural or historic functions (and processes) of a degraded wetland. Wetland rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result in a gain in wetland acres. Activities to rehabilitate a wetland could include breaching a dike to reconnect wetlands to a floodplain or return tidal influence to a wetland. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1418 Wetland vegetation class.

“Wetland vegetation class” means a wetland community classified by its vegetation including aquatic bed, emergent, forested and shrub-scrub. To constitute a separate wetland vegetation class, the vegetation must be at least partially rooted within the wetland and must occupy the uppermost stratum of a contiguous area or comprise at least 30 percent areal coverage of the entire wetland. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1420 Wetpond. 

“Wetpond” means an artificial water body constructed as a part of a surface water management system. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1420))


18.20.1422 Wildlife.

“Wildlife” means birds, fish and animals that are not domesticated and are considered to be wild. (Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1423 Wildlife habitat conservation area.

“Wildlife habitat conservation area” means an area designated by the City to protect habitat of wildlife species proposed or listed by the Federal government or the State of Washington as endangered, threatened, sensitive, or a priority. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1424 Wildlife habitat network.

“Wildlife habitat network” means a designated wildlife habitat network defined and mapped by King County or as designated by the City that links wildlife habitat with critical areas, critical area buffers, priority habitats, trails, parks, open space and other areas to provide for wildlife movement and alleviate habitat fragmentation. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 14-05 § 3)


18.20.1425 Wildlife shelter. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1425))


18.20.1426 Wireless communication facility.

“Wireless communication facility” means any tower, antenna, ancillary structure or facility, or related equipment or component thereof, that is used for the transmission of radio frequency signals through electromagnetic energy for the purpose of providing phone, internet, video, information services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging, wireless digital data transmission, broadband, unlicensed spectrum services utilizing part 15 devices, or other similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1427 Wireless communication facility, building-mounted.

“Wireless communication facility, building-mounted” means a wireless communication facility that is attached to an existing commercial, industrial, residential, or institutional building. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1428 Wireless communication facility, concealed facility.

“Wireless communication facility, concealed facility” means a wireless communication facility that is not readily identifiable as such and is designed to be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the existing building(s) on a site; or a wireless communication facility disguised, hidden, or integrated with an existing structure that is not a monopole or tower; or a wireless communication facility that is placed within an existing or proposed structure or tower or mounted within trees, so as to be significantly screened from view or camouflaged to appear as a nonantenna structure or tower (i.e., tree, light pole, clock tower, flagpole with flag, church steeple). (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1429 Wireless communication facility equipment enclosure.

“Wireless communication facility equipment enclosure” means any structure above or below ground, including without limitation cabinets, shelters, pedestals and other devices or structures, that is used exclusively to contain radio or other equipment necessary for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communication signals including, without limitation, air conditioning units and generators. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1429.1 Wireless communication facility equipment compound.

“Wireless communication facility equipment compound” means an outdoor fenced area occupied by all the towers, antennas, ancillary structure(s), ancillary facilities, and equipment enclosures, but excluding parking and access ways. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1429.2 Wireless communication facility, feed lines or coaxial cables.

“Wireless communication facility, feed lines or coaxial cables” means cables used as the interconnection media between the transmission/receiving base station and the antenna. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1429.3 Wireless telecommunication carrier.

“Wireless telecommunication carrier” means any person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates, or manages any plant, equipment, structure, or property within the City for the purpose of offering wireless telecommunication service within the City. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B))


18.20.1430 Work release facility. 

“Work release facility” means a facility which allows the opportunity for convicted persons to be employed outside of the facility, but requires confinement within the facility when not in the place of employment. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1430))


18.20.1432 Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle. 

“Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle” means a motor vehicle or the remains or remnant parts of a motor vehicle which is mechanically inoperative and cannot be made operative without the addition of vital parts or mechanisms or the application of a substantial amount of labor and is certified by the Department of Community Development as meeting at least three of the following requirements:

(1) Is three years old or older;

(2) Is extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission;

(3) Is apparently inoperable;

(4) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1432))


18.20.1435 Yard or organic waste processing facility.

“Yard or organic waste processing facility” means a site where yard and garden wastes, including wood and land clearing debris, are processed into new products such as soil amendments and wood chips. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.06.1435))1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 10-10 added this section as CMC 18.20.147. This section has been editorially renumbered to preserve alphabetization. 2

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 08-17 adds this section as CMC 18.20.469. It has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 3

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 26-16 adds this section as CMC 18.20.875.5. It has been editorially renumbered to preserve alphabetization. 4

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 10-10 adds this section as CMC 18.20.1023. This section has been editorially renumbered to preserve alphabetization. 5

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 26-16 adds this section as CMC 18.20.1267.3. It has been editorially renumbered to preserve alphabetization. 


Chapter 18.25 PERMITTED USES

Sections:

18.25.010    Establishment of uses.

18.25.020    Interpretation of land use tables.

18.25.025    Land use tables within R, CC, NC and I zones.

18.25.030    Residential land uses.

18.25.040    Recreational/cultural land uses.

18.25.050    General services land uses.

18.25.060    Government/business services land uses.

18.25.070    Retail land uses.

18.25.080    Manufacturing land uses.

18.25.090    Resource land uses.

18.25.100    Regional land uses.

18.25.105    Repealed.

18.25.110    Applicability – Ordinance.


18.25.010 Establishment of uses. 

The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use which will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.85 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.010))


18.25.020 Interpretation of land use tables.

(1) The land use tables in this chapter determine whether a use is allowed in a zone district. The zone district is located on the vertical column and the use is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(2) If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not allowed in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

(3) If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 14.30 CMC and the general requirements of the code.

(4) If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 14.30 CMC and conditional use fees as set forth in the current fee resolution, and the general requirements of the code.

(5) If a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the land use table.

(6) If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitation or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.

(7) All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 20-07 § 114; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.020))


18.25.025 Land use tables within R, CC, NC and I zones.

The land use tables set forth in CMC 18.25.030 through 18.25.100, inclusive, shall not apply to any property within any designated downtown zone. The permitted land use table for property located within any downtown zone is set forth in CMC 18.31.110. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 32-05 § 1)


18.25.030 Residential land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE (1)	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	DWELLING UNITS, TYPES:

	*	Single detached (4)	P

C2	P

C2	P

C2	P4

C2	P9	 	 	 	 

	 	Duplex	P	P	P	P	P10	P3	P3	 	 

	*	Townhome/townhouse (2 to 4 units)	P	P	P	P	P10	P3	P3	 	 

	*	Multifamily/townhome/townhouse (4+ units)	 	 	 	P4	P	P3	P3	P	 

	*	Manufactured home park	 	C8	 	C8	 	 	 	 	 

	 	GROUP RESIDENCES

	*	Community residential facility-I	C	C	C	C	C	P3	P3	 	 

	*	Community residential facility-II	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 

	*	Senior citizen assisted housing	P	P	P	P	P	P3	 	P	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:

	*	Residential accessory uses	P6	P6,8	P6,8	P6,8	P6,8	P6	 	 	 

	*	Home occupation (5)	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	P	 

	 	TEMPORARY LODGING

	*	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	P7	P7	P7	P7	P7	P	P	 	 

	*	Hotel	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 

Footnotes of Table A.

(1) Must be in accord with Chapter 18.35 CMC, Development Standards – Design Requirements.

(2) Required before approving more than one dwelling on individual lots, except on lots in subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans approved for multiple unit lots, and except as provided for accessory dwelling units in Condition No. 6.

(3) Only as part of a mixed-use/integrated development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.35 CMC.

(4) See Chapter 18.37 CMC, Development Standards and Design Requirements for Cottage Housing.

(5) See CMC 18.80.100 for requirements associated with home occupations.

(6) Accessory Dwelling Units.

(a) Only one accessory dwelling per primary single detached dwelling unit, accessory dwelling units shall not be allowed on the same property as a duplex;

(b) Only in the same building as the primary dwelling unit on an urban lot that is less than 10,000 square feet in area, on a rural lot that is less than the minimum lot size, or on a lot containing more than one primary dwelling;

(c) The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied;

(d) One of the dwelling units shall not exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet except when one of the dwelling units is wholly contained within a basement or attic;

(e) When the primary and accessory dwelling units are located in the same building, only one entrance may be located on each street side of the building;

(f) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided;

(g) The accessory dwelling unit shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one of the dwelling units ceases to be owner occupied;

(h) An applicant seeking to build an accessory dwelling unit shall file a notice approved by the Department with the Records and Elections Division which identifies the dwelling unit as accessory. The notice shall run with the land. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice was filed before the Department shall approve any permit for the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. The required contents and form of the notice shall be set forth in administrative rules;

(i) Must be in accord with Chapter 18.35 CMC.

(7) Only as an accessory to the permanent residence of the operator, provided:

(a) The number of persons accommodated per night shall not exceed five, except that a structure which satisfies the standards of the International Building Code for R-1 occupancies may accommodate up to 10 persons per night.

(8) Individual electric vehicle charging stations for a single-family residence shall follow the Installation Guide for Charging Stations, prepared by Puget Sound Regional Council, and as amended.

(9) Within the Lakepoint Urban Village1 subarea, single-family detached residences shall not be allowed around or abutting the pond.

(10) Within the Lakepoint Urban Village* subarea, townhouses shall not abut the pond except as part of a mixed-use development, unless otherwise separated from the pond by a public trail, park, green space or street. (Ord. 02-20 § 3 (Att. B); Ord. 11-17 § 4; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 10; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.030))


18.25.040 Recreational/cultural land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	PARK/RECREATION:

	*	Park (1)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	*	Trails	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	 	AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT:

	*	Adult entertainment businesses (1)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	 	Cinema and performing arts (1)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

	 	Meeting hall/other group assembly (1)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

	 	Physical fitness/recreation club (1)	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P

	 	Recreation, indoor (1)	 	C4	C4	 	 	 	 	P	P

	 	Recreation, outdoor (1)	 	C4	C4	 	 	 	 	P	P

	*	Golf course facility (1)	 	P3	P3	 	 	 	 	 	P3

	 	CULTURAL:

	823	Library (1)	 	C4	C4	C4	C4	P	P	P	 

	841	Museum (1)	 	C4	C4	C4	C4	P	P	P	P

	842	Arboretum (1)	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 

Footnotes of Table A.

(1) On-site exterior lighting shall meet the following provisions:

(a) All exterior light fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).

(b) Light fixtures shall be specified, mounted, aimed and shielded so that their beams fall within the immediate on-site surroundings, and so that no direct illumination or glare is directed off the site; including but not limited to adjacent residential or mixed-use zones.

(c) Light fixtures for outdoor performance, sports, and recreation facilities shall be specified, mounted, aimed and shielded so that their beams fall within the primary playing area. The main field lighting shall be turned off as soon as possible following the end of the event. Where feasible, a low level lighting system shall be used to facilitate patrons leaving the facility, cleanup, nighttime maintenance and other closing activities.

(2) Adult entertainment businesses shall be prohibited within 550 feet of any property zoned R or containing schools, licensed day care centers, public parks or trails, community centers, public libraries or churches. In addition, adult entertainment businesses shall not be located closer than 3,000 feet to any other adult entertainment business. These distances shall be measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels zoned R or that contain the uses identified in this subsection.

(3) Clubhouses, maintenance buildings, equipment storage areas and driving range tees shall be at least 50 feet from residential property lines. Lighting for practice greens and driving range ball impact areas shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Applications shall comply with adopted best management practices for golf course development. Ancillary facilities associated with a golf course are limited to practice putting greens, maintenance buildings and other structures housing administrative offices or activities that provide convenience services to players. These convenience services are limited to a pro shop, food services and dressing facilities and shall occupy a total of no more than 10,000 square feet.

(4) A conditional use permit is required unless the use is an accessory to a park or in a building listed on the National Register as a historic site or designated as a King County landmark subject to Chapter 18.47 CMC. (Ord. 02-20 § 4 (Att. C); Ord. 11-17 § 5; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.040))


18.25.050 General services land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	PERSONAL SERVICES:

	72	General personal service	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P

	7216	Dry cleaning plants	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	7218	Industrial launderers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	7261	Funeral home/crematory	 	C4	C4	C4	C4	 	 	 	 

	*	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum (5)	 	C3	C3	C3	C3	C3	C3	 	 

	*	Day care I	 	P6	P6	P	P	P	P	P	P7

	*	Day care II	 	P8	P8	P	P	P	P	P	P7

	074	Veterinary clinic or animal shelter (12)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

	753	Automotive repair (1) (12)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	754	Automotive service (2)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	76	Miscellaneous repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	866	Churches, synagogue, temple	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	C	 

	83	Social services	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	P	 

	60/81/872	Legal/financial	 	 	 	P9, 14	P13	P	P14	P	 

	8748	Business consulting services	 	 	 	P9	P13	P	 	P	 

	*	Kennel or cattery	P	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	P12

	*	Artist studios	 	 	 	P9	C	P	 	P	P

	*	Interim recycling facility	P10	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	 	HEALTH SERVICES:

	*	Medical/dental office/outpatient clinic	 	 	 	P9	P13, 15	P	P	P	P

	805	Nursing and personal care facilities	 	 	 	P9	 	 	 	 	 

	807	Medical/dental lab	 	 	 	P9	 	 	 	 	P

	808 – 809	Miscellaneous health	 	 	 	P9	 	 	 	 	 

	 	EDUCATIONAL SERVICES:

	 	Schools: Elementary, middle/junior high, secondary or high school	 	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 

	 	Vocational school	 	C	C	C	C	 	 	 	P

	 	Specialized instruction school	 	C	C	C	C	P	 	 	P

	 	School district support facility	 	P11	P11	P11	P11	C	 	 	P

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except SIC Industry No. 7534 – Tire retreading; see manufacturing permitted use table.

(2) Not abutting or taking access from SE 270th Place.

(3) A conditional use permit is required unless a columbarium is an accessory to a church.

(4) Only as an accessory to a cemetery.

(5) Structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

(6) Only as an accessory to residential use, and:

(a) Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet; and

(b) Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

(7) Permitted as an accessory use. See commercial/industrial accessory uses, CMC 18.25.060.

(8) Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.85 CMC, or an accessory use to a school, church, park, sport club or public housing administered by a public agency, and:

(a) Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates, and have a minimum height of six feet;

(b) Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

(c) Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

(d) Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

(9) Permitted only in existing single-family structures.

(10) Limited to source-separated yard or organic waste processing facilities.

(11) Only if adjacent to an existing or proposed school.

(12) (a) No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

(b) The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and

(c) The provisions of Chapter 18.80 CMC relative to animal keeping are met.

(13) Limited to 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless located in a multi-story, mixed-use building in which case the limitation does not apply.

(14) Excluding banks.

(15) Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises. (Ord. 11-17 § 6; Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A)); Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.050))


18.25.060 Government/business services land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	GOVERNMENT SERVICES:

	*	Office, public agency or utility	C3	C3	C3	C3	C3	P	P	P	P

	*	Yard, public agency or utility	C3	P8	P8	P8	C3	P8	P8	P8	P

	*	Public agency archives	C3	C3	C3	C3	C3	P	P	P	P

	921	Court	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	9221	Police facility	 	P7	P7	P7	P7	P7	P7	P7	P

	9224	Fire facility	 	C6	C6	C6	C6	P	P	P6	P

	*	Utility facility	P4

C14	P4

C14	P4

C14	P4

C14	P4

C14	P10	P4

C14	P10	P

	*	Commuter parking lot	 	P13	P13	P13	P13	 	 	P17	P

	 	BUSINESS SERVICES:

	*	Construction and trade	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Individual transportation and taxi	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	421	Trucking and courier service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Warehousing (1) and wholesale trade	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	47	Transportation service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	473	Freight and cargo service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	48	Communication offices	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	482	Telegraph and other communications	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	General business service	 	 	 	 	P10, 18	P10, 16	 	P10	P

	*	Professional office	 	 	 	P11	P18	P	 	P	P

	735	Miscellaneous equipment rental (12)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	751	Automotive rental and leasing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	873	Research, development, and testing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P2

	*	Heavy equipment and truck repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	 	ACCESSORY USES:

	*	Commercial/industrial accessory uses	 	 	 	P15	P15	P9,15	P15	P9,15	P15

	*	Off-street required parking lot	 	P	P	P	P	P	C	P	P

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except self-service storage.

(2) Except SIC Industry No. 8732 – Commercial economic, sociological, and educational research, see general business service/office.

(3) A conditional use permit is not required if the use is:

(a) A re-use of a public school facility or a surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.85 CMC; or

(b) An accessory to a fire facility and the office is no greater than 1,500 square feet of floor area.

(4) Excluding bulk gas storage tanks.

(5) Repealed by Ord. 11-17.

(6) (a) All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

(b) Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street;

(c) No outdoor storage.

(7) Limited to “storefront” police offices. Such offices shall not have:

(a) Holding cells;

(b) Suspect interview rooms (except in the NC zone); or

(c) Long-term storage of stolen properties.

(8) (a) Utility yards only on sites with utility district offices; or

(b) Public agency yards as defined by CMC 18.20.935.

(9) Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises.

(10) Provided, that all material and/or equipment of any kind is stored in a fully enclosed building.

(11) Permitted only in existing single-family structures.

(12) Not abutting or taking access from SE 270th Place.

(13) Limited to new commuter parking lots designed for 30 or fewer parking spaces or commuter parking lots located on existing parking lots for churches, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting; provided, that the new or existing lot is adjacent to a designated arterial that has been improved to a standard acceptable to the Department of Transportation.

(14) Limited to bulk gas storage tanks which pipe to individual residences but excluding liquefied natural gas storage tanks.

(15) Electric vehicle charging stations are permitted in accordance with CMC 18.50.170.

(16) Gasoline service stations and battery exchange stations are limited to the community commercial (CC) zone and subject to the following conditions:

(a) A gasoline service station shall be limited to four pumps and eight price gauges to service no more than eight vehicles.

(b) A battery exchange station shall provide a minimum of three stacking spaces.

(c) Stacking spaces and drive-through facilities shall be designed in accordance with CMC 18.50.080.

(d) Any associated materials, equipment storage, outdoor storage tanks and battery exchange activities shall be within a fully enclosed structure, unless otherwise determined by the Director.

(17) Limited to park-and-ride facilities associated with a public or private transit facility provider. Any such commuter parking lot shall not exceed 125 surface spaces. Parking stalls in excess of this amount shall be located within a parking structure.

(18) Limited to 3,000 square feet of gross floor area unless located in a multi-story, mixed-use building, in which case the limitation does not apply. (Ord. 02-20 § 5 (Att. D); Ord. 11-17 § 7; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 08-07 § 1; Ord. 16-05 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 24-04 § 1; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.060))


18.25.070 Retail land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	Building, hardware and garden materials	 	 	 	 	P2	P1	P1	P1, 7	 

	*	Department and variety stores	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 

	54	Food stores	 	 	 	 	P2	P	P2	P	P2

	56	Apparel and accessory stores	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 

	58	Eating and drinking places	 	 	 	 	P6	P	P	P	P

	592	Liquor stores	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 

	*	Book, stationery, video and art supply stores	 	 	 	 	P2	P	P	P	 

	*	Hobby, toy, game shops	 	 	 	 	P2	P	P	P	 

	*	Photographic and electronic shops	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 

	*	Fabric shops	 	 	 	 	P2, 7	P	P	P	 

	*	Florist shops	 	 	 	 	P2, 7	P	P	P	 

	*	Farmers’ and public markets	 	 	 	 	P5	P5	P5	P5	 

	 	Laundromat/dry cleaner	 	 	 	 	P2	 	P	P	 

	 	Commercial printing and publishing	 	 	 	 	P2	 	P	P	 

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Only hardware and garden materials stores shall be permitted; provided, that all material and/or equipment of any kind is stored in a fully enclosed building.

(2) Limited to a maximum of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless located in a multi-story, mixed-use building, in which case the limitation does not apply.

(3) Reserved.

(4) Permitted only in existing single-family structures.

(5) Farmers’ and public markets are permitted. Temporary markets require a temporary use permit in accordance with CMC 18.85.125.

(6) Limited to a maximum of 8,000 square feet of gross floor area, and drive-through facilities are not permitted.

(7) Storage limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the fabrication of commodities sold on the premises. (Ord. 11-17 § 8; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 09-09 § 4; Ord. 06-06 § 1; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.070))


18.25.080 Manufacturing land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	205	Bakeries	 	 	 	 	C3	P	P	P	P

	20	Food and kindred products (except 205)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P1

	2082/2084	Winery/brewery	 	 	 	 	C3	 	 	P	P

	22	Textile mill products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	23	Apparel and other textile products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	24	Wood products, except furniture	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	25	Furniture and fixtures	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	26	Paper and allied products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	27	Printing and publishing	 	 	 	 	 	P2	 	 	P

	28	Chemicals and allied products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	2911	Petroleum refining and related industries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	2951, 3271, 3273	Asphalt/concrete mixtures and block	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	30	Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	31	Leather and leather goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	32	Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	33	Primary metal industries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	34	Fabricated metal products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	35	Industrial and commercial machinery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	351 – 355	Heavy machinery and equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	357	Computer and office equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	36	Electronic and other electric equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	374	Railroad equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	376	Guided missile and space vehicle parts	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	379	Miscellaneous transportation vehicles	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	38	Measuring and controlling instruments	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	39	Miscellaneous light manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	*	Aircraft, ship and boat building	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	7534	Tire treading	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	781 – 782	Movie production/distribution	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Marijuana production and processing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Except slaughterhouses.

(2) Limited to photocopying and printing services offered to the general public.

(3) Limited to 3,000 square feet of gross floor area unless located in a multi-story, mixed-use building, in which case the limitation does not apply. (Ord. 11-17 § 9; Ord. 12-16 § 6; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.080))


18.25.090 Resource land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	Agriculture training facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	FORESTRY:

	 	Growing and harvesting forest product	 	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Forest research	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	 	FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT:

	0921	Hatchery/fish preserve (1)	 	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	P

	0273	Aquaculture (1)	 	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Wildlife shelters	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	ACCESSORY USES:

	*	Resource accessory uses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P2

B. Development Conditions.

(1) May be further subject to Chapter 16.05 CMC, Shoreline Master Program.

(2) Excluding housing for agricultural workers. (Ord. 11-17 § 10; Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.090))


18.25.100 Regional land uses.

A. Table.

	Key	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	SIC #	SPECIFIC LAND USE	US	R4-8	R-12	R-18	MR	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	*	Jail	 	 	 	C	 	C	 	 	C

	*	Work release facility	 	 	 	C	 	C	 	 	 

	*	Public agency animal control facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	*	Public agency training facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C1

	*	Nonhydroelectric generation facility	 	 	 	 	 	C6	 	 	C

	*	Wireless communication facility (4)	 	P

C	P

C	P

C	P

C	P

C	P

C	P

C	P

C

	*	Earth station	 	C2	C2	C2	C2	P3	 	C2	P

	*	Energy resource recovery facility	 	 	 	C	 	C	 	 	C

	*	Soil recycling facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	*	Transfer station	 	 	 	C	 	C	 	 	C

	*	Wastewater treatment facility	 	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	C

	*	Fairground	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	8422	Zoo/wildlife exhibit	 	C	C	C	 	 	 	 	C

	7941	Stadium/arena	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	8221, 8222	College/university (1)	 	P5	P5	 	 	P5	 	 	P

	*	Secure community transition facility (SCTS)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	7

B. Development Conditions.

(1) Shooting ranges, either indoor or outdoor, associated with educational programs are not permitted.

(2) Limited to no more than three satellite dish antennas.

(3) Limited to one satellite dish antenna.

(4) Wireless communication facilities (WCFs) are not permitted on any residential structure, undeveloped site located in a residential land use district, or site that is developed with a residential use. WCFs may be located (a) on any residential structure or undeveloped site in R-18, MHO, TC or GC zone districts; or (b) on any nonresidential structure (i.e., churches, schools, public facility structures, utility poles, etc.), or in public rights-of-way in any residential zone district. Chapter 18.70 CMC, Wireless Communication Facilities, outlines the approval and review process. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of Chapter 18.70 CMC and the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 18.70 CMC shall govern.

(5) Permitted as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.85 CMC. A conditional use permit is required if the use is a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.85 CMC.

(6) Limited to cogeneration facilities for on-site use only.

(7) Conditional use permit required subject to meeting conditions for siting SCTFs in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 71.09 RCW and CMC 18.125.040. (Ord. 15-17 § 1; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 16-05 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.100))


18.25.105 Permitted land uses.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 17-09 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 09-09 § 5; Ord. 05-09 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 21-08 § 2)


18.25.110 Applicability – Ordinance.

Complete applications for segregation submitted prior to adoption of this code shall continue to be governed by those ordinances in effect on the date the complete application was submitted. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.08.900))1

Code reviser’s note: “Hawk Property” was renamed “Lakepoint Urban Village” with the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 02-16. 


Chapter 18.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.020    Interpretation of tables.

18.30.030    Densities and dimensions – Residential zones.

18.30.040    Densities and dimensions – Resource and commercial/industrial zones.

18.30.045    Repealed.

18.30.050    Repealed.

18.30.060    Minimum residential density.

18.30.070    Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

18.30.080    Calculations – Site area used for base density and maximum density floor area calculations.

18.30.090    Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

18.30.100    Repealed.

18.30.110    Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

18.30.120    Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

18.30.130    Measurement of setbacks.

18.30.140    Setbacks – Specific building or use.

18.30.150    Setbacks – Livestock buildings and manure storage areas.

18.30.160    Setbacks – Modifications.

18.30.170    Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

18.30.180    Setbacks – From alley.

18.30.190    Setbacks – Required modifications.

18.30.200    Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

18.30.210    Height – Exceptions to limits.

18.30.220    Height – Limits near airports.

18.30.230    Lot or site divided by zone boundary.

18.30.240    Sight distance requirements.

18.30.250    Nonresidential land uses in residential zones.

18.30.260    Personal services and retail uses in R-4 through R-18 zones – Neighborhood commercial.


18.30.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic dimensional standards for development relative to residential density and as well as specific rules for general application. The standards and rules are established to provide flexibility in project design, and maintain privacy between adjacent uses. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.010))


18.30.020 Interpretation of tables. 

(1) CMC 18.30.030 and 18.30.040 contain general density and dimension standards for the various zones and limitations specific to a particular zone(s). Additional rules, exceptions, and methodologies are set forth in CMC 18.30.060 through 18.30.240.

(2) The density and dimension tables are arranged in a matrix format on two separate tables and are delineated into two general land use categories:

(a) Residential; and

(b) Resource and commercial/industrial.

(3) Development standards are listed down the left side of both tables, and the zones are listed at the top. The matrix cells contain the minimum dimensional requirements of the zone. The parenthetical numbers in the matrix identify specific requirements applicable either to a specific use or zone. A blank box indicates that there are no specific requirements. If more than one standard appears in a cell, each standard will be subject to any applicable parenthetical footnote following the standard. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.020))


18.30.030 Densities and dimensions – Residential zones.

A. Table.

	STANDARDS	ZONES

	RESIDENTIAL

	R-1 (14)

Urban Separator	R-4	R-6	R-8	R-12	R-18	MR

	Base density: dwelling units/acre (15)	1 du/ac	4 du/ac	6 du/ac	8 du/ac	12 du/ac	18 du/ac (18)	14 du/ac

	Maximum density: dwelling unit/acre (1)	 	6 du/ac	9 du/ac	12 du/ac	18 du/ac	24 du/ac	50 du/ac

	Minimum density (2) (15)	 	85% (12)	85% (12)	85% (12)	85% (12)	85% (12)	85% (12)

	Minimum lot area (13)	2,500 sf	2,500 sf	2,500 sf	2,500 sf	2,500 sf (3)	2,500 sf (3)	2,500 sf (3)

	Minimum lot width (3)	35 ft (7)	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft

	Minimum street setback (3)	20 ft (7)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft (8)	10 ft	10 ft

	Minimum interior setback (3) (13) (20)	7 ft 6 inches (7)	7 ft 6 inches	7 ft 6 inches	7 ft 6 inches	5 ft (19)	10 ft	5 ft (19)

	Base height (4)	35 ft	35 ft	35 ft

45 ft (11)	35 ft

45 ft (11)	35 ft

45 ft (11)	35 ft	60 ft

	Maximum impervious surface: percentage (5)	30% (16)	55%	70%	75%	75% (3)	75%	80% (3)

B. Development Conditions.

(1) This maximum density may be achieved only through the application of residential density incentives in accordance with Chapter 18.90 CMC or transfers of density credits in accordance with Chapter 18.95 CMC, or any combination of density incentive or density transfer. Maximum density may only be exceeded in accordance with CMC 18.90.040(6)(a)(vii). Within the Lakepoint Urban Village1 subarea, this condition shall not apply.

(2) Also see CMC 18.30.060.

(3) These standards may be modified under the provisions for zero-lot-line and townhouse developments.

(4) Height limits may be increased if portions of the structure that exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, but the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. Wireless communication facilities, including licensed amateur (HAM) radio stations and citizen band stations, shall not exceed the zone’s base height limit unless allowed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.70 CMC or a height modification is granted pursuant to CMC 18.70.150. Netting or fencing and support structures for the netting or fencing used to contain golf balls in the operation of golf courses or golf driving ranges are exempt from the additional interior setback requirements but the maximum height shall not exceed 75 feet.

(5) Applies to each individual lot. Impervious surface area standards for:

(a) Regional uses shall be established at the time of permit review;

(b) Nonresidential uses in residential zones, except those located within the MR zone, shall comply with CMC 18.30.140 and 18.30.250;

(c) Individual lots in the R-4 through R-6 zones that are less than 9,076 square feet in area shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the nearest comparable R-6 or R-8 zone; and

(d) A lot may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

(6) Mobile home parks shall be allowed a base density of six dwelling units per acre.

(7) The standards of the R-4 zone shall apply if a lot is less than 15,000 square feet in area.

(8) At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport or other fenced parking area and the street property line or back of sidewalk if any portion of the sidewalk has been included in an easement. The linear distance shall be measured along the center line of the driveway from the access point to such garage, carport or fenced area to the street property line.

(9) Intentionally left blank.

(10) Intentionally left blank.

(11) The base height to be used only for projects as follows:

(a) In R-6, R-8 and R-12 zones, a building with a footprint built on slopes exceeding a 15 percent finished grade.

(12) Density applies only to dwelling units and not to sleeping units.

(13) Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the property line on which a joint use driveway is located to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet as measured from the center line of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite side of the joint use driveway.

(14) (a) All subdivisions and short subdivisions in the R-1 zone shall be required to be clustered if the property is located within or contains:

(i) A floodplain;

(ii) A critical aquifer recharge area;

(iii) A regionally or locally significant resource area;

(iv) Existing or planned public parks or trails, or connections to such facilities;

(v) A Class I or II stream or wetland;

(vi) A steep slope; or

(vii) A greenbelt/urban separator or wildlife corridor area designated by the comprehensive plan or a community plan.

(b) The development shall be clustered away from sensitive areas or the axis of designated corridors such as urban separators or the wildlife habitat network to the extent possible and the open space shall be placed in a separate tract that includes at least 50 percent of the site. Open space tracts shall be permanent and shall be dedicated to a homeowners’ association or other suitable organization, as determined by the Director, and meet the requirements in CMC 18.35.040. On-site sensitive area and buffers, wildlife habitat networks, required habitat and buffers for protected species and designated urban separators shall be placed within the open space tract to the extent possible. Passive recreation (with no development of recreational facilities) and natural-surface pedestrian and equestrian trails are acceptable uses within the open space tract.

(15) See CMC 18.30.090.

(16) All subdivisions and short subdivisions in the R-1 zone shall have a maximum impervious surface area of eight percent of the gross acreage of the plat. Distribution of the allowable impervious area among the platted lots shall be recorded on the face of the plat. Impervious surface of roads need not be counted towards the allowable impervious area. Where both lot- and plat-specific impervious limits apply, the more restrictive shall be required.

(17) Intentionally left blank.

(18) Except cottage housing, which may have a base density of 12 du/acre.

(19) Minimum interior setback for underground parking structures is zero feet.

(20) See CMC 18.30.200 for projections and structures allowed within interior setbacks. (Ord. 03-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 60-03 § 2; Ord. 57-03 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.030))


18.30.040 Densities and dimensions – Resource and commercial/industrial zones.

A. Table.

	STANDARDS	ZONES

	COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/MIXED-USE

	CC	NC	RCMU	I

	Base density: dwelling units/acre (5)	8 du/ac (1)	8 du/ac (1)	18 du/ac	 

	Maximum density: dwelling unit/acre (5)	12 du/ac (2)	12 du/ac (2)	50 du/ac	 

	Minimum street setback	0 ft (3)	0 ft (3)	0 ft	25 ft

	Minimum interior setback	20 ft (4)(8)	20 ft (4)(8)	10 ft

20 ft (4)	20 ft (4)

	Base height (9)	35 ft	35 ft (10)	60 ft	45 ft

	Maximum impervious surface: percentage (7)	85%	85%	80%	90%

	Maximum building size (gross square feet)	30,000 sf	5,000 sf (11)(12)	NA	NA

B. Development Conditions.

(1) These densities are allowed only through the application of mixed-use/integrated development standards. Except for senior housing, no less than 60 percent of the ground floor of a mixed-use/integrated project shall be established for commercial use.

(2) These densities may only be achieved through the application of residential density incentives or transfer of density credits in mixed-use developments.

(3) Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 15 feet to any property line. Gas islands and their associated canopy structures may not be placed on a street corner in accord with the requirements of the design manual.

(4) Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

(5) The floor-to-lot ratio for mixed-use developments shall conform to Chapter 18.35 CMC. Floor-to-lot ratios shall not apply in the Lakepoint Urban Village2 subarea.

(6) Repealed by Ord. 15-17.

(7) The impervious surface area for any lot may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

(8) Required on property lines adjoining residential zones unless a stand-alone townhouse development is proposed to be located adjacent to property upon which an existing townhouse development is located.

(9) Structures in excess of the base height limitation may be increased upon approval of a conditional use permit.

(10) Structures within 150 feet of R-zoned lands shall have sloped roofs with a pitch at least as steep as that of the roofs of the closest single-family structure.

(11) The maximum footprint of any structure is 5,000 square feet. A building’s gross floor area may exceed this figure if the structure includes second or third floors.

(12) The total area of the collective footprints of all structures on a site may not exceed 10,000 square feet per acre of lot area. (Ord. 15-17 § 2; Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 06-06 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.040))


18.30.045 Downtown building form and site design standards.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 21-08 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 20-07 § 115; Ord. 34-05 § 1)


18.30.050 Measurement methods.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.050))


18.30.060 Minimum residential density.

Minimum density for residential development shall be based on the tables in CMC 18.30.030, adjusted as provided in CMC 18.30.070 through 18.30.080.

(1) A proposal may be phased, if compliance with the minimum density requirement results in noncompliance with Chapter 18.75 CMC, if the overall density of the proposal is consistent with this section.

(2) Minimum density requirements may be waived by the City of Covington if the applicant demonstrates one or more of the following:

(a) The proposed layout of the lots in a subdivision or the buildings in a multiple dwelling development will not preclude future residential development consistent with the minimum density of the zone;

(b) The nonsensitive area of the parcel is of a size or configuration that results in lots that cannot meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the zone;

(c) The site contains a national, State or County historic landmark.

(3) A proposal to locate a single residential unit on a lot shall be exempt from the minimum density requirement provided the applicant either pre-plans the site by demonstrating that the proposed single residence would be located in a manner compatible with future division of the site in a manner that would meet the minimum density requirements, or locates the dwelling within 15 feet of one or more of the site’s interior lot lines. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.060))


18.30.070 Calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

Permitted number of units, or lots or floor area shall be determined as follows:

(1) The allowed number of dwelling units or lots (base density) shall be computed by multiplying the site area specified in CMC 18.30.080 by the applicable residential base density number;

(2) The maximum density (unit or lot) limits shall be computed by adding the bonus or transfer units authorized by Chapter 18.90 or 18.95 CMC to the base units computed under subsection (1) of this section;



(3) The allowed floor area, which excludes structured or underground parking areas and areas housing mechanical equipment, shall be computed by applying the floor-to-lot area ratio to the project site area specified in CMC 18.30.080;

(4) If calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

(a) Fractions of 0.50 or above shall be rounded up; and

(b) Fractions below 0.50 shall be rounded down. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.070))


18.30.080 Calculations – Site area used for base density and maximum density floor area calculations. 

(1) All site areas may be used in the calculation of base and maximum allowed residential density or project floor area except as outlined under the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Submerged lands shall not be credited toward base and maximum density or floor area calculations. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.080))


18.30.090 Calculations – Site area used for minimum density calculations.

Minimum density shall be determined by:

(1) Multiplying the base density (dwelling units/acre) as set forth in CMC 18.30.030(A) by the net buildable area of the project site; and then

(2) Multiplying the resulting product by the minimum density percentage set forth in CMC 18.30.030(A) or as adjusted pursuant to the provisions of CMC 18.30.100. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.085))


18.30.100 Minimum density adjustments for moderate slopes. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.087))


18.30.110 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was used to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.090))


18.30.120 Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction. 

Except as provided for nonconformances in Chapter 18.85 CMC:

(1) In the R zones no construction shall be permitted on a lot that contains an area of less than 2,500 square feet or that does not comply with the applicable minimum lot width, except for townhouse developments zero-lot-line subdivisions, or lots created prior to adoption of this code. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.100))


18.30.130 Measurement of setbacks. 

(1) Interior Setback. The interior setback is measured from the interior lot line to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the interior lot lines at the depth prescribed for each zone.

(2) Street Setback. The street setback is measured from the street right-of-way to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the street right-of-way or the edge of the surface improvement at the depth prescribed for each zone. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.110))


18.30.140 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.120))


18.30.150 Setbacks – Livestock buildings and manure storage areas. 

(1) The minimum interior setback for any building used to house, confine or feed swine shall be 90 feet.

(2) The minimum interior setback for any building used to house, confine or feed any other livestock shall be 25 feet.

(3) The minimum interior setback for any manure storage area shall be 35 feet. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.122))


18.30.160 Setbacks – Modifications. 

The following setback modifications are permitted:

(1) When the common property line of two lots is covered by a building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line; and

(2) When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming street setbacks, the required street setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required street setback, whichever results in the greater street setback. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.130))


18.30.170 Setbacks – From regional utility corridors. 

(1) In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

(2) In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate regional utility corridors. 

(3) All structures shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet from property or easement lines delineating the boundary of regional utility corridors, except for utility structures necessary to the operation of the utility corridor or when structures are allowed by mutual agreement in the utility corridor.

(4) Any structure designed for human occupancy, except for utility structures not normally occupied that are necessary for the operation of the pipeline or a minor communication facility, shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from a hazardous liquid or gas transmission pipeline located within a regional utility corridor. The setback distance may be modified if the applicant demonstrates the following:

(a) A 100-foot setback would deny all reasonable use of the property; or

(b) That the structure would be protected from radiant heat of an explosion by berming or other physical barriers; or

(c) That a 100-foot setback would be impractical or unnecessary due to existing geographical features, streets, lot lines, or easements; or

(d) That no other practical alternative exists to meet the demand for service; and

(e) That the applicant will construct a hazardous liquid or gas transmission containment system or other mitigating actions if the City finds that leakage could accumulate within 100 feet of the pipeline. Any containment system or other mitigating actions required by this section shall meet all applicable Federal, State and local regulations. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.140))


18.30.180 Setbacks – From alley. 

(1) Structures may be built to a property line abutting an alley, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the alley property line to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet, as measured from the center line of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite edge of the alley. No portion of the garage or the door in motion may cross the property line. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.150))


18.30.190 Setbacks – Required modifications.

The following setback modifications are required:

(1) In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial; and

(2) Where the standard setback for a property is modified within an adopted subarea or neighborhood plan area zoning, the applicable setback shall be that specified therein. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.160))


18.30.200 Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

Provided that the required setbacks from regional utility corridors of CMC 18.30.170, the adjoining half-street or designated arterial setbacks of CMC 18.30.190 and the sight distance requirements of CMC 18.30.240 are maintained, structures may extend into or be located in required setbacks, including setbacks as required by CMC 18.30.250(2), as follows:

(1) Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project into any setback, provided such projections are:

(a) Limited to two per facade;

(b) Not wider than 10 feet; and

(c) Not more than 24 inches into an interior setback or 30 inches into a street setback;

(2) Detached residential accessory structures, including tool and storage sheds, gazebos, trellises, play equipment and similar structures, with a floor area not exceeding 200 square feet each may be located in required interior setback areas pursuant to the following conditions:

(a) No portion of any accessory structure shall be closer than three feet from any interior property line; and

(b) No portion of any accessory structure located within an interior setback shall exceed 12 feet in height; and

(c) No portion of any accessory structure located within an interior setback shall be located within six feet of any other accessory structure or primary structure; and

(d) No storage of material or debris, overgrown vegetation, or any other obstruction that restricts passage is allowed in the area between the accessory structure and property line; and

(e) An accessory structure requiring a City building permit shall not be located within an interior setback; and

(f) Accessory structures shall not be located within interior setback areas that contain utility easements and/or critical area setbacks; and

(g) Structures and confinement areas used for the keeping of domestic animals, fowl, livestock, and bees are not permitted within interior setbacks, unless specifically allowed by Chapter 18.80 CMC; 

(3) Building siding materials and trim boards; provided, that the siding materials and trim boards do not extend further than six inches into said setback;

(4) Uncovered porches and decks are allowed within interior setbacks pursuant to the following conditions: 

(a) No portion of an uncovered porch or deck that is 18 inches or less in height above the finished grade shall be closer than three feet from any interior property line; and

(b) No portion of an uncovered porch or deck which exceeds 18 inches in height above the finished grade shall encroach more than 18 inches into an interior setback; 

(5) Eaves may not project more than:

(a) Eighteen inches into an interior setback;

(b) Twenty-four inches into a street setback; or

(c) Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero-lot-line development;

(6) Fences with a height of six feet or less may project into or be located in any setback;

(7) Rockeries, retaining walls and curbs may project into or be located in any setback, provided these structures are in accord with the International Building Code and International Residential Code, and:

(a) Do not exceed a height of six feet in R-1 through R-18; and

(b) Do not exceed the building height for the zone in commercial/industrial zones, measured in accordance with the codified standards; 

(8) Fences located on top of rockeries, retaining walls or berms are subject to the requirements of CMC 18.35.210;

(9) Telephone, power, light and flag poles may project to property lines;

(10) The following may project into or be located within a setback and shall maintain a minimum five-foot setback from any interior property line:

(a) Sprinkler systems, air conditioners, heat pumps, generators, electrical and cellular equipment cabinets and other similar utility boxes and vaults;

(b) Security system access controls;

(c) Structures, except for buildings, associated with trails and on-site recreation spaces and play areas such as benches, picnic tables and drinking fountains designed in accordance with Chapter 18.35 CMC;

(11) Mailboxes and newspaper boxes may project into or be located within street setbacks;

(12) Fire hydrants and associated appendages; 

(13) Metro bus shelters may be located within street setbacks;

(14) Unless otherwise allowed in Chapter 18.55 CMC, freestanding and monument signs four feet or less in height, with a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, may project into or be located within street setbacks; and

(15) Stormwater conveyance and control facilities, both above and below ground, provided such projections are:

(a) Consistent with setback, easement and access requirements specified in the stormwater manuals adopted in Chapter 13.25 CMC; or

(b) In the absence of said specifications, not within five feet of the property line. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 03-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-09 § 27; Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 11; Ord. 60-03 § 1; Ord. 57-03 § 1; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.170))


18.30.210 Height – Exceptions to limits.

The following structures may be erected above the height limits of CMC 18.30.030 through 18.30.040:

(1) Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance; and

(2) Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples, crosses, spires, utility line towers and poles, and similar structures. (Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.180))


18.30.220 Height – Limits near airports. 

No building or structure shall be erected nor shall any tree be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit established by the local airport height maps. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.190))


18.30.230 Lot or site divided by zone boundary.

When a lot or site is divided by a zone boundary, the following applies:

(1) If a lot or site contains both residential and nonresidential zoning, the zone boundary between the zones shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site.

(2) If a lot or site contains residential zones of varying density:

(a) Any residential density transfer within the lot or site shall be allowed the density, as a result of moving dwelling units from one lot to another lot within a site or across zone lines within a single lot, does not exceed 150 percent of the base density on any of the lots or portions of a lot to which the density is transferred;

(i) The transfer does not reduce the minimum density achievable on the lot or site; 

(ii) The transfer enhances the efficient use of needed infrastructure;

(iii) The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to the low density portion of the lot or site;

(iv) The transfer contributes to preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, wildlife corridors, or other natural features; and

(v) The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to adjoining lower density properties;

(b) Residential density transfers shall not be allowed to a lot or portion of a lot zone urban separator (R-1);

(c) Compliance with the criteria in this subsection (2) of this section shall be evaluated during review of any development proposals in which such a transfer is proposed; and

(d) Residential density transfers from one lot to another lot within a site or from one portion of a lot to another portion of a lot across a zone line shall not, in of itself, be considered development above the base density for purposes of requiring a conditional use permit for apartments or townhouses in the R-1 (urban separator) through R-8 zones.

(3) Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in each zone in accordance with Chapter 18.25 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.200))


18.30.240 Sight distance requirements. 

Except for utility poles and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections and site access points:

(1) A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection (2) of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade;


[IMAGE]


    Note: The area of a sight distance triangle between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade shall remain open.

(2) The sight distance triangle at:

(a) A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both street property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

(b) A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the street lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle; and

(3) The Director may require modification or removal of structures or landscaping located in required street setbacks, if:

(a) Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway; and

(b) No reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.210))




18.30.250 Nonresidential land uses in residential zones.

Except for utility facilities, uses listed in CMC 18.25.100, and nonresidential uses regulated by CMC 18.30.260, all nonresidential uses located in the R zones shall be subject to the following requirements:

(1) Impervious surface coverage shall not exceed:

(a) Seventy percent of the site in the R-1 through R-18 zones.

(2) Buildings and structures, except fences and wire or mesh backstops, shall not be closer than 30 feet to any property line, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Single detached dwelling allowed as accessory to a church or school shall conform to the setback requirements of the zone.

(4) Parking areas are permitted within the required setback area from property lines, provided such parking areas are located outside of the required landscape area.

(5) Sites shall abut or be accessible from at least one public street functioning at a level consistent with the City of Covington road design standards. New high school sites shall abut or be accessible from a public street functioning as an arterial per the City of Covington road standards.

(6) The base height shall conform to the zone in which the use is located.

(7) Building illumination and lighted signs shall be designed so that no direct rays of light are projected into neighboring residences or onto any street right-of-way. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.220))


18.30.260 Personal services and retail uses in R-4 through R-18 zones – Neighborhood commercial.

The general personal service use (SIC No. 72 except 7216, 7218 and 7261) listed in CMC 18.25.050 and the retail uses listed in CMC 18.25.070 which are located in the R-4 through R-18 zones shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) Each individual establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area;

(2) Establishments shall not be located less than one mile from another commercial establishment, unless located with other establishments meeting the criteria in subsection (1) of this section;

(3) Establishment sites shall abut an intersection of two public streets, each of which is designated as a neighborhood collector or arterial and which has improved pedestrian facilities for at least one-quarter mile from the site;

(4) The maximum on-site parking ratios for establishments and sites shall be two per 1,000 square feet and required parking shall not be located between the building(s) and the street; 

(5) Buildings shall comply with the building facade modulation and roofline variation requirements in CMC 18.35.070 and 18.35.080 and at least one facade of the building shall be located within five feet of the sidewalk;

(6) If the personal service or retail use is located in a building with multifamily uses, then the commercial use shall be on the ground floor and shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the building;

(7) Sign and landscaping standards for the use apply. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.12.230))1

Code reviser’s note: “Hawk Property” was renamed “Lakepoint Urban Village” with the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 02-16. 2

Code reviser’s note: “Hawk Property” was renamed “Lakepoint Urban Village” with the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 02-16. 


Chapter 18.31 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

18.31.010    General.

18.31.015    City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards.

18.31.020    Design review.

18.31.030    Nonconforming development.

18.31.040    Supplemental town center review criteria.

18.31.045    Development agreements – Town center development.

18.31.050    Downtown zoning districts map.

18.31.060    Downtown zoning districts street types map.

18.31.070    Downtown zoning districts established.

18.31.080    Permitted land uses.

18.31.085    Permitted land use determination process.

18.31.090    Downtown zoning districts density and dimension standards.

18.31.100    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) – Bonus features.

18.31.110    Parking, access and circulation standards.

18.31.120    Public space requirements.

18.31.130    Landscaping requirements.

18.31.140    Repealed.


18.31.010 General.

(1) This chapter applies and establishes development and design standards for the Covington downtown zone, as defined in CMC 18.15.080 and 18.31.050.

(2) In the event of a conflict between the regulations of this chapter and other standards contained in the Covington Municipal Code, the regulations of this chapter shall control. 

(3) The purpose and intent of these regulations is to:

(a) Promote a downtown with a diverse mix of retail, housing, office and civic land uses and a genuine sense of place; 

(b) Encourage development that is pedestrian oriented and human in scale and an aesthetically attractive, energy efficient, easily accessible and economically healthy environment; 

(c) Include diverse retail and service uses, higher density residential housing, a network of pedestrian oriented streets and a high degree of connectivity for all modes of travel; and

(d) Include a central public gathering place at its heart. 

(4) Unless otherwise specified by the requirements of this chapter or by the administration and review authority provisions set forth in CMC 18.10.080, the Director of Community Development, hereafter referred to as the Director, shall be responsible for the review of all standards and decisions specified by this chapter.

(5) All development located within the downtown zone shall comply with the standards as set forth in this chapter. Relief from development standards shall be granted in accordance with the design review process in CMC 18.31.020. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.015 City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards.

(1) The City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards, as hereafter may be amended, is hereby adopted. Compliance with all standards contained in the design guidelines and standards is required for all development in the downtown zone unless specifically noted as wholly or partially exempt under this chapter.

(2) The City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards are referenced throughout this chapter. These references are intended to assist the applicant with navigating the City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards and do not preclude the applicant from complying with applicable guidelines and standards provided in other sections of the document. 

(3) The City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards includes both specific requirements and general guidelines. Where a standard is prefaced by the word “shall,” compliance with that standard is mandatory. Where the word “should” is used, the applicant, Director and Hearing Examiner are requested to give strong consideration to that guideline. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.020 Design review.

(1) Design review for projects or portions of projects which conform to the City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards shall be approved administratively by the Director. Specific requirements shall be met by choosing from a list of options stated under the general guidelines. 

(2) An applicant requesting modification to the City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards shall apply for a design departure pursuant to a Type 2 land use decision in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC subject to the following criteria:

(a) The proposed modification meets the design intent as stated in the standard equal to or better than would compliance with the standard; and

(b) In evaluating whether a proposed modification is an equal or better solution to the prescribed standard, the City may consider the goals and policies set forth in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element.

(3) A permit applicant wishing to waive any of the standards requirements in this chapter due to a hardship created by the unique physical circumstances, not including financial hardship, relating to the specific property may apply for a variance pursuant to a Type 3 land use decision in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC and subject to the variance criteria in CMC 18.125.030. 

(4) Applications for design departures from the City of Covington downtown design guidelines and standards and variances from this chapter shall be subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.030 Nonconforming development.

(1) Any lot, structure or use located in the downtown zone that was constructed in compliance with the applicable codes in place at the time the structure was constructed, that became nonconforming as a result of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or subsequent amendments, shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure.

(2) All new development, additions and remodels within the downtown zone are subject to the standards and/or guidelines contained in this chapter, provided the following shall be partially or wholly exempt from certain standards contained in this chapter. Reconstruction, structural alteration or enlargement of a legal nonconforming structure or expansion of a nonconforming use shall be allowed as provided in Chapter 18.85 CMC, except as otherwise provided as follows:

(a) If intentional reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of a legal nonconforming structure exceeds 75 percent of the replacement cost, the proposal shall comply with all standards contained in this chapter.

(b) In the event of a catastrophic loss, where the replacement cost exceeds 75 percent, a legal nonconforming structure may be placed in the same location and footprint as previously existed prior to the loss. With the exception of those standards that would involve repositioning the building or reconfiguring the site, the proposal shall meet all other standards contained in this chapter.

(c) All modifications with a value that exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing structure, as determined by the Director, shall be designated as “major modifications.” All requirements which do not involve repositioning the building or reconfiguring site development shall apply to major exterior modifications, providing any addition shall in no way expand the nonconformance and be sited and designed in a manner to increase conformance with these standards.

(d) All modifications with a value less than 50 percent of the building valuation shall be considered “minor modifications.” Minor modifications are only required to meet those standards determined by the Director to be reasonable related to or impacted by the proposed improvement.

(e) The design standards do not apply to modifications that do not change the exterior appearance of the building or site. If a project involves both exterior and interior improvements, then the project valuation shall include both exterior and interior improvements, and design standards shall apply. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.040 Supplemental town center review criteria.

(1) The purpose of this section is to establish a supplemental review process for proposed development in the town center district. The intent is to ensure that development in the town center proceeds in an orderly fashion with coordinated infrastructure and public amenities, appropriate intensities and mutually compatible development in accordance with the vision in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element. 

(2) Compliance with the supplemental town center review criteria shall be required for all development in the town center, other than the reuse, modification or expansion of an existing structure. 

(3) The Director has the authority to determine if the applicant is required to hold a public meeting, separate from any required public hearings, due to the scope, scale and location of a project in the town center district. The public meeting shall occur after a commercial site development permit application has been submitted and prior to issuance of a final land use decision. 

(a) The applicant shall provide at least two weeks’ advance notice.

(b) Notice of the public meeting shall be published in the city’s designated paper and mailed to property owners within 500 feet of the proposed site. The notice shall at a minimum include a brief description of the proposal, the location, and a photo or sketch of the proposed facility. 

(c) Costs associated with holding the public meeting shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 

(4) The Director shall issue a decision on the commercial site development permit application pursuant to Chapter 18.110 CMC as Type 2 land use decision in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC based on the following review criteria:

(a) The proposal is consistent with the Goals and Policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

(b) The proposal will substantially implement the town center vision, including a development pattern, street grid and central public plaza that is similar to or meets the design intent of that shown in Figure 4.2 of the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element and the mix of uses and pedestrian development character articulated in Section 4.5.2 of the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element.

(c) The proposed development can be achieved without compromising options for circulation, infrastructure and open space improvements on surrounding properties. 

(d) Infrastructure and circulation can be constructed to serve other properties in the area in a manner consistent with the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element.

(5) The following additional review criteria shall be submitted with the commercial site development permit application to ensure that the proposed development will not limit or prohibit future development goals within the town center. These documents are conceptual and are for the purpose of reviewing future densities, compatibility of development on the proposed site, and infrastructure needs in the town center. These documents are not subject to the land use decision review process. 

(a) Site plan depicting the maximum development intensity of any future planned or conceptual development to be located on the proposed site; and

(b) Building elevations, description and depiction of any future planned or conceptual land uses, known information relating to the location of public infrastructure and the total area devoted to public amenities, including public spaces and plazas. 

(6) Development amenities shown on a future planned or conceptual site plan do not relieve the applicant from complying with the requirements of this chapter for the proposed development, as submitted with the commercial site development permit application. 

(7) The required application materials for the commercial site development permit are provided in CMC 18.110.030. Additional materials may be required to demonstrate compliance with the decision criteria as set forth in subsection (4) of this section. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.045 Development agreements – Town center development.

(1) The purpose of this section is to establish a process for allowing deviations to the development standards within the downtown zoning, town center (TC) district only, through a development agreement process consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW, Chapter 18.114 CMC, Development Agreements, and as further outlined in this chapter.

(2) Unless otherwise provided herein, all development in the downtown zoning districts shall comply with all applicable codes. Deviations from the following development standards shall be authorized only within the town center (TC) district on single or contiguous combined parcels three acres or greater.

(a) Medical office uses greater than two stories shall have a minimum of 60 percent ground floor retail trade and services and 40 percent business and professional services when fronting onto 171st Ave. SE, as conditioned in CMC 18.31.080(4)(8)(b).

(b) Mixed-use structures greater than one story shall provide 60 percent of the ground floor as retail, restaurant, or professional services, as conditioned in CMC 18.31.080(4)(23).

(c) Multifamily residential dwelling units shall be located in a minimum three-story mixed-use structure. Sixty percent or more of the ground floor abutting a street, public space, public plaza, and/or public green space shall be occupied by one or more of the following permitted uses: retail, restaurant, or personal services as conditioned in CMC 18.31.080(4)(26)(b).

(d) All schools: compulsory, vocational, and higher education located on the upper floors of a mixed-use building and including commercial uses, as conditioned in CMC 18.31.080(4)(13).

(e) Time limitation of permit approval if the proposed development combines two or more distinct land use categories that are permitted in the town center district and is located on single or contiguous combined parcel of six acres or more.

(3) A development agreement shall not eliminate the requirement to provide ground floor retail, restaurant, or personal services for structures greater than one story as conditioned in CMC 18.31.080(4)(23).

(4) A development agreement shall not reduce the required retail, trade, services, and personal services uses to less than 30 percent along each street frontage. Required business and professional services shall not be reduced to less than 20 percent. The director may recommend flexibility in the combination of the required retail, restaurant, business, and professional service space if the aggregate is located along SE 276th Street and 171st Ave. SE and the total requirement is met through the combination.

(5) Deviations shall be supported by the goals and policies in the City’s Comprehensive Plan. If goals and polices of the Comprehensive Plan required amendments to support an applicant’s request for a deviation, then the goals and policies shall be amended and approved through the City’s annual Comprehensive Plan amendment docketing process prior to submitting a development proposal and requesting a development agreement.

(6) A development agreement authorized under this section shall provide a level of public benefit or mitigation proportionate to the deviation and that exceeds those required under the standard regulations. A development agreement shall require completion, acquisition, contribution, or a combination thereof, as approved by the City as follows: 

(a) Transportation, park, or other improvement projects, including nonmotorized improvements identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan or six-year Capital Improvement Program.

(b) Additional accessible public space equivalent to a minimum of two and one-half percent of the gross floor area of all the structures.

(c) Exterior public art or a contribution to the art fund equivalent to a minimum of one percent of the total value of the project’s construction cost.

(d) A project that the City finds will provide mitigation and/or public benefit, as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan or six-year Capital Improvement Program. (Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A))




18.31.050 Downtown zoning districts map.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.060 Downtown zoning districts street types map.

(1) The following downtown zoning districts street map is conceptual and not intended to define the exact alignment of future streets. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the City of Covington Design and Construction Standards, adopted by reference in Chapter 12.60 CMC. Modifications to these standards shall be in accordance with Chapter 14.30 CMC as a Type 2 land use decision by the City Engineer. 
[IMAGE]


(2) Where a street type is not designated on the downtown zoning districts street type map for a proposed street, the Director shall have the authority to determine the street type designation of the proposed street based on the type designation of adjacent or nearby streets and upon the purpose and intent of the downtown zoning, development, and design regulations as stated in CMC 18.31.010. An applicant requesting modification to a Director’s determination of a street type designation shall apply for a downtown design departure as stated in CMC 14.30.040, pursuant to a Type 2 land use decision. (Ord. 10-11 § 6 (Exh. F); Ord. 02-11 § 1; Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.070 Downtown zoning districts established.

The following zoning districts are established within the downtown zone to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by implementing the goals and policies adopted in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element. The district intent statements define the specific purpose of each district. They shall be the policies of the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element; serve as a guide for determining the appropriate location of uses; help determine appropriate conditions for development within the downtown zone; and help the Director interpret the standards and provisions of this chapter.

(1) The town center district (TC) is the pedestrian-oriented core of downtown and allows the most intensive level of development. The emphasis of this district is on mixed-use development that includes pedestrian-oriented retail, high density residential development, and civic uses. The development of a walkable street grid and a central public gathering space are key objectives of this district. To meet goals for a pedestrian-oriented town center, limited large-format retail uses are permitted, and such uses are subject to a conditional use permit and additional design criteria provided in CMC 18.31.040.

(2) The mixed commercial district (MC) is applied to the majority of the Covington downtown zone. This district encourages a mix of commercial and multi-story residential uses, public uses, and allows for large-format and auto-oriented retail, provided they meet pedestrian-oriented design standards that are more flexible than those applied to the town center district. Achieving a high level of connectivity with new and improved streets and trails is a major goal in this district.

(3) The general commercial district (GC) is applied to a limited area of the downtown and is intended to allow the widest range of uses, coupled with more limited design standards than other areas of downtown. Permitted uses include commercial and light industrial uses, offices, major transportation and utility facilities, and residential uses that are appropriately buffered to ensure compatibility. Development and design standards are less prescriptive and provide greater flexibility to accommodate the intended uses. 

(4) The mixed housing/office district (MHO) is applied to areas where infill development and redevelopment of low intensity areas with multifamily housing and office is encouraged. Residential uses that are encouraged in this district include townhouses, cottages, and low-rise multifamily. Office development and limited intensity neighborhood retail is also permitted. Development and design standards applied to this district require buffers, lower height limits and building scale that is appropriate to the size of the lot. Trail connections are also emphasized in this district. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.080 Permitted land uses.

(1) The use of a property is defined by the activity for which the building or lot is intended, designed, arranged, occupied or maintained. The use is considered permanently established when that use will or has been in continuous operation for a period exceeding 60 days. A use which will operate for less than 60 days is considered a temporary use, and subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.85 CMC.

(2) Explanation of Permitted Use Table. 

(a) The permitted use table in this chapter determines whether a use is allowed in a district. The name of the district is located on the vertical column and the use is located on the horizontal row of these tables.

(b) If the letters “NP” appear in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is not permitted in that district, except for certain temporary uses.

(c) If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 14.30 CMC and the general requirements of the code.

(d) If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed subject to the conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 14.30 CMC and conditional use fees as set forth in the current fee resolution, and the general requirements of the code.

(e) If a number appears next to a specific use or in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code and the specific conditions indicated in the permitted use conditions with the corresponding number in the code subsection immediately following the permitted use table.

(f) All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section.

(3) Permitted Use Table.

	Use Categories	Town Center (TC)23	Mixed Commercial (MC)	General Commercial (GC)	Mixed Housing Office (MHO)1

	Residential

	Dwelling Unit, Accessory	NP	NP	NP	P2

	Dwelling Unit, Multifamily	P26	P	P	P

	Dwelling Unit, Single-Family Attached, Detached or Cottage Housing21, 27	NP	NP	NP	P2

	Senior Citizen Assisted Housing	P	P	P	C

	Commercial

	Adult Entertainment 	NP	P3	P3	NP

	Business Services19	P5	P	P	P4,5

	Drive-Through Use	NP	P	P	NP

	Farmers’ Markets and Public Markets6	P	P	P	NP

	Gambling and Card Rooms	NP	NP	NP	NP

	Home Occupation and Live/Work	P	P	P	P

	Veterinary Clinics (SIC 074), Animal Shelters, Kennels, and Catteries20	NP	NP	P	NP

	Outdoor Commercial	NP	NP	P	NP

	Personal and Beauty Services21	P	P	P	P

	Private Electric Vehicle Parking Facility (Primary Use)	 	 	P5,24	 

	Private Parking Facility (Primary Use)	NP	NP	NP	NP

	Professional Office	P	P	P	P

	Retail Trade and Services – 100,000 sq. ft. or less for all structures 	P5	P	P10	P4,5

	Retail Trade and Services – greater than 100,000 sq. ft. for all structures 	C5,9,18	P	P10	NP

	Shooting Ranges25	NP	NP	P	NP

	Storage/Self Storage	NP	P5	P	NP

	Temporary Lodging/Hotel	P	P	P	C22

	Marijuana Retailer and Retail Outlets28	NP	P	P	NP

	Cultural/Recreation

	Cinema, Performing Arts and Museums 	P	P	P	NP

	Meeting Hall/Other Group Assembly	P	P	P	C

	Physical Fitness/Recreation Club	P/C29	P	P	P

	Recreation, Indoor	P/C29	P	P	P

	Recreation, Outdoor	C	P	P	P

	Religious	C7	P	P	C

	Health Services

	Emergency Care Facility 	C9,18	P	NP	NP

	Hospital 	NP	P	NP	NP

	Medical Office/Outpatient Clinic	P8	P	NP	P

	Nursing/Personal Care Facility	NP	P	NP	C

	Industrial/Manufacturing 

	Asphalt Plants	NP	NP	NP	NP

	Light Industrial/Manufacturing	NP	NP	P10	NP

	Government/Institutional11

	Essential Public Facilities	NP	NP	C	NP

	Government Services	P 	P 	P 	P12

	Major Utility Facility	C14	C	P	C

	Minor Utility Facility	P15	P	P	P

	Schools: Compulsory, Vocational and Higher Education 	C13	P	NP	C

	Wireless Communication Facilities16

	Antenna, Collocation on an Existing Structure17	P	P	P	P

	Wireless Communication Facility Tower	NP	NP	NP	NP

(4) Permitted Use Conditions. 

1. a. Unless the use can be accommodated within an existing structure, development and/or redevelopment in the Covington Firs and Covington Township subdivisions shall be a minimum of two acres; 

b. Be contiguous to a non-single-family use of two acres or more to be eligible to redevelop to a new use; and 

c. Successive development cannot isolate existing single-family residential lots less than two acres (as a group) between developments. 

2. a. No new subdivision of land is permitted for single-family homes except for townhouses and cottage developments. The exception is a binding site plan for commercial uses. 

b. New single-family homes are allowed on existing single-family lots. 

c. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed as an accessory to a single-family detached unit subject to the development standards in CMC 18.25.030(7). 

3. Adult entertainment uses are prohibited within certain locations pursuant to the development standards provided in Chapter 5.20 CMC and CMC 18.25.040(2). 

4. This use is restricted to a maximum of 5,000 gross square feet within the MHO district.

5. Services and operations other than customer parking shall be fully contained within a structure.

6. Temporary farmers’ and public markets shall be permitted in accordance with CMC 18.85.125.

7. The development shall not occupy more than one acre for the total of the site development, including any planned phases and/or expansions. 

8. a. Buildings greater than four stories shall provide 80 percent of required parking within a structure. Structured parking shall not front onto 171st Ave. SE.

b. Medical office uses greater than two stories shall have a minimum of 60 percent ground floor retail trade and services and 40 percent business and professional services when fronting onto 171st Ave. SE, unless otherwise allowed through the development agreement process in Chapter 18.114 CMC and further specified in CMC 18.31.045.

9. The development shall be located west of the proposed 171st Ave. SE road alignment with frontage onto 168th Pl. SE or the planned SE 276th St. alignment. 

10. All structures shall meet the required setbacks, landscaping and all other standards contained in this chapter. Equipment storage, manufacturing activities, and wrecked, dismantled and/or inoperative vehicles shall be enclosed in a structure or fully screened from public right-of-way, including SE 272nd St. and Covington Way with Type I landscaping in accordance with CMC 18.40.040.

11. Maintenance yards, substations and solid waste transfer stations are not permitted in the TC, MC, or MHO downtown zoning districts. 

12. Transit stations and park and ride facilities, not including bus stops, shall be reviewed by a conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 18.125.040.

13. All schools for compulsory, vocational and higher education shall be located on the upper floors of a mixed-use building that includes ground floor commercial uses, unless otherwise allowed through the development agreement process in Chapter 18.114 CMC and further specified in CMC 18.31.045.

14. All facilities shall not occupy more than one acre of a site and the facility shall be screened with Type I landscaping in accordance with CMC 18.40.040.

15. Minor utility facilities, such as telecom, fiber optics, Internet and similar facilities, shall be located within a fully enclosed structure, unless otherwise determined by the Director.

16. Chapter 18.70 CMC, Wireless Communication Facilities, outlines the approval and review process. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of Chapter 18.70 CMC and the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 18.70 CMC shall govern.

17. All antennas and ancillary wireless communication facilities shall be concealed facilities and mounted on an existing building or structure or placed underground as provided for in Chapter 18.70 CMC.

18. a. Emergency care facilities shall not occupy more than four acres for the total of the site development including any planned phases and/or expansions of the emergency care use;

b. Shall not exceed 50,000 square feet of total building square footage; and

c. Shall not exceed more than two stories or 35 feet whichever is greater. 

19. Gasoline service stations and battery exchange stations are limited to the general commercial and mixed commercial districts and subject to the following conditions:

a. A gasoline service station shall be limited to eight pumps and 16 price gauges to service no more than 16 vehicles.

b. A battery exchange station shall provide a minimum of three stacking spaces. 

c. Stacking spaces and drive-through facilities shall be designed in accordance with CMC 18.50.080.

d. Any associated materials, equipment storage, outdoor storage tanks and battery exchange activities shall be within a fully enclosed structure, unless otherwise determined by the Director. 

20. a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas shall be surrounded by an eight-foot-high solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; 

c. Subject to animal keeping provisions of Chapter 18.80 CMC; 

d. Prior to issuance of a development permit, documentation shall be provided by a qualified acoustical consultant, for approval by the Community Development Director, verifying that the expected noise to be emanating from the site complies with the standards set forth in WAC 173-60-040(1) for a Class B source property and a Class A receiving property; 

e. Not permitted in any subdivision containing dwelling units; and

f. May only treat domestic animals on premises.

21. Day care I is allowed only as an accessory to a single-family detached unit. 

22. Except bed and breakfasts, guesthouses are permitted outright and do not require a conditional use permit. 

23. Mixed-use structures greater than one story shall provide ground floor retail, restaurant, or personal services along 60 percent of the building facade, unless otherwise allowed through the development agreement process in Chapter 18.114 CMC and further specified in CMC 18.31.045. Permitted uses under the headings of cultural/recreation and governmental/institutional in subsection (3) of this section are exempt from this provision.

24. Parking facilities shall be fully screened from the public right-of-way with Type 1 landscaping in accordance with CMC 18.40.040.

25. a. The indoor shooting range, including its plans, rules, procedures, management and staff, shall comply with the applicable safety guidelines and provisions in the latest edition of “the Range Source Book” (National Rifle Association of America: Fairfax, Virginia) or its successor, as appropriate to the type of facility involved. 

b. Any new development proposal and/or business license application for an indoor shooting range shall be accompanied by a notarized letter by the shooting facility operator that the facility complies with Federal and State regulations, meets commonly accepted shooting facility safety and design practices, and will be operated in a manner that protects the safety of the general public.

c. Outdoor shooting ranges are not permitted.

26. a. Multifamily residential dwellings in the TC zone shall be located in a minimum three-story mixed-use structure; and

b. Sixty percent or more of the ground floor abutting a street, public space, public plaza and/or public green space shall be occupied by one or more of the following permitted uses: retail, restaurant or personal services, unless otherwise allowed through the development agreement process in Chapter 18.114 CMC and further specified in CMC 18.31.045. Driveways, service and truck loading areas, parking garage entrances and lobbies shall not be included in calculating the required percentages of ground floor use. 

27. New and existing single-family attached and detached dwellings within commercial zones shall abide by the density and dimension standards for the R-8 zone provided in CMC 18.30.030.

28. Subject to the applicable 1,000-foot and 500-foot sensitive use buffers outlined in CMC 18.33.050.

29. “Physical fitness/recreation clubs” and “recreation, indoor” facilities are permitted outright when located within an existing building or located within a new mixed-use development; otherwise, a conditional use is required for a new standalone facility. (Ord. 06-19 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 12-16 § 7; Ord. 03-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 04-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 01-12 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.085 Permitted land use determination process.

(1) A use determination process shall be applied to any proposed use that does not clearly fit within the permitted use table in CMC 18.31.080(3) or contains multiple uses, e.g., retail and light manufacturing, processing or assembling, or an accessory use that is more than 25 percent of the floor area of the primary use. 

(2) If the Director determines that a use determination process is required, the request for a use determination shall be submitted and a decision issued prior to submittal of the underlying land use application.

(3) If a land use application has been submitted, the Director shall issue a land use determination prior to the issuance of application completeness in accordance with CMC 14.35.030. 

(4) The Director shall require information describing the use or uses on the site, their location and operational characteristics. The Director may approve, deny, or approve with conditions a land use determination within any downtown district based on all of the following criteria:

(a) The primary use is determined by the Director to be reasonably similar and related to one of the permitted use categories in a downtown district; 

(b) The use is consistent with the district’s purpose statement and the comprehensive plan policies; 

(c) The use can be accommodated in the existing structure in which it is proposed without requiring substantial modification to the form of the structure;

(d) The use does not have noxious impacts (excessive noise, odor, vibration, dust, etc.) on other nearby properties and uses; and

(e) The use will not result in significant transportation impacts that would not be mitigated by the required development standards.

(5) Applications for a land use determination shall be subject to review and approval procedures for a Type 2 land use decision process and shall be subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.090 Downtown zoning districts density and dimension standards.

(1) Table of Density and Dimension Standards, Downtown Zoning Districts.

	Standards	Town Center (TC)	Mixed Commercial (MC)	General Commercial (GC)	Mixed Housing Office (MHO)	Exceptions and Notes

	Maximum Building Height	75 feet	60 feet	55 feet	45 feet 	Maximum height shall be 45 feet within 50 feet of any zone outside of the downtown zone. In the MHO district, the 35 feet maximum height shall also apply within 50 feet of another MHO property.

	Maximum Residential Density (stand alone)	Not Permitted	60 D.U./acre	48 D.U./acre	24 D.U./acre	For cottage housing, CMC 18.37.040 shall control. Stand alone residential structures are not permitted in the town center.

	Maximum Residential Density (if ground floor is commercial)	Unlimited	Unlimited	Unlimited	24 D.U./acre	 

	Minimum Residential Density	32 D.U./acre	24 D.U./acre	24 D.U./acre	12 D.U./acre	Residential use is not required in the downtown. For cottage housing, CMC 18.37.040 shall control.

	Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) with Bonus Features	4:1	3:1	3:1	2:1, 1.25:1 east of Wax Road	Refer to CMC 18.31.100 for bonus features.

	Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) without Bonus Features	1.5:1	1:1	1:1	1:1; .75:1 east of Wax Road	No minimum FAR. Development within the Jenkins Creek Corridor shall utilize low impact development (LID) techniques as adopted in CMC 13.25.020. 

	Maximum Impervious Surface 	80%	90%	80%	70%; 50% east of Wax Road and south of SE 272nd St.	Developments in the MHO located east of Wax Road and south of SE 272nd St., and cottage housing developments shall not exceed the 50% maximum impervious surface. 

	Minimum Lot Frontage Occupied by a Building	Type I Street – 80% 

Type II Street – 50%

Type III Street – 50%

Type IV Street – 40% 	Type II Street – 50% 

Type IV Street – 40% 	Type IV Street – 40% 	None	A building shall be located within 5 feet of the back of sidewalk or on a public plaza. Where utility easements greater than 5 feet exist, the building shall be set back to the extent of the easement and this area shall be designed as an extension of the sidewalk and/or may be included as part of the public space requirement. 

	Minimum Setbacks within District	None	None	20 feet	10 feet	For development located east of SE Wax Road in the MHO zoning district, the setback for non-single-family residential buildings from SE Wax Road may be 0 feet.

	Minimum Setbacks from Any Public Property Other Than a Street	None	None	5 feet	5 feet	 

	Minimum Setbacks to Adjoining Downtown District	10 feet where adjoining the MHO District only	10 feet 	N/A	10 feet	In districts other than the MHO, no setback shall be required for mixed-use development or commercial building less than 50,000 square feet, with no significant outside storage or sales.

	Minimum Setbacks to Zones Outside the Downtown Zone	0	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet	Refer to Design Standards Section B(1)(g) – Buffers and Transitions. No setback is required where a zone is separated from another zone by a street. 

(2) Additional Density and Dimension Development Standards Referenced in This Title.

(a) CMC 18.30.060 through 18.30.090 for density measurement and calculation methods. 

(b) CMC 18.30.130 through 18.30.200 for measurement of setbacks and allowed projections into the setbacks. (Ord. 04-18 § 2; Ord. 14-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.100 Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) – Bonus features.

(1) Developments in the downtown districts are eligible to earn increased FAR, and the maximum incentive to be earned by each bonus feature is set forth in CMC 18.31.090. The FAR incentive is expressed as additional bonus FAR earned per amount of bonus feature provided.



(2) Floor area ratio (FAR) is a ratio of the area of interior square footage of a structure to the site area. For example, a two-story building occupying half of a site would have an FAR of 1:1, or expressed as one. A four-story building occupying half a site would have an FAR of two. The definition of floor area ratio is further defined in CMC 18.20.507.

(3) Bonus FAR may be earned through any combination of the following listed bonus features.

	Bonus Feature	FAR Bonus	Description, Additional Requirements and Limitations

	1. Significant Public Plaza or Public Green Space	2.0	(a) Permitted only in the town center district at the discretion of the Director. 

(b) Location and design shall be consistent with City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element and complimentary to any planned public plaza or development.

(c) Shall be a minimum of 4% of the interior floor area of the development and no less than 1,000 square feet. 

(d) This bonus shall be in addition to the minimum public space requirement in CMC 18.31.120. Refer to Section B(1)(i) of the Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards.

	2. LEED Platinum Certification	1.0	(a) As certified by the USGBC. 

(b) Applicant is responsible for providing LEED pre-certification submittal documentation and annotated checklist to the City. City will review documentation at the applicant’s expense. 

(c) Any approvals shall be a condition of approval and applied to any subsequent building permit for the development.

	3. Structure Parking, below grade 	1.0	At least 80% of the parking shall be contained within a structure that is below grade.

	4. Other Public Plaza or Public Green Space	1.0	(a) Location and design shall be consistent with City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element and any planned public plaza or development. 

(b) Shall be a minimum of 2% of the interior floor area of the development and no less than 500 square feet. 

(c) This bonus shall be in addition to the minimum public space requirement in CMC 18.31.120.

	5. Affordable Housing	1.0 	(a) For all new development within the downtown districts, total square footage may be increased by 2.0 square feet for every 1.0 square foot of affordable housing (for a maximum of 1.0 FAR), provided an affordable housing plan (AHP) is developed and submitted to the Director for review and approval. 

(b) The developer shall commit to implementing the AHP as a part of a signed agreement with the City. This agreement shall be reviewed by ARCH, or similar housing authority, with recommendations made to the Director prior to implementation of an agreement.

	6. Structured Parking, at Grade or Above Grade	0.75	(a) At least 80% of the parking shall be contained within a structure. The structure may be part of the building or a separate structure. 

(b) The structure shall be designed so that parked cars are not visible from the street and a commercial or residential use shall occupy the street level.

	7. Through Block Connection or Alley Enhancement	0.75	(a) A pedestrian walkway and accompanying landscaping that shall be at least 15 feet wide and extend along a property line; or 

(b) A pedestrian walkway that extends through a site to allow the public to pass from one street to another street or an alley. 

(c) The surface shall consist of stone, unit pavers or textured concrete, with pedestrian scale lighting spaced no more than 50 feet apart.

	8. Multi-Modal Pathway	0.5	A pathway for the movement of pedestrians and bicyclists that is consistent with the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element, the City’s PROS Plan and approved by the Director. 

	9. Public Meeting Room	0.5	(a) Permitted in the town center district only. 

(b) A room available to the community for meetings and events. The size shall be a minimum of 300 square feet, with windows on at least one side and shall be directly accessible from the outside or by a controlled lobby that allows public access. 

(c) There shall be no fees imposed on user groups.

	10. LEED Gold Certification	0.5	(a) As certified by the USGBC. 

(b) Applicant is responsible for providing LEED pre-certification submittal documentation and annotated checklist to the City. City will review documentation at the applicant’s expense. 

(c) Any approvals shall be a condition of approval and applied to any subsequent building permit for the development.

	11. Water Feature	0.5	(a) A decorative water feature shall be equivalent to at least 1% of the project’s construction cost. 

(b) Shall be directly accessible and visible to the public by being adjacent to a plaza, sidewalk, pathway or through-block connection. 

(c) Documentation shall be provided verifying the construction value and the cost of the water feature prior to approval of engineering phase plans.

	12. Exterior Art Element	0.5	(a) Exterior art element shall be equivalent to at least 1% of the total value of the project’s construction cost. Such elements include but are not limited to sculptures, bas-reliefs, metal work and murals. 

(b) Documentation shall be provided verifying the construction value and the value of the art as appraised by an art appraiser. 

(c) Art elements shall be visible to the public at all times and will be reviewed and approved by an arts body designated by the City.

(Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.110 Parking, access and circulation standards.

(1) Developments in the downtown zone shall be designed with surface and/or structured parking to allow drivers and pedestrians to move safely on and off the site, provide adequate off-street parking, reduce on-street parking, increase traffic safety, maintain smooth traffic flow, and reduce the visual impact of parking lots. 

(2) Parking design standards are outlined in the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Sections B(1)(b), C(2)(d)(iii), and C(3)(d)(iii). These standards shall be incorporated into the design and location of any surface and structured parking. 

(3) Surface Parking Location and Structured Parking Requirements Table.

	 	Town Center (TC)	Mixed Commercial (MC)	General Commercial (GC)	Mixed Housing/ Office (MHO)

	Surface Parking Location

	Rear of principal building	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	Side of principal building	Permitted, but lot frontage requirements apply by street type	Permitted, but lot frontage requirements apply by street type	Permitted, but lot frontage requirements apply by street type	Permitted

	Between principal building and street	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	Permitted, but lot frontage requirements apply on Type IV streets	Permitted

	Street corner	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	Permitted 	Permitted 

	Adjacent to park or open space	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	At street terminus 	Not Permitted	Permitted	Permitted	Permitted

	Structured Parking Location and Design

	All Locations	Permitted, ground-level retail required if fronting a Type I or Type II street	Permitted, ground-level retail required if fronting a Type I or Type II street	Permitted	Permitted

(4) Minimum Parking Requirements Table.

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Spaces Required

	Residential

	Dwelling unit, multifamily:

	Studio and one-bedroom units	1.0 per dwelling unit*

	Two-bedroom units	1.5 per dwelling unit*

	Three-bedroom units	2.0 per dwelling unit*

	Dwelling unit, single-family attached	2.0 per dwelling unit (tandem spaces allowed)

	Dwelling unit, single-family detached	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Dwelling unit, accessory or cottage housing	1.0 per dwelling unit

	*Plus one extra space for every 10 dwelling units rounded upward to the nearest multiple of 10. 

	Commercial 

	Retail trade and services (non-food)	2 per 1,000 square feet

	Nonfood retail in mixed-use development, less than 5,000 square feet and less than 40% of the gross floor area of the development	No off-street parking required**

	Food stores, in mixed-use development, less than 15,000 square feet and less than 40% of the gross floor area of the development	3 per 1,000 square feet**

	Food stores, other than above	4 per 1,000 square feet, plus additional parking as provided below for eating establishment

	Eating and drinking establishment, other than above	1 per 100 square feet in dining, lounge and customer ordering area

	Professional office	2 per 1,000 square feet

	Gasoline service stations/Battery exchange stations	3 per facility plus 1 per 300 square feet of store

	Temporary lodging/Hotel	1.1 per bedroom

	Business Services	3 per 1,000 square feet

	Home occupation including live/work	1 stall in addition to requirement for primary use 

	** The applicant may demonstrate through a traffic study that on-street parking is adequate to wholly or partially fulfill this parking requirement.

	Industrial/Manufacturing

	Light Industrial/Manufacturing	1 per 1,000 square feet, plus additional parking for office or retail areas as noted elsewhere in this table

	Recreation/Culture

	Theater	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 2 spaces for every 3 employees

	Group assembly	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes

	Park/playfield/plaza	Director decision

	Health Club	Director decision

	Health Services

	Hospital	1 per bed

	Medical Office 	5 per 1,000 square feet

	Nursing and personal care facility	1 per 4 beds

	Emergency care facility	5 per 1, 000 square feet

	Other

	Utility	Director decision

	Government office	3 per 1,000 square feet

	All other	Director decision

	Bicycle Parking

	In the downtown districts one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 15 vehicle parking spaces. Bicycle parking shall be located within 50 feet of the principal building and directly adjacent to a sidewalk or pedestrian walkway that connects directly to the building entrance(s).

	Car Share Parking

	Within the downtown districts the total number of parking spaces provided within residential developments containing more than 30 units may be reduced by three spaces for each one dedicated car share space. A signed agreement between the property owner and car share provider shall be submitted to the Director for approval. 

	Electric Vehicle Charging Station

	All developments that require off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of the electric vehicle charging stations requirements in CMC 18.50.160 through 18.50.180. 

	Reduction for Joint-Use Parking

	Developments which submit an approved parking management plan as noted in subsection (5) of this section may receive a reduction in required parking of between 0% and 20%. The Director may increase the percentage of the reduction where compelling evidence is provided in the applicant’s traffic report that the proposed reduction is warranted. Refer to subsection (6) of this section. 

(5) Parking for a specific use shall be limited to no more than 50 percent greater than the minimum parking requirement required by subsection (2) of this section. Exceptions to this parking maximum include:

(a) Parking spaces are provided above or below grade.

(b) If the Director determines additional off-street parking spaces are warranted based on a traffic study. The Director shall consider whether the proposal is consistent with the stated purposes, objectives, goals or policies established in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element. 

(c) The Director shall have the authority to restrict parking for a specific use to an amount that is less than the maximum amount allowed in this section if the proposal would substantially conflict with the stated purposes, objectives, goals or policies contained in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element. 

(6) Developments that contain more than 30,000 square feet of commercial area and/or more than 100 units of housing are required to submit a parking management plan that responds to the vision in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element. A parking management plan shall address the following:

(a) Integration and connection with adjacent parking areas associated with other developments.

(b) A joint use parking strategy or documentation that demonstrates why such a strategy is not feasible. 

(c) A joint use parking strategy is appropriate when all of the following criteria are met:

(i) The total parking area exceeds 8,000 square feet;

(ii) The uses sharing parking facilities are of different use categories or have different hours of operation; and

(iii) The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use is more than 800 feet from the most remote joint-use facility.

(7) The amount of off-street parking required in subsection (4) of this section may be reduced by no more than 20 percent, as determined by the Director, when shared facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

(a) The normal hours of operation of each use are separated by at least two hours; or

(b) A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer and submitted by the applicant documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict, and that uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized.

(8) The total number of parking spaces requested for shared parking shall not be less than the minimum required spaces for any single use.

(9) A covenant or other contract for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the Director. This covenant or contract shall by recorded with the King County Department of Records and Election Division as a deed restriction on all properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the Director.

(10) If requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners shall provide a remedy satisfactory to the Director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

(11) Additional Parking Requirements and Parking Design Standards Referenced in This Title.

(a) CMC 18.50.050 through 18.50.180 for other applicable standards.

(12) Additional parking lot screening, landscaping and curb cut spacing requirements shall be incorporated into the design and layout of any proposed parking as provided in the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Sections C(2)(b), C(3)(b) and C(4)(b). (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.120 Public space requirements.

(1) New development within the town center (TC) and mixed commercial (MC) districts shall meet the public space requirement. 

(2) All new development shall provide accessible public space equivalent to one and one-half percent of the gross floor area of all structures. The design and location of public spaces shall consider the design and location of public spaces on adjacent properties and shall be oriented and connected to those spaces. 

(3) If the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that a required public space is adjacent to, integrated with and can be accessed from a public space on an adjoining property, this requirement may be reduced to one percent of gross floor area. 

(4) All required public spaces shall be oriented toward, and have direct connections (both physical and visual) to, a public street. 

(5) Where public spaces are integrated into new development, or where new development abuts an existing or planned public plaza, the primary building entrance shall be oriented toward the public space or plaza.

(6) All development that abuts the main public space envisioned in the City of Covington Comprehensive Plan Downtown Element shall be oriented and connected to that public space.

(7) Additional public space design standards in the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Section B(1)(i) shall be included in the design of any public space requirements. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.130 Landscaping requirements.

(1) Landscape Area Requirement.

(a) In addition to the landscape standards contained in this chapter, five percent of the total area between the building facade and the curb shall be landscaped. This shall be in addition to street trees and landscaping provided in public spaces and parking lots that are required in other subsections. 

(b) Required landscaping may be planted within planting areas surrounding trees, in raised planters, and on vegetative walls mounted to the ground-level building facade. 

(c) Where a building or portion of a building is located more than 10 feet from a public sidewalk or useable public space, all areas between the building and the public sidewalk that is not used for vehicle or pedestrian access, circulation, parking or seating shall be landscaped. 

(d) Potted landscape material may be substituted for required landscaping in areas designed for outdoor eating with the approval of the Director.

(e) Additional landscape requirements in the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Sections B(1)(a), C(2)(d)(ii), C(3)(d)(ii), C(4)(d)(iii) and C(5)(d)(ii) shall be included in the landscaping for the development. 

(2) A minimum of 15 percent of the total area of a public space, such as a courtyard or plaza, shall be landscaped. Additional provisions are detailed in the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Section B(1)(i) and are based on street type. 

(3) Landscape Buffers – Standards and When Required.

(a) Downtown development that abuts zones outside of the downtown districts shall have a minimum 20-foot-wide landscaped buffer within the required setback. 

(b) Any development that abuts the MHO district shall provide a minimum of 10-foot-wide landscaped buffer within the required setback. 

(c) For cottage housing, CMC 18.37.050(5) and 18.37.110 shall apply. 

(d) Refer to the City of Covington Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards Section B(1)(g) for applicable design standards for buffer and zone transition requirements. 

(4) Additional Landscaping Requirements Referenced in This Title. 

(a) CMC 18.40.100, 18.40.110, 18.40.130, 18.40.140, and 18.40.150 for additional applicable standards.

(b) CMC 18.40.080(3), (4), (5) and (6) for parking area landscaping requirements.

(c) Chapter 18.45 CMC, Tree Preservation and Protection. 

(i) The Director shall have the authority to reduce the required tree replacement ratio where such requirement would conflict with the urban design intent of the downtown design guidelines and standards. 

(ii) The Director shall ensure that representative native vegetation is retained or replanted totaling at least five percent of the site area and that enhanced landscaping is provided in excess of the requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 04-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.31.140 Sign requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 08-18. (Ord. 10-10 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.33 MARIJUANA-RELATED USES

Sections:

18.33.010    Definitions.

18.33.020    Marijuana-related uses – Generally.

18.33.030    Marijuana producers and processors.

18.33.040    Marijuana retailers.

18.33.050    Sensitive use buffers.

18.33.060    Enforcement – Penalty.

18.33.070    Legal nonconforming uses.


18.33.010 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise the terms within this chapter shall have the meanings established pursuant to Chapter 18.20 CMC. Any terms not defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall have meanings established pursuant to RCW 69.50.101. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.020 Marijuana-related uses – Generally.

(1) The production, processing, and retailing of marijuana is and remains illegal under Federal law. Nothing in this chapter is an authorization to circumvent Federal law or provide permission to any person or entity to violate Federal law.

(2) This chapter incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 69.50 RCW and Chapter 314-55 WAC. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, in the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 69.50 RCW or Chapter 314-55 WAC, the more restrictive provision shall control. 

(3) The regulations under Chapter 69.50 RCW and Chapter 314-55 WAC, now or as may hereafter be amended, shall apply to all marijuana producers, processors, retailers, and retail outlets in addition to the provisions of this chapter. 

(4) Only marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board may locate in the City and then only pursuant to the license issued by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board.

(5) Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers are required to acquire all additional necessary business licenses and permits, and comply with all other applicable City ordinances and regulations.

(6) The City may, prior to issuance of any license or permit, perform an inspection of the proposed premises to determine compliance with any applicable requirements of this chapter and all other applicable City ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.030 Marijuana producers and processors.

Marijuana producers and marijuana processors licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board are permitted only in the industrial (I) zone, subject to the requirements and other general provisions as set forth in this title, except where modified by this chapter.

(1) Marijuana producers and marijuana processors shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

(2) All marijuana production and processing activities shall occur within an enclosed structure and the facility shall be designed, located, constructed, and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, glare, and traffic impacts. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.040 Marijuana retailers.

Marijuana retailers licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board are permitted only in the general commercial (GC) and mixed commercial (MC) zones, subject to the requirements and other general provisions as set forth in this title, except where modified by this chapter.

(1) Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory to a primary use or as a home occupation.

(2) Any marijuana odor shall be contained within the marijuana retail outlet so that the odor of marijuana cannot be detected from any abutting use or property by a person with a normal sense of smell. If any marijuana odor can be smelled from any abutting use or property, the marijuana retailer shall be required to implement measures necessary to contain the odor, including, but not limited to, installation of ventilation equipment. 

(3) In addition to the security requirements in Chapter 315-55 WAC, during business hours, all marijuana retailers shall store all useable marijuana, marijuana-infused product, and cash in a safe or in a substantially constructed and locked cabinet. The safe or cabinet shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For useable marijuana products that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, these products must be stored in a locked refrigerator or freezer container in a manner approved by the Director, provided the container is affixed to the building structure. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.050 Sensitive use buffers.

(1) Marijuana producers and marijuana processors shall not locate within 1,000 feet of the following uses or any use included in Chapter 314-55 WAC now or as hereafter may be amended, unless otherwise regulated in State law:

(a) Public or private elementary or secondary school, or any facility owned or operated by such school; 

(b) Childcare center, preschool, nursery school, or other childcare facility; 

(c) Public park, trail, or playground;

(d) Any real property designated in the Capital Improvement Plan for future park use;

(e) Recreation center or facility;

(f) Church, temple, synagogue, mosque, or chapel; 

(g) Public transit center; 

(h) Public library; or

(i) Any game arcade admission to which is not restricted to persons aged 21 years or older. 

(2) Marijuana retailers and marijuana retail outlets shall not locate:

(a) Within 1,000 feet of the following uses:

(i) Public or private elementary or secondary school, or any facility owned or operated by such school; or

(ii) Childcare center, preschool, nursery school, or other childcare facility. 

(b) Within 500 feet of the following uses or any use included in Chapter 314-55 WAC now or as hereafter may be amended, unless otherwise required in applicable State law:

(i) Public park, trail, or playground;

(ii) Any real property designated in the Capital Improvement Plan for future park use;

(iii) Recreation center or facility;

(iv) Church, temple, synagogue, mosque, or chapel; 

(v) Public transit center; 

(vi) Public library; or

(vii) Any game arcade admission to which is not restricted to persons aged 21 years or older. 

(3) The buffer restrictions in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel of property from which the proposed land use is to be separated. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.060 Enforcement – Penalty.

(1) Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance per se and, in addition to any other remedy provided by law or equity, may be abated by the City under applicable provisions of this code or State law.

(2) No person or entity may violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. Each person or entity commits a separate offense for each and every day they commit, continue, or permit a violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


18.33.070 Legal nonconforming uses.

No use that constitutes or purports to be a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, or marijuana retailer as those terms are defined in this title that was engaged in that activity prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of the Covington Municipal Code and that use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming use status. (Ord. 12-16 § 4)


Chapter 18.35 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.35.005    Applicability.

18.35.010    Purpose.

18.35.020    General layout standards.

18.35.030    Lot segregations – Zero-lot-line development.

18.35.040    Lot segregations – Clustered development.

18.35.050    Townhouse development.

18.35.060    Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

18.35.070    Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

18.35.080    Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

18.35.090    Repealed.

18.35.100    Mixed-use development in the CC and NC zones – Design features.

18.35.110    Repealed.

18.35.120    Manufactured home parks – Standards for existing parks.

18.35.130    Manufactured home parks – Standards for new parks.

18.35.140    Manufactured home parks – Alternative design standards.

18.35.150    Residential – On-site recreation requirements.

18.35.160    Multifamily – On-site recreation facility required.

18.35.170    Dedication of parks and trails – Required by capital facilities plan.

18.35.180    Private on-site recreation facilities – Minimum design standards.

18.35.190    Request for impact fee credits – Park and recreation and trail facilities.

18.35.200    Storage space, loading areas, and collection points for recyclables and refuse.

18.35.210    Fences.

18.35.220    Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines.

18.35.230    Repealed.

18.35.240    Repealed.

18.35.250    Repealed.

18.35.260    Repealed.

18.35.270    Repealed.

18.35.280    Short subdivisions or short subdivision alterations – Adequacy of access – Right-of-way use permits.

18.35.290    Proposed formal subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans – Railroad buffer strips.

18.35.300    Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval – Maintenance of private streets, easements and utilities required.

18.35.310    Lakepoint Urban Village subarea.1


18.35.005 Applicability.

The standards contained in this chapter shall apply to all zones other than the downtown zone. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.35.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to improve the quality of development by providing building and site design standards that:

(1) Reduce the visual impact of large residential buildings from adjacent streets and properties;

(2) Enhance the aesthetic character of large residential buildings;

(3) Contain sufficient flexibility of standards to encourage creative and innovative site and building design;

(4) Meet the on-site recreation needs of project residents;

(5) Enhance aesthetics and environmental protection through site design; and

(6) Allow for continued or adaptive re-use of historic resources while preserving their historic and architectural integrity. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.010))


18.35.020 General layout standards. 

For residential developments in the R zones:

(1) The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,320 feet; and

(2) Except for corner lots, lots for single detached dwellings shall not have street frontage along two sides unless one of said streets is a neighborhood collector street or an arterial street. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.020))


18.35.030 Lot segregations – Zero-lot-line development.

In any R zone or in the CN zone, interior setbacks may be modified during subdivision or short subdivision review as follows:

(1) If a building is proposed to be located within a normally required interior setback:

(a) An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot of the subdivision that is wide enough to ensure a 10-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided for common wall construction;

(b) The easement area shall be free of permanent structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

(c) Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yard areas of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other opaque materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory-style windows or skylights; and

(d) The final plat or short plat shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area.

(2) In the R zones, setbacks on existing individual lots may be modified; provided, that the standards set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section are met. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.030))


18.35.040 Lot segregations – Clustered development.

If residential lot clustering is proposed, the following provisions shall be met: 

(1) In the R zones, any designated open space tract resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed except as specified on recorded documents creating the open space. Open spaces may be retained under ownership by the subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, or conveyed to a third party. If access to the open space is provided, the access shall be located in a separate tract; 

(a) Clusters containing two or more lots of less than two and one-half acres, whether in the same or adjacent developments, shall be separated from similar clusters by at least 120 feet;

(b) The overall amount and the individual degree of clustering shall be limited to a level that can be adequately served by rural facilities and services, including, but not limited to, on-site sewage disposal systems with all setbacks and land use restrictions required by the Washington State Department of Ecology and Washington State Department of Health, and rural roadways;

(c) A 50-foot Type II landscaping screen, as defined in CMC 18.40.040, shall be provided along the frontage of all public roads. The planting materials shall consist of species that are native to the Puget Sound region. Preservation of existing healthy vegetation is encouraged and may be used to augment new plantings to meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. 13-09 § 28; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.040))


18.35.050 Townhouse development. 

In the R-1 through R-18 zones and in the NC zone, a building that contains a grouping of attached townhouse units shall not exceed a 200-foot maximum length without a separation of at least 10 feet from other groupings or rows of townhouses. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.060))


18.35.060 Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

The standards of CMC 18.35.070 and 18.35.080 shall apply to all new apartment developments exceeding four dwelling units, new townhouse development and new group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I). Expansions of existing development that involve four or more dwelling units shall be subject to compliance with CMC 18.35.070 and 18.35.080. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.070))


18.35.070 Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location. 

(1) On sites abutting an alley constructed to a width of at least 20 feet, apartment and townhouse development and all group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I) shall have parking areas placed to the rear of buildings with primary vehicular access via the alley, except when waived by the Director due to physical site limitations.

(2) When alley access is provided, no additional driveway access from the public street shall be allowed except as necessary to access parking under the structure or for fire protection.

(3) When the number of uncovered common parking spaces for attached dwellings and group residences exceed 30 spaces and when there is alley access, no more than 50 percent of these uncovered parking spaces shall be permitted between the street property line and any building, except when authorized by the Director due to physical site limitations. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.080))


18.35.080 Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

Apartment and townhouse developments and all group residences shall provide horizontal and vertical building facade modulation on facades exceeding 60 feet and facing abutting streets or properties zoned R-1 (urban separator) through R-4. The following standards shall apply:

(1) The maximum wall length without modulation shall be 30 feet; and

(2) The sum of the modulation depth and the modulation width shall be no less than eight feet. Neither the modulation depth nor the modulation width shall be less than two feet.

(3) Any other technique approved by the Director or listed in the design manual that achieves the intent of this section. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.090))


18.35.090 Mixed-use development – Percentages of commercial uses.

Repealed by Ord. 06-13. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.110))


18.35.100 Mixed-use development in the CC and NC zones – Design features.

Mixed-use development permitted by Chapter 18.25 CMC shall incorporate the following design features:

(1) Residential and nonresidential uses proposed for mixed-use development shall be only those uses permitted in the CC and NC zones, as established by Chapter 18.25 CMC.

(2) If residential and nonresidential uses are proposed for the same structure, nonresidential uses shall occupy no less than 60 percent of the ground floor. The Director may waive this requirement under the following circumstances:

(a) If the structure is located on a sloping lot that provides access from upper levels or from multiple levels. In such cases, the nonresidential use may be located on the levels that exit onto the primary pedestrian streets; or

(b) If views from the upper levels are valuable amenities that would help assure success of the nonresidential uses, such as a restaurant;

(c) Senior housing developments need not include commercial uses.

(3) Mixed-use development shall provide off-street parking behind or to the side of buildings, or enclosed within buildings consistent with CMC 18.50.030. Relief from this requirement may be granted by the Director only if the applicant can demonstrate that there is no practical site design to meet this requirement. The Director may allow only the number of parking spaces that cannot be accommodated to the rear or sides of buildings, or enclosed within buildings, to be located to the front of buildings. A 20 percent reduction of required parking is allowed if a mixed-use development meets the criteria of CMC 18.50.040 for shared parking. (Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.135))


18.35.110 Mixed-use development – Phasing – Required plans, requirements, covenants, recordings – Review and approval. 

Repealed by Ord. 06-13. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.145))


18.35.120 Manufactured home parks – Standards for existing parks. 

(1) Manufactured home parks established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall continue to be governed by all standards relating to density, setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking in effect at the time they were approved.

(2) Placement of new accessory structures and replacement mobile homes, either standard or nonstandard, in these manufactured home parks shall be governed by the dimensional standards in effect when the parks were approved, unless two or more replacement mobile homes are proposed to be installed adjacent to each other under the flexible setback option set forth in CMC 18.35.140. Where internal setbacks are not specified, the average of the prevailing setbacks on the pads to either side of the proposed new or replacement structure shall apply. 

(3) No spaces or pads in an existing manufactured home park shall be used to accommodate recreational vehicles (RVs), except when the spaces or pads were specifically for RVs at the time the park was established.

(4) An existing manufactured home park may be enlarged, provided the proposed enlargement meets the standards set forth in CMC 18.35.130 and 18.35.140.

(5) Both insignia and non-insignia mobile homes may be installed in established parks; provided, that all mobile homes supported by piers shall be fully skirted, and that nonstandard mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in CMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.150))


18.35.130 Manufactured home parks – Standards for new parks.

New manufactured home parks shall be developed subject to the following standards:

(1) A manufactured home park shall be at least three acres in area;

(2) Residential densities in a manufactured home park shall be as follows:

(a) Must not exceed a density of 25 percent over the base density; and

(b) Manufactured home parks shall be eligible to achieve the maximum density permitted in the zone by providing the affordable housing benefit for manufactured home parks set forth in Chapter 18.90 CMC;

(3) Both insignia and non-insignia mobile homes may be installed in manufactured home parks; provided, that non-insignia mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in CMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction;

(4) A manufactured home park shall be exempt from impervious surface limits set forth in Chapter 18.30 CMC;

(5) At least one of the off-street parking spaces required for each mobile home shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home pad;

(6) Internal roads and sidewalks shall provide access to each mobile home space and shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted City of Covington road standards for residential minor access streets;

(7) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of separation maintained between all mobile homes on the site, unless the flexible setback option set forth in CMC 18.35.140 is used. Accessory structures shall be located no closer than:

(a) Ten feet to mobile homes on adjacent spaces, unless constructed of noncombustible materials, in which case the minimum setback shall be five feet;

(b) Five feet to accessory structures of mobile homes on adjacent spaces; and 

(c) Five feet to the mobile home or other accessory structures on the same space, except a carport or garage may be attached to the mobile home, and the separation may be waived when such structures are constructed of noncombustible materials;

(8) All mobile homes and RVs supported by piers shall be fully skirted; and 

(9) A manufactured home park may include a storage area for RVs owned by residents of the park, provided the storage area contains no utility hook-ups and no RV within the storage area shall be used as living quarters. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.160))


18.35.140 Manufactured home parks – Alternative design standards. 

As an alternative to the building separation and internal street standards of CMC 18.35.130:

(1) Building separation requirements or setbacks between mobile homes and accessory structures on adjacent spaces may be modified, provided:

(a) The common walls meet the fire protection standards set forth in the International Building Code and the standards set forth in the International Fire Code for duplexes, multifamily and condominium developments, as applicable; and

(b) Rental agreement clauses, by-laws or other legal mechanisms stipulate maintenance responsibilities for structures, fences and yards;

(2) Private streets may be used with a minimum driving surface of 22 feet in width, provided:

(a) The streets comply in all other respects with the road standards;

(b) All required parking is located off-street and as specified in CMC 18.35.130(5); and

(c) Such streets shall not:

(i) Directly connect two or more points of vehicular access to the park; or

(ii) Serve over 100 dwelling units within the park. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 12; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.170))


18.35.150 Residential – On-site recreation requirements.

(1) Residential development that includes single-family attached and detached dwelling units within the City’s service area shall mitigate for impacts to park and recreation service levels through payment of a park impact fee in accordance with CMC Title 19.

(2) If the applicant chooses to provide a park and recreation facility as part of the residential development the park and recreation facility shall meet the following minimum requirements:

(a) Park and recreation facilities should be provided at a rate of 200 square feet per lot.

(b) Park and recreation facilities shall meet minimum design standards pursuant to CMC 18.35.180.

(c) The applicant will not receive credit for any park and recreation facilities or dedication of land for a future park and recreation facility unless the space meets the criteria in CMC 18.35.190.

(3) Developments within the Lakepointe Urban Village Subarea as designated in the Future Land Use Map shall provide fully accessible recreation facility for leisure, play and sport activities as follows, or as otherwise determined by the Director in accordance with the adopted subarea plan (Ordinance 02-2017) and planned action (Ordinance 04-2017):

(a) Residential subdivision at a density of four units an acre or more: 450 square feet per unit;

(b) Townhouses developed at a density of eight units or less per acre: 450 square feet per unit;

(c) Manufactured home park: 260 feet per unit;

(d) Multifamily dwelling units and townhouses developed at a density of greater than eight units per acre: 100 square feet per unit;

(e) Senior housing or other age-restricted facilities: 200 square feet per unit or as required by the funding agency, whichever is greater. (Ord. 10-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.35.160 Multifamily – On-site recreation facility required.

(1) Multifamily development and mixed-use development with residential units, including senior housing or other age-restricted facilities, shall be required to provide private recreation facilities on site pursuant to subsection (2) of this section and mitigate for impacts to the City’s park and recreation service levels through payment of a park impact fee in accordance with CMC Title 19.

(2) Multifamily development shall provide 100 square feet per unit of private recreation facility. The private recreations facility shall meet the minimum design standards pursuant to CMC 18.35.180.

(3) Indoor recreation areas or rooftop areas may be credited toward the total recreation space requirement, if the Director determines that the areas are located, designed and improved in a manner that provides recreational opportunities functionally equivalent to recreational activities provided outdoors or provides areas for social activities, multi-purpose entertainment and education areas. (Ord. 10-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.35.170 Dedication of parks and trails – Required by capital facilities plan.

(1) Dedication of park and recreation facility and trails shall be provided by any development when such development is located within an area identified by the capital facilities plan as a park site or trail corridor.

(2) The area of the park and recreation facility and trail dedication shall be counted as part of the site for purposes of density and floor area calculations, unless otherwise exempt from density calculations in accordance with CMC 18.30.080.

(3) The residents of the development shall be provided, at a minimum, pedestrian access to the park and recreation facility and trail.

(4) Residential and multifamily developments that propose to provide public park and trail facilities pursuant to this section shall be subject to an impact fee credit in accordance with CMC Title 19. An easement granted for future park and recreation and trail facilities shall not be subject to impact fee credits, unless the easement includes required facility improvements. (Ord. 10-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.35.180 Private on-site recreation facilities – Minimum design standards.

(1) Private park and recreation facilities shall meet the minimum design standards:

(a) Be on the site of the proposed development.

(b) Be adjacent to and visible from main pedestrian path, sidewalk or near building entrances.

(c) Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation; 75 percent of the site cannot exceed two percent grade, unless the topography results in enhanced critical areas or environmental protection.

(d) Be fully accessible and convenient to all residents within the development and in compliance with 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design and the 2004 Architectural Barriers Act, as amended.

(e) Be designed with amenities that encourage residents to the facility such as benches, trash receptacles, and paths leading from the main pedestrian path and to an internal walking path.

(f) Trails and paths shall be constructed per the City of Covington’s Design and Construction Standards adopted in CMC Title 12. Trails located within critical area buffers shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 18.65 CMC. Any modified private trail or path design shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation Director prior to any preliminary land use approval.

(g) Private recreation facility, paths and trails shall be placed in a designated recreation facility tract. The tract shall be dedicated to the homeowner’s association or other organization. Maintenance of any recreation facility tract retained in private ownership should be audited regularly for safety and compliance with current standards. The homeowner’s association or other organization shall be responsible for all costs associated with the continued long-term maintenance of the recreation tract and facilities.

(h) Provide play equipment that meets, at a minimum, the Consumer Product Safety Standards for equipment, soft surfacing and comply with all applicable ADA accessibility standards, and incorporate play pieces that address ages two to five and five to 12. Prior to final approval of the development, the applicant will be required to provide the City a letter from a certified parks installer that the equipment was installed to industry standards.

(2) The City may require a financial guarantee for construction and maintenance of private recreation facilities and trails consistent with CMC Title 14. (Ord. 10-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.35.190 Request for impact fee credits – Park and recreation and trail facilities.

(1) Residential and multifamily developments that propose to provide private park and recreation and trail facilities shall not receive a credit against the park impact fee, unless otherwise determined by the Parks and Recreation Director, in accordance with this section, and CMC Title 19. Any request for a credit shall be submitted in accordance with CMC Title 19.

(2) The applicant may request a credit be applied to the park impact fee based on the installation of a private park and recreation facility, construction of a private trail, or the dedication of land for future park and recreation and trail facilities. The applicant shall be responsible for all cost associated with preparing data and analysis to determine if the private park and recreation or trail facilities provided on private land satisfy the applicant’s requirement to mitigate for park and recreation level of service deficiencies.

(3) The Parks and Recreation Director is responsible for making a final decision pertaining to a request for park impact fee credits. The applicant shall submit the following information, in addition to the minimum requirements in Chapter 19.20 CMC, to be considered:

(a) Supply and demand data that identifies proposed private park and recreation facility would better meet community needs for parks and recreation facilities than payment of park impact fees.

(b) The location and design of the park and recreation facilities are consistent with comprehensive plan and any applicable park and recreation plans, as amended.

(c) Site plan and supporting documents that show the proposed private park and recreation facility meets the following minimum criteria:

(i) The land and its development are an integral element of the comprehensive plan;

(ii) The land is suitable for future active park and recreation facilities pursuant to the comprehensive plan;

(iii) The land is a size and horizontal and vertical configuration necessary for the design of recreation facilities that meet the City’s park standards identified in the comprehensive plan;

(iv) The land has public access via a public street;

(v) The land is located near areas designated by the City for park, trail or recreation purposes;

(vi) The land provides a link between City and/or other publicly owned recreation properties.

(d) The land shall be surveyed or adequately marked with survey monuments, or otherwise readily distinguishable from adjacent property.

(e) The land shall have no known physical problems associated with it, such as problems with drainage, erosion or flooding, or the presence of hazardous waste, which the Director determines would cause inordinate demands on public resources for maintenance and operation.

(f) The land shall have no known on-site safety hazards. Substandard vehicular and pedestrian facilities shall be considered but shall not alone be used to disqualify a proposed site dedication.

(g) The Director may require a developer to post financial guarantee consistent with CMC Title 14 for the maintenance of any private park and recreation facility as a method of showing long-term maintenance for a time as specified by the Director. (Ord. 10-17 § 5 (Exh. C))


18.35.200 Storage space, loading areas, and collection points for recyclables and refuse.

Developments shall provide storage space for the collection of recyclables as follows:

(1) The storage space shall be provided at the following rates, calculated based on any new dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments and any new square feet of building gross floor area in any other developments:

(a) One and one-half square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a County-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

(b) Two square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

(c) Three square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

(d) Five square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

(2) The storage space for residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one building.

(b) There shall be one collection point for every 30 dwelling units.

(c) Collection points may be located within residential buildings, in separate buildings/structures without dwelling units, or outdoors.

(d) Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building.

(e) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

(3) The storage space for nonresidential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

(a) Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point.

(b) Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas.

(c) Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

(d) Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours.

(4) The collection points shall be designed as follows:

(a) Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose containers for recyclables.

(b) Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site.

(c) Collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet.

(d) A six-foot wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point, excluding collection points located in industrial developments that are greater than 100 feet from residentially zoned property. All screening shall include the use of landscape material.

(e) Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.

(f) Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

(g) Loading areas within 50 feet and visible from an adjacent street or sidewalk shall be screened by a fence or wall. Collection points shall be fully enclosed.

(5) Only recyclable materials generated on-site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recycables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off site.

(6) The Director may waive or modify specific storage space and collection point requirements set forth in this section if the Director finds, in writing, that an alternate recycling program design proposed by the applicant meets the needs of the development and provides an equivalent or better level of storage and collection for recyclables. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.210))


18.35.210 Fences. 

Fences are permitted as follows: 

(1) Fences exceeding a height of six feet shall comply with the applicable street and interior setbacks of the zone in which the property is located, except:

(a) Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm within a required setback area are permitted subject to the following requirements:

(i) Except for City of Covington public works projects in R-1 through R-18 zones and the resource zones:

(A) The total height of the fence and the rockery, retaining wall or berm upon which the fence is located shall not exceed a height of 10 feet. This height shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall or berm; and

(B) The total height of the fence itself, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed six feet.

(ii) In the commercial/industrial zones, the height of the fence, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed six feet.

(iii) Any portion of the fence above a height of eight feet, measured to include both the fence and the rockery, retaining wall, or berm (as described in subsection (1)(a)(i)(A) of this section), shall be an open-work fence.

(2) Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall or berm outside required setback areas shall not exceed the building height for the zone, measured in accordance with the standards established in the International Building Code.

(3) Electric fences shall:

(a) Be permitted only on properties that abut an agricultural use; 

(b) Comply with the following requirements:

(i) An electric fence using an interrupted flow of current at intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamp; 

(ii) An electric fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamp; 

(iii) All electric fences in the R-4 through R-8 zones shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at 50-foot intervals stating that the fence is electrified; and

(iv) Electric fences sold as a complete and assembled unit can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation are certified by an ANSI approved testing agency; and

(4) Except as specifically required for the necessary security related to a nonresidential use, no barbed or razor-wire fence shall be located in any R-4 through R-8 zone. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 13; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.220))


18.35.220 Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines. 

(1) Tracts and easements containing hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines and required setbacks from such pipelines may include the following uses, subject to other regulations applicable to each use and approval of the holder of the easement: utility structures not normally occupied necessary for the operation of the pipeline, landscaping, trails, parks, open space, keeping of animals, agriculture, forestry, commercial signage, minor communication facilities and the utility structures not normally occupied necessary for the operation of the minor communication facility, and other compatible uses as specified on the face of the recorded plat or short plat; provided, that structures designed for human occupancy shall never be allowed within pipeline tracts, easements or setbacks.

(2) Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines shall not be located in aquifer recharge areas, landslide hazard areas or erosion hazard areas. When it is impractical to avoid such areas, special engineering precautions should be taken to protect public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.225))


18.35.230 Trail corridors – Applicability.

Repealed by Ord. 10-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.230))


18.35.240 Trail corridors – Design standards.

Repealed by Ord. 10-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.240))


18.35.250 Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.

Repealed by Ord. 10-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.250))


18.35.260 Wildlife habitat corridors – Applicability.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.260))


18.35.270 Wildlife habitat corridors – Design standards.

Repealed by Ord. 06-17. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.270))


18.35.280 Short subdivisions or short subdivision alterations – Adequacy of access – Right-of-way use permits. 

(1) Each lot within the short subdivision or short subdivision alteration shall have acceptable access to a street conforming to City street standards or to a lower level of improvement acceptable to the Director of Community Development. Individual lots may be served by access panhandles established either by fee ownership or easement, subject to approval of the Department. In order to assure safe and adequate access, the Director of Community Development:

(a) May approve private streets consistent with City street standards;

(b) May limit direct access to certain streets and require on-site public or private streets in lieu of individual driveways or access panhandles, in accordance with the City street standards;

(c) Shall require off-site improvements to public or private streets needed to provide access from the short subdivision to a street acceptable to the Director of Community Development; and

(d) Shall assure that the number of lots to be served by the street system complies with the adopted street standards.

(2) Short subdivisions involving construction within City right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way use permit. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.300))


18.35.290 Proposed formal subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans – Railroad buffer strips.

Where railroads abut proposed formal subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans, measures to provide a physical separation between the two uses shall be required. These measures may include the use: grade separations, setbacks or barriers such as walls and fences. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.310))


18.35.300 Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval – Maintenance of private streets, easements and utilities required.

As a condition of preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval, all private streets, easements, community utilities and properties shall be maintained by the owners of the property served by them and kept in good repair at all times. In order to ensure continued good repair, it must be demonstrated to the Department prior to plat recording that:

(1) There is a workable organization to guarantee maintenance with a committee or group to administer the organizational functions; and

(2) There is a means for assessing maintenance costs equitably to property owners served by the private streets, easements, community utilities and properties. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.14.320))


18.35.310 Lakepoint Urban Village2 subarea.

(1) Where standards in this section conflict with other standards in this title, the standards in this section shall supersede other standards for the Lakepoint Urban Village* subarea.

(2) An interconnected system of pedestrian and bicycle facilities shall provide access to all areas of the community, to adjacent neighborhoods, and to regional trails.

(3) The main arterial connecting SR 18 and 204th Ave SE shall attenuate traffic speeds through the community, support active street-level uses, and enhance pedestrian comfort and safety. An interconnected system of pedestrian and bicycle facilities shall provide access to all areas of the community, to adjacent neighborhoods, and to regional trails.

(a) Sixty percent or more of the length of each block frontage in the MR and RCMU zoning districts shall be occupied by a building unless more than 40 percent of the length of a block frontage is occupied, individually or collectively, by zoning setbacks, a park, plaza, open space, driveway, or critical area, in which case the building frontage requirement shall be reduced accordingly. This requirement does not apply where all or a portion of a block frontage is not deep enough for a building.

(b) Fifty percent or more of the length of each block frontage on both sides of all streets in other zoning districts shall be occupied by a building unless 50 percent or more of the length of a block frontage is occupied, individually or collectively, by zoning setbacks, a park, plaza, open space, driveway, or critical area, in which case the building frontage requirement shall be reduced accordingly. This requirement does not apply where all or a portion of a block frontage is not deep enough for a building.

(c) On lots or parcels with multiple buildings, pedestrian circulation routes shall interconnect all buildings.


[IMAGE]


(4) Buildings.

(a) CMC 18.35.050 and 18.35.080 shall apply only to townhouse developments.

(b) CMC 18.35.100 shall not apply to commercial, mixed-use, or integrated developments.

(c) A minimum of 60 percent of the street-level frontage of commercial and mixed-use buildings should be devoted to commercial uses.


[IMAGE]


(d) The main entrance for all buildings along a street frontage, including single-family residences and townhouses, shall be accessed from a public sidewalk or a pedestrian walkway connected to a public sidewalk.


[IMAGE]


(e) At least one public entrance for a commercial use shall be accessed from a public sidewalk or a pedestrian walkway connected to the public sidewalk.


[IMAGE]


(f) Overhead weather protection shall be provided continuously along 75 percent or more of the length of a commercial or mixed-use building frontage adjacent to a sidewalk or a pedestrian walkway connected to a sidewalk. Overhead weather protection may be composed of marquees, awnings, canopies, a building projection or other permanent structural element and must cover at least five feet of the width of the adjacent public walkway or sidewalk. This requirement applies only to building frontages containing street-level commercial uses.


[IMAGE]


(g) The use of sustainably harvested salvaged, recycled or reused products is encouraged.

(5) Pond Area.

(a) The area abutting the pond shall contain a continuous route devoted to public access. Public access includes, but is not limited to, parks, plazas, promenades, sidewalks, and multi-purpose trails. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and shall be designed to be compliant with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).


[IMAGE]


(b) When buildings containing commercial uses are located around the pond, at least 60 percent of the length of the pond-facing ground-level building frontage should be devoted to commercial uses. Multi-story buildings located around the pond should include residential uses.


[IMAGE]


(c) Public access corridors leading to the pond should be located at intervals of approximately 500 feet, unless not feasible due to topography. Access corridors include, but are not limited to, parks, streets, pedestrian ways, and passive open space.

(d) A least one public gathering place of at least one-half acre shall be provided to serve as a major public amenity.


[IMAGE]


(6) Gathering Places.

(a) In the RCMU zoning district, at least one public gathering place of at least one-half acre shall be provided that is an integral element of the commercial area and suitable for special events and celebrations.


[IMAGE]


(b) Outside of the RCMU zoning district and the pond area, at least one park shall be provided that is sufficient in size to include a range of active recreational uses for residents of varying ages and interests.

(c) All public gathering places shall be linked physically and visually to adjacent sidewalks or trails.


[IMAGE]


(7) Blank Walls, Mechanical and Utility Equipment.

(a) Any building facade with a blank wall greater than 200 square feet adjacent to a sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, parking lot, trail, park, plaza or other public space shall be treated architecturally and/or with landscape elements.


[IMAGE]


(b) Roof-mounted mechanical equipment visible from adjacent properties, sidewalks on an adjacent street or from an adjacent park or trail shall be screened from view by integrated building elements, such as walls, landscaped planters, or enclosures.

(c) Building- or ground-mounted utility meters or equipment shall be visually screened from an adjacent sidewalk or trail by a fence, wall, or landscaping.

(8) Gateways.

(a) Visual “gateways” shall be located in the area of the entrances to the subarea from SR 18 and from 204th Avenue SE.

(b) Gateways can consist of elements as varied as signage, special but significant landscaping, an identifying structure, sculpture or other artwork, a water feature, or some other distinctive element.


[IMAGE]


(9) The Director may approve alternatives to the standards in this section; provided, that the alternatives provide a comparable benefit or functional equivalent to the standard. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A))1

Code reviser’s note: “Hawk Property” was renamed “Lakepoint Urban Village” with the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 02-16. 2

Code reviser’s note: “Hawk Property” was renamed “Lakepoint Urban Village” with the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 02-16. 


Chapter 18.37 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR COTTAGE HOUSING

Sections:

18.37.010    Purpose.

18.37.020    Applicability.

18.37.030    Definitions.

18.37.040    General development standards for cottages (Table 1).

18.37.050    Site requirements.

18.37.060    Building requirements.

18.37.070    Parking and access.

18.37.080    Accessory structures.

18.37.090    Community buildings.

18.37.100    Private and common open space.

18.37.110    Landscaping and vegetation.

18.37.120    Other design requirements.

18.37.130    Ownership options.
[IMAGE]



18.37.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for cottage housing development as an alternative housing choice in order to:

(1) Respond to the region’s changing household demographics;

(2) Provide opportunities for more affordable housing;

(3) Encourage creation of functional usable open space in residential communities;

(4) Promote neighborhood interaction and safety through design;

(5) Ensure compatibility with neighboring uses; and

(6) Provide opportunities for infill development consistent with the goals of the Growth Management Act. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.020 Applicability.

Cottage housing developments are allowed in those areas of the City designated DN-MHO and R-18 zones. Applications for cottage housing developments shall be reviewed under the subdivision or binding site plan process set forth in Chapter 17.30 CMC. Where a conflict arises, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.030 Definitions.

“Carriage house unit” means a small residential or guest unit usually located on the second story of a garage or community building, similar to a studio unit suitable for one resident or two guests.

“Community building” means a building owned in common by the cottage housing homeowners, and designated for multi-purpose uses by the cottage housing community. It should be consistent with the design and scale of the cottages, and its use should clearly be accessory to the cottage housing development. Part of the building may be used for a carriage house unit or for storage for residents.

“Cottage” means a detached or attached dwelling that is small in scale and typically no more than one and a half stories in height, and is developed in a cluster.


[IMAGE]


“Cottage housing development” means a type of development made up of a minimum of four cottages clustered around a common open space with garages and parking located behind or away from the houses. A cottage development may include two-unit attached residences as well as detached cottages.

“Two-unit home” means a structure containing two dwelling units, designed to look like a detached single-family home. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.040 General development standards for cottages (Table 1).

Table 1 provides the basic design standards for cottage housing development in the City of Covington.

18.37.040: TABLE 1: COTTAGE HOUSING STANDARDS 

	STANDARDS FOR COTTAGES	CONDITIONS

	Maximum number of stories	One and one-half	The second story shall be no more than .6 of the square footage of the main story

	Maximum building height	18' (maximum of 25' at roof ridge with minimum roof slope of 6:12)	The ridge of pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12 may extend up to 25 feet. All parts of the roof above 18 feet shall be pitched

	Maximum impervious surface percentage 	50% of gross lot area

	Maximum lot coverage for all principal and accessory structures in development	35% of gross lot area

	Maximum building footprint	1,000 square feet per unit, excluding attached garage	Two-unit attached structures shall not exceed a building footprint of 2,000 square feet for one-story units, or 1,800 square feet for one-and-one-half- or two-story units

	Maximum unit size (total floor area)	1,600 square feet excluding an attached garage	Habitable space in a below-grade story (i.e., basement) shall count towards the total floor area

	Density	12 du/ac. See CMC 18.30.060 through 18.30.100 for other density requirements	See density bonuses for affordable units below

	Parking	1.3 spaces for 1 BR units, 1.5 for 2 BR units, and 1.8 for 3 BR units. E.g., four 1 BR units (x 1.3), six 2 BR units (x 1.5) and two 3 BR units (x 1.8) = 18 parking stalls for 12 units	Parking requirements for cottages may be reduced if the location of the site is within .3 miles (1,600 feet) of a transit stop. Other parking requirements and reductions specified in Chapter 18.50 CMC apply

	Open and common space	Minimum of 400 square feet per unit of common open space and a minimum of 250 square feet per unit of usable private open space (excluding side setbacks, but may include decks and patios)	Common space should be in one contiguous area, or no more than two separate areas. Primary entry and patios should be oriented toward open space wherever feasible

	Affordability incentives	See CMC 18.90.030 and 18.90.040 for details of affordable housing incentives. Bonuses of up to one and one-half times base density are possible, or two times base density if all units are affordable	Under conditions stated in CMC 18.90.030 and 18.90.040, each unit affordable to households earning under 50 percent and 80 percent of King County median income (benefit unit) allows up to 1.5 bonus units. E.g., four affordable units permit a bonus of six units over the base density

	Green building incentives	Bonus of one and one-half times base density allowed if cottages and community building are built to LEED Gold, or Built Green™ 4 Star or 5 Star standards*	Affordability and green building incentives may be combined up to a maximum of two times base density. Note that 4 and 5 Star Built Green™ levels require verification by a third party

	*See www.builtgreen.net for details of Built Green™ program, and www.usgbc.org for details of LEED program. See note to CMC 18.37.050(2) for example of calculations.

(Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.050 Site requirements.

(1) Arrangement.

(a) Cottage housing developments shall contain a minimum of four cottages arranged on at least two sides of a common open space on a minimum lot of 8,000 square feet.

(b) A development may have several clusters with clear separation.

(c) Cottage housing developments should promote a sense of community both within the development and with respect to the larger community. It should not “turn its back” on the larger community. Units along the public right-of-way should have an inviting facade such as a primary or secondary entrance facing the right-of-way.

(d) All other units shall be arranged around the central common area and have their primary entry facing that common space.

(e) Attached structures containing two units shall be allowed as part of a cottage development but they shall be similar in design to the detached cottages. The number of attached units in a development shall not be more than one-third of the total number of units.
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(2) Base Density and Density Bonuses for Affordable Units and Green Development.

(a) Cottages shall be built at a maximum base density of 12 du/acre.

(b) Increased density shall be allowed if the units meet certain affordability criteria described in CMC 18.90.030 and 18.90.040.

(c) Under certain conditions stipulated in those sections, each unit affordable to households earning under 50 percent and under 80 percent of median income (known as “benefit units”) allow the construction of up to one and one-half bonus units up to 150 percent of the base density allowed in the zone.

(d) If all the units in the development meet the affordability criteria, then two times the base density is allowed.

(e) Increased density shall be allowed if the cottage development achieves Built Green™ four-star or five-star certification or LEED for Homes certification at the Gold level. One and one-half times the base density shall be allowed for a development which meets either of these standards.

(f) Affordable housing and green building density bonuses may be combined up to a maximum density of no more than two times the base density.*

(3) Clustering. Critical area buffers may count toward the gross lot area, allowing for clustering of development, and providing a maximum of 50 percent of the common open space requirement.

(4) Lot Coverage. Principal and accessory structures in the development shall account for no more than 35 percent of the gross lot area.

(5) Setbacks.

(a) Setbacks shall be 10 feet from the public right-of-way and from the property line.

(b) There shall be a minimum of five feet side yard, allowing a minimum of 10 feet of space between adjacent buildings.

(c) Front and back yards shall be a minimum of five feet from common areas, structures or internal driveway.

(6) Impervious Surface. No more than 50 percent of the gross lot area may be covered with impervious surface. Use of pervious paving materials is encouraged. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))

*A “benefit unit” is an affordable unit. “Bonus units” are the extra units that are added to the base density. (Base density = underlying density in the zone, such as 12 du/acre in DN-7B). Depending on the affordable income level and whether there is a covenant binding the home to 15-year or 30-year affordability, more or less bonus units can be earned, ranging from .75 bonus units (no covenant required) to one bonus unit (15-year affordability) to one and one-half bonus units (30-year affordability). The maximum bonus units earned can be no more than 150 percent of the base density, or 200 percent if all the units are affordable. For green development, the whole development (including all bonus units) must meet the certification requirements. If it does, then 150 percent of the base density is allowed. If the base density is 12 du/acre, then a “Built Green™” development could build up to 18 du/acre. By also building six affordable units with 15-year affordability, the developer would gain six more bonus units, up to the maximum of 24 units allowed (two times base density of 12).


18.37.060 Building requirements.

(1) Building Footprint.

(a) Cottage units shall have a maximum building footprint of 1,000 square feet.

(b) The footprint of an attached one-car garage is not included in this maximum, but shall not exceed 200 square feet per unit.

(c) Two-unit attached structures shall not exceed a building footprint of 2,000 square feet for one-story units or 1,800 square feet for either one-and-a-half or two-story units.

(2) Floor Area. The maximum total floor area of cottage units shall be 1,600 square feet. An additional 200 square feet is permitted for an attached garage.

(3) Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 18 feet, with a maximum of 25 feet allowed to the roof ridge and a minimum roof slope of 6:12.

(4) Stories.

(a) Cottages may have a second partial or full story, providing that the floor area of the second story is no more than 0.6 of the square footage of the main floor. E.g., a cottage with an 800-square-foot building footprint (main floor) could have a second floor of 480 square feet, for a total floor area of 1,280 square feet.

(b) A below-grade partial story may be allowed, but habitable space on that story shall count toward the total floor area of the cottage.

(5) Two-Unit Structures.

(a) Attached two-unit structures should be similar in appearance to detached cottages and have one primary entry facing the common open space.

(b) The number of attached units in a cottage development may not exceed one-third of the total number of units.

(6) Porches. Attached, covered porches are required with a minimum of 64 square feet per unit and a minimum of seven feet on all sides.

(7) Fences.

(a) Fences around dwelling units or on the street frontage shall not exceed 36 inches in height.

(b) Fences along nonfrontage property line shall not exceed six feet in height.

(8) Existing Dwellings on the Site. Existing dwellings may be incorporated into the development as a residence or community building, and may be nonconforming to standards. Noncompliance may not be increased.

(9) Renovation and Expansion.

(a) Renovations shall be in keeping with the size and architectural character of the new development.

(b) A covenant restricting any increases in unit size after initial construction beyond the maximum allowed by this section shall be recorded against the property. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.070 Parking and access.

(1) Parking.

(a) Parking spaces required for a cottage housing development shall be 1.3 spaces for studio or one-bedroom units, 1.5 spaces for two-bedroom units, and 1.8 spaces for three-bedroom units.

(i) This provides for no less than one assigned space per unit plus extra spaces for visitors or second vehicles.

(ii) Since cottages are designed for small households, it is expected that only the larger units (3 BR) would require a second assigned space.

(iii) The parking requirement may be reduced to one space per unit if the location is within .3 miles (about 1,600 feet) of a public transit stop which has a.m. and p.m. peak headways of 30 minutes or less. Other parking requirements and reductions specified in Chapter 18.50 CMC shall apply.

(b) Parking and/or garage structures shall be located behind or to the side of the residential area and open space. When feasible they should be accessed from the back of the cottages.

(c) Parking areas and garages shall be screened from common space and public streets by landscaping or architectural screening.

(2) Shared Access and Connectivity.

(a) Whenever possible, shared access with adjacent properties shall be encouraged, and in some cases, it shall be required.

(b) The site shall be designed for future connectivity with adjacent lots. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.080 Accessory structures.

(1) Accessory structures such as garages, carports, storage or tool sheds shall not exceed 200 square feet per unit, or 1,000 square feet per structure for a shared garage providing space for up to five vehicles. More than one such structure is allowed proportionate to the size of the development and number of parking spaces required. Storage space may be included in a garage structure, but vehicle space may not be used for storage or uses other than parking.

(2) The design of garages, carports, and other accessory structures must be similar or compatible with that of the cottages in the development. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.090 Community buildings.

(1) Uses.

(a) Community buildings are intended as an amenity for the use of the cottage housing residents and to help promote the sense of community. They may include a multi-purpose entertainment space, a small kitchen, library, or similar amenities.

(b) Guest quarters, storage space, or a carriage unit could be included as part of a community building.
[IMAGE]


(2) Design.

(a) The community building should be of similar scale, design, and height as the cottages, with a maximum footprint of 1,000 square feet and with the second floor not to exceed 0.6 square footage of the first floor.

(b) Commercial uses are prohibited in the community building. Day care I may be allowed if all building code and health code requirements are met. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.100 Private and common open space.

(1) Common Open Space.

(a) Common open space is a defining characteristic of a cottage housing development. A minimum of 400 square feet per unit of common open space shall be provided.

(b) Up to 50 percent of the common open space requirement may be provided in an area constrained from development such as a critical area buffer, steep slope, or forested area; provided, that its use by residents respects the environmental constraints and regulations.

(c) Common space should be in one contiguous area, or no more than two separate areas.

(d) Each area should have a minimum dimension of 20 feet on all sides.

(e) The primary entry and porches of the cottages shall be oriented toward the common open space whenever feasible (with the exception of units adjacent to the public right-of-way which should have an entry on the right-of-way).

(2) Private Open Space.

(a) A minimum of 250 square feet of usable private open space shall be provided adjacent to each unit.

(b) Side setbacks shall not apply to the calculation of this private open space.

(c) Front or back yards, porches or decks, or additional side yard beyond the five-foot setback may be included in the calculation of private open space. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.110 Landscaping and vegetation.

(1) The provisions of the Covington tree preservation ordinance (Chapter 18.45 CMC) for commercial development shall apply. Native and drought-resistant vegetation is preferred.

(2) Cottage developments shall be designed around significant trees. Where feasible, existing mature trees which do not pose a safety hazard should be retained.
[IMAGE]


(3) Areas within a critical area or critical area buffer or within the shoreline management area shall abide by vegetation regulations for those areas.

(4) Landscaping located in common open space areas shall be designed to allow for easy access and use of the space by all residents, and to facilitate maintenance needs. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.120 Other design requirements.

Cottage housing units shall contain a variety of designs that include articulation of facades; changes in materials, texture, color, and window treatments; and other architectural features so all units do not appear identical. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.37.130 Ownership options.

Ownership may be fee simple lots with a homeowner’s association holding common areas, or condominium ownership of the whole development. (Ord. 10-09 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.40 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – LANDSCAPING

Sections:

18.40.010    Purpose.

18.40.020    Application.

18.40.030    Repealed.

18.40.040    Landscaping – Screen types and description.

18.40.050    Landscaping – Street frontages.

18.40.060    Landscaping – Interior lot lines.

18.40.070    Landscaping – Building perimeter.

18.40.080    Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

18.40.090    Landscaping – Adjacent to freeway rights-of-way.

18.40.100    Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

18.40.110    Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

18.40.120    Landscaping – Alternative options.

18.40.130    Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

18.40.140    Maintenance.

18.40.150    Financial guarantees.

18.40.160    Repealed.

18.40.170    Repealed.

18.40.180    Repealed.

18.40.190    Repealed.

18.40.200    Repealed.

18.40.210    Repealed.

18.40.220    Repealed.

18.40.230    Repealed.


18.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetic character of communities, to improve the aesthetic quality of the built environment, to promote retention and protection of existing vegetation; to promote water efficiency, to promote native wildlife, to reduce the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats, and to increase privacy for residential zones by:

(1) Providing visual relief from large expanses of parking areas and reduction of perceived building scale;

(2) Providing physical separation between residential and nonresidential areas;

(3) Providing visual screens and barriers as a transition between differing land uses;

(4) Retaining existing vegetation and significant trees by incorporating them into the site design;

(5) Providing increased areas of permeable surfaces to allow for:

(a) Infiltration of surface water into ground water resources;

(b) Reduction in the quantity of storm water discharge; and

(c) Improvement in the quality of storm water discharge;

(6) Encouraging the use of native plant species by their retention or use in the landscape design; 

(7) Requiring water use efficiency through water budgeting and efficient irrigation design standards;

(8) Encouraging the use of a diversity of plant species, which promote native wildlife habitat. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.010))


18.40.020 Application. 

(1) All development shall be subject to the landscaping provisions of this chapter; provided, that specific landscaping and tree retention provisions for uses established through a subdivision, short subdivision, commercial site development permit, or conditional use permit application shall be determined during the applicable review process.

(2) Landscaping standards referenced in Chapter 18.31 CMC shall be applicable within the downtown zone. Where all other standards in this chapter may conflict with Chapter 18.31 CMC, the standards contained in Chapter 18.31 CMC shall apply. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.020))


18.40.030 Land use grouping.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.030))


18.40.040 Landscaping – Screen types and description.

The three types of landscaping screens are described and applied as follows:

(1) Type I Landscaping Screen. 

(a) Type I landscaping is a full screen that functions as a visual barrier. This landscaping is typically found adjacent to freeways and between residential and nonresidential areas. 

(b) Type I landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to form a continuous screen;

(ii) Between 70 and 90 percent evergreen trees; 

(iii) Repealed by Ord. 10-10; 

(iv) Evergreen shrubs provided at the rate of one per linear four feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Ground cover pursuant to CMC 18.40.110.

(2) Type II Landscaping Screen.

(a) Type II landscaping is a filtered screen that functions as a visual separator. This landscaping is typically found between commercial and industrial uses; between differing types of residential development; and to screen industrial uses from the street; 

(b) Type II landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip spaced to create a filtered screen;

(ii) At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees;

(iii) Repealed by Ord. 10-10; 

(iv) Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Ground cover pursuant to CMC 18.40.110.

(3) Type III Landscaping Screen. 

(a) Type III landscaping is a see-through screen that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations. This landscaping is typically found along street frontage or between apartment developments; 

(b) Type III landscaping shall minimally consist of:

(i) A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to create a continuous canopy;

(ii) At least 70 percent deciduous trees; 

(iii) Repealed by Ord. 10-10; 

(iv) Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

(v) Ground cover pursuant to CMC 18.40.110. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.040))


18.40.050 Landscaping – Street frontages. 

The average width of perimeter landscaping along street frontages shall be provided as follows: 

(1) Twenty feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an institutional use, excluding playgrounds and playfields; 

(2) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an industrial development;

(3) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be provided for an above-ground utility facilities development, excluding distribution and transmission corridors, located outside a public right-of-way;

(4) Ten feet of Type III landscaping shall be provided for a commercial or attached/group residence development if not placed adjacent to the property line in conformance with the design manual; and 

(5) For all development:

(a) Trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for every 35 feet of frontage along all public/private streets;

(b) The trees shall be: 

(i) Located within the street right-of-way or utility easement, as specified in the City’s street standards, adopted by reference in Chapter 12.60 CMC; 

(ii) Maintained by the adjacent landowner unless part of a City maintenance program; 

(iii) A species approved by the City and compatible with overhead utility lines, if present; 

(c) The trees may be spaced at irregular intervals to accommodate sight distance requirements for driveways and intersections. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.050))


18.40.060 Landscaping – Interior lot lines. 

The average width of perimeter landscaping along interior lot lines shall be provided as follows:

(1) Twenty feet of Type I landscaping shall be included in a commercial or industrial development along any portion adjacent to a residential development;

(2) Five feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an attached/group residence development, except that along portions of the development adjacent to property developed with single detached residences or vacant property that is zoned R-1 through R-8, the requirement shall be 10 feet of Type II landscaping;

(3) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an industrial development along any portion adjacent to a commercial or institutional development; and

(4) Ten feet of Type II landscaping shall be included in an institutional use, excluding playgrounds and playfields, or an above-ground utility facility, except distribution or transmission corridors when located outside a public right-of-way. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.060))


18.40.070 Landscaping – Building perimeter.

The average width of perimeter landscaping along any building/structure parameter shall be provided as follows:

(1) Building frontage placed adjacent to a public right-of-way in conformance with the adopted design manual shall be exempt from this provision.

(2) Five feet of Type III landscaping shall be provided.

(3) Potted landscape material may be substituted for the requirements of subsection (2) of this section in areas designed for outdoor eating with the approval of the Department.

(4) Shrubs may be substituted for a portion of the required trees as prescribed in CMC 18.40.040 as approved by the Department. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.065))


18.40.080 Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

Parking area landscaping shall be provided within surface parking areas with 10 or more parking stalls for the purpose of improving air quality, reducing surface water runoff, providing shade and diminishing the visual impacts of large paved areas as follows:

(1) Residential developments with common parking areas shall provide planting areas at the rate of 20 square feet per parking stall;

(2) Commercial, industrial or institutional developments shall provide landscaping at a rate of:

(a) Twenty square feet per parking stall if 10 to 30 parking stalls are provided; and

(b) Twenty-five square feet per parking stall if 31 or more parking stalls are provided;

(3) Parking islands shall be provided and distributed throughout the parking area as follows:

(a) Parking islands shall be provided at intervals not greater than 10 parking spaces; 

(b) Parking islands shall be provided at the end of every parking row;

(4) Permanent curbs or structural barriers shall be provided to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang; 

(5) Landscaping around the perimeter of a site that is in addition to the perimeter landscaping required by CMC 18.40.050, and CMC 18.31.130 in the downtown zones, may count toward 10 percent of the required surface parking area landscaping if it is adjacent to the parking area; and

(6) Parking area landscaping shall consist of:

(a) Canopy-type deciduous trees, evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and ground covers planted in islands or strips;

(b) Shrubs that do not exceed a maintained height of 42 inches;

(c) Plantings contained in planting islands or strips having an area of at least 100 square feet and with a narrow dimension of no less than five feet or as required by the design manual;

(d) Ground cover in accordance with CMC 18.40.110; and

(e) At least 70 percent of trees are deciduous. (Ord. 04-12 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.070))


18.40.090 Landscaping – Adjacent to freeway rights-of-way. 

(1) All residential developments shall provide a minimum average width of 20 feet of Type I landscaping adjacent to freeway rights-of-way.

(2) All other developments shall provide a minimum average width of 20 feet of Type III landscaping adjacent to freeway rights-of-way. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.080))


18.40.100 Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

All new landscape areas proposed for a development shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot.

(2) All new turf areas, except all-weather, sand-based athletic fields shall:

(a) Be augmented with a three-inch layer of organic material cultivated a minimum of six inches deep; or 

(b) Have an organic content of five percent or more to a depth of six inches as shown in a soil sample analysis. The soil analysis shall include:

(i) Determination of soil texture, indicating percentage of organic matter;

(ii) An approximated soil infiltration rate (either measured or derived from soil/texture /infiltration rate tables). A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate; and 

(iii) Measure Ph value.

(3) Except as specifically outlined for turf areas in subsection (2) of this section, the organic content of soils in any landscape area shall be as necessary to provide adequate nutrient and moisture-retention levels for the establishment of plantings.

(4) Landscape areas, except turf or areas of established ground cover, shall be covered with at least two inches of mulch to minimize evaporation. 

(5) Plants having similar water use characteristics shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

(6) Plant selection shall consider adaptability to climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Preservation of existing vegetation is encouraged. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.085))


18.40.110 Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

In addition to the general standards of CMC 18.40.100, landscape areas required pursuant to CMC 18.40.050 through 18.40.090 shall conform to the following standards:

(1) All plants shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) grades and standards as published in the “American Standard for Nursery Stock” manual; provided, that existing healthy vegetation used to augment new plantings shall not be required to meet the standards of this manual; 

(2) Single-stemmed trees required pursuant to this chapter shall at the time of planting conform to the following standards:

(a) In parking area landscaping and in street rights-of-way:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.75 inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Coniferous and broadleaf evergreens shall be at least five feet in height;

(b) In all other required landscape areas:

(i) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1.75 inches and a height of 10 feet; and

(ii) Coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height.

(c) All trees shall have watering tubes installed per the approved City detail or be watered by an approved irrigation system;

(3) Multiple-stemmed trees shall be permitted as an option to single-stemmed trees; provided, that such multiple-stemmed trees are:

(a) At least six feet in height; and

(b) Not allowed within street rights-of-way;

(4) When the width of any landscape strip is 20 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows;

(5) Shrubs shall be:

(a) At least an AAN Container Class No. 2 size at time of planting in Type II, III and parking area landscaping;

(b) At least 24 inches in height at the time of planting for Type I landscaping; and 

(c) Maintained at a height not exceeding 42 inches when located in Type III or parking area landscaping; 

(6) Ground covers shall be planted and spaced to result in total coverage of the majority of the required landscape area within three years;

(7) All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping along the street frontage;

(8) Required street landscaping may be placed within City of Covington street rights-of-way subject to the City road design standards, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line to replant the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way;

(9) Required street landscaping may be placed within Washington State rights-of-way subject to permission of the Washington State Department of Transportation;

(10) New landscape material provided within areas of undisturbed vegetation or within the protected area of significant trees shall give preference to utilizing indigenous plant species. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.090))


18.40.120 Landscaping – Alternative options.

The following alternative landscape options may be allowed, subject to approval by the Department, only if they accomplish equal or better levels of screening, or when existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures or utilities would render application of this chapter ineffective or result in scenic view obstruction: 

(1) The amount of required landscape area may be reduced to ensure that the total area for required landscaping and/or the area remaining undisturbed for the purpose of wildlife habitat or corridors does not exceed 15 percent of the net developable area of the site. For the purpose of this subsection, the net developable area of the site shall not include areas deemed unbuildable due to their location within sensitive areas and any associated buffers; 

(2) The average width of the perimeter landscape strip may be reduced up to 25 percent along any portion where: 

(a) Berms at least three feet in height or architectural barriers at least six feet in height are incorporated into the landscape design; or

(b) The landscape materials are incorporated elsewhere on-site; 

(3) In pedestrian district overlays, street perimeter landscaping may be waived provided a site plan, consistent with the applicable adopted area zoning document, is approved that provides street trees and other pedestrian-related amenities;

(4) Where a local or subarea plan with design guidelines has been adopted, the Director shall base the landscaping modifications on the policies and guidelines of such plan;

(5) When an existing structure precludes installation of the total amount of required site perimeter landscaping, such landscaping material shall be incorporated on another portion of the site;

(6) Single-stemmed deciduous tree species that cannot generally be planted and established in larger sizes may have a caliper of less than 1.75 inches; and

(7) The Department shall develop and maintain an advisory listing of trees recommended for new plantings. Such list shall describe their general characteristics and suitability, and provide guidelines for their inclusion within required landscape areas. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.100))


18.40.130 Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation. 

(1) The landscape plan submitted to the Department shall be drawn on the same base map as the development plans and shall identify the following:

(a) Total landscape area and separate hydrozones; 

(b) Landscape materials botanical/common name and applicable size;

(c) Property lines;

(d) Impervious surfaces; 

(e) Natural or manmade water features or bodies;

(f) Existing or proposed structures, fences, and retaining walls;

(g) Natural features or vegetation left in natural state; 

(h) Designated recreational open space areas; and

(i) Decorative and street lighting locations.

(2) The proposed landscape plan shall be certified by a Washington State registered landscape architect, Washington State certified nurseryman, or Washington State certified landscaper.

(3) An affidavit signed by an individual specified in subsection (2) of this section, certifying that the landscaping has been installed consistent with the approved landscaping plan, shall be submitted to the Department within 30 days of installation completion, unless the installed landscaping has been inspected and accepted by the Department. 

(4) The required landscaping shall be installed no later than three months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase. However, the time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of such required landscaping during the next appropriate planting season. A financial guarantee shall be required prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if landscaping is not installed and inspected prior to occupancy. (Ord. 20-07 § 117; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.115))


18.40.140 Maintenance. 

(1) All landscaping shall be maintained for the life of the project.

(2) All landscape materials shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent primary limb failure.

(3) With the exception of dead, diseased or damaged trees specifically retained to provide wildlife habitat; other dead, diseased, damaged or stolen plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season.

(4) Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.180))


18.40.150 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14. 

(1) Prior to receiving a temporary or permanent occupancy certificate for any building or structure for which landscaping is required, an applicant shall provide a performance guarantee adequate to secure the completion and improvement of required landscaping, in accordance with the approved site plan, within three months following issuance of the building or buildings temporary or permanent occupancy certificate, whichever comes first. 

(2) Performance guarantees for landscaping shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, and shall be required for a period of two years after the planting or transplanting of vegetation to insure proper installation, establishment and maintenance. This time period may be extended by one year by the Director, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season. 

(3) The Director may extend the time limit for compliance with the above landscaping requirement up to one year after issuance of the occupancy certificate if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a fee for the extension request as set forth in the current fee resolution, and a schedule for completion of remaining work. 

(4) Fees. Landscaping installation inspections, performance guarantee release inspections, and requests for extensions are subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 20-07 §§ 85, 118; Ord. 43-02 § 2; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.190). Partially from former 14.110.070)


18.40.160 Water use – Applicability of water budget for landscape areas.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.300))


18.40.170 Water use – Irrigation water budget calculated. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.310))


18.40.180 Water use – Estimated water use calculated.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.320))


18.40.190 Water use – Irrigation efficiency goals and system design standards.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.330))


18.40.200 Water use – Irrigation system design, design review and audit at installation. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.340))


18.40.210 Water use – Irrigation design plan contents. 

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.350))


18.40.220 Water use – Irrigation schedules.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.360))


18.40.230 Water use – Irrigation system maintenance.

Repealed by Ord. 10-10. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.16.370))




Chapter 18.45 TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION

Sections:

18.45.010    Short title.

18.45.020    Purpose and intent.

18.45.030    Definitions.

18.45.040    Applicability of regulations.

18.45.050    Exemptions from tree permits.

18.45.060    Permits and permit requirements.

18.45.070    Permit standards and conditions for all minor tree removal and major tree clearing.

18.45.080    Tree retention, preservation, and tree replacement requirements.

18.45.090    Tree protection standards.

18.45.100    Tree maintenance standards and best pruning practices.

18.45.110    Tree preservation modification and departure options.

18.45.120    Performance guarantees, liability, insurance and licensing.

18.45.130    Enforcement, violations and penalties.

18.45.140    Appeals.

18.45.150    Severability.


18.45.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the tree preservation and protection regulations of the City of Covington. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.020 Purpose and intent.

The intent of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures for preservation of trees, to preserve the character of the community, to successfully retain desirable trees on developing and redeveloping sites, and to maintain a viable tree canopy for the City of Covington. Specifically, the regulations contained in this chapter are intended to accomplish the following goals and objectives:

(1) Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Covington;

(2) Implement the purposes of the State Growth Management Act relating to conservation of natural resources;

(3) Support and implement the City of Covington comprehensive plan, specifically the land use element and natural environment element;

(4) Implement the goals of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA);

(5) Improve the aesthetic quality of the built environment by reducing impacts on critical areas and the natural environment;

(6) Minimize erosion, siltation, water pollution, and surface and ground water runoff;

(7) Preserve significant trees for the reduction of noise and air pollution, wind protection, animal habitat, slope stabilization and retention of ground water;

(8) Assist with removing at-risk trees;

(9) Provide for delivery of reliable utility services, for reasonable development of property, for reasonable preservation or enhancement of property values, and for increases in privacy for residential sites;

(10) Promote building and site planning practices that are consistent with the City natural topography, soils, and vegetation features;

(11) Provide an appropriate amount and quality of tree retention related to future land uses;

(12) Provide for increased areas of permeable surfaces that allow for infiltration of surface water into ground water resources, reduction in the quantity of storm water discharge, and improvement in the quality of storm water discharge; and

(13) Provide for regulations that are clear, understandable, user friendly, easy to administer, and cost effective to enforce. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases below shall be defined as set forth herein. If not defined in this chapter, the definitions provided in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be applicable. In the event of a conflict between the definitions set forth in this chapter and the definitions set forth in Chapter 18.20, the definitions in this chapter shall govern. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender.

“At-risk tree” means any significant tree determined by a qualified arborist through a tree risk assessment as a likely source of imminent danger to life or property, or determined to have a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease, resulting in the loss of a major structural component of that tree in a manner that is likely to:

(1) Damage a residential or accessory structure, place of employment or public assembly, or approved parking for a residential structure or accessory structure or place of employment or public assembly;

(2) Damage an approved road or utility facility; or

(3) Prevent emergency access by first responders.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means adherence to tree health care standards detailed in the current edition of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 and the current edition of the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) BMPs including the special companion publication to the ANSI A300, Best Management Practices for Utility Pruning of Trees.

“Brushing” means an allowed practice of removing ground cover, shrubs and vegetation not defined as a tree to create better visibility on a site for purposes of public safety, surveying or marketing.

“Caliper” means the diameter of a tree trunk, applied only to new or replacement nursery-grown trees, which shall be measured six inches above the ground for trees with a caliper/diameter up to and including four inches. For trees with a diameter greater than four inches, measured six inches above the ground, the caliper shall be measured at 12 inches above the ground.

“Canopy” means the part of the tree crown composed of leaves and small twigs or the collective branches and foliage of a group of trees’ crowns.

“City” means the City of Covington, King County, Washington.

“Clearing” or “land clearing” for purposes of this chapter means the direct and indirect removal of trees, including topping and limbing, from any public or private undeveloped, partially developed, or developed lot, public lands, public right-of-way, or utility easement. This shall also include any destructive or inappropriate activity applied to a tree that will result in its death or effectively destroy the functionality. “Clearing” shall not include landscape maintenance, brushing, or pruning consistent with accepted horticultural practices which does not impair the health, survival, or function of trees.

“Critical root zone (CRZ)” means the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) definition of CRZ, which is an area equal to a one-foot radius from the base of the tree trunk for each one inch of the tree diameter at four and one-half feet above grade (referred to as diameter at breast height). Example: A 24-inch-diameter tree at four and one-half feet above grade would have a critical root zone radius (CRZ) of 24 feet. In this example, the total protection zone, including trunk, would be 50 feet in diameter.

“Crown” means that portion of the tree stem that is occupied by branches with live foliage.

“Diameter breast height (DBH)” is a tree’s diameter in inches at four and one-half feet above the ground at the lowest point surrounding the trunk, and is used to measure existing trees on a site. Where a tree splits into several trunks below DBH, the DBH for the tree is the square root of the sum of the DBH for each individual trunk squared (example with three trunks: DBH = square root of [(stem 1)2 + (stem 2)2 + (stem 3)2]).

“Development” is the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargements of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, stockpiling, clearing or land disturbance; and any use or extension of use of the land.

“Dripline” of a tree is the outermost circumference of the tree canopy, from which water drips onto the ground. The “dripline area” is taken to include the soil and roots that lie within that circumference.

“Excessive canopy raising” means the excessive removal of lower canopy limbs (especially on conifers), by reducing the live crown ratio (the ratio of live crown to total tree height) lower than 60 percent of the original crown. Excessive canopy raising can pose a high risk. A tree’s hinge point changes under wind load forces. Articulation occurs significantly higher on the upper stem not accustomed to these load forces, which significantly increases chances of upper stem failure.

“Ground cover” means any living plant material that is normally terrestrial and grows low to the ground, as well as other small trees less than four inches in DBH and not defined as a tree. Ground covers are intended to stabilize soils and protect erosion.

“Heritage tree(s)” means a significant tree that is equal to or greater than 32 inches DBH.

“Imminent danger” means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

“Invasive tree” is a species that was introduced by humans to locations outside of the tree’s native range that spread and persist over large areas. Invasive species negatively impact natural ecosystems by displacing native species, reducing biological diversity, and interfering with natural succession. Tree species known to be invasive in the Pacific Northwest are listed below. The City may determine that additional tree species should be classified as invasive if the species clearly exhibits the detrimental characteristics of invasive species.

	Common Name	Species Name

	Norway maple	Acer platanoides

	Sycamore maple	Acer pseudoplatanus

	Horse chestnut	Aesculus hippocastanum

	Tree-of-heaven	Ailanthus altissima

	European white birch	Betula pendula

	English/European hawthorn	Crataegus monogyna

	English holly	Ilex aquifolium

	Princess tree	Paulownia tomentosa

	White poplar	Populus alba

	Sweet cherry	Prunus avium

	Cherry laurel	Prunus laurocerasus

	Portugal laurel	Prunus lusitanica

	Black locust	Robinia pseudoacacia

	European mountain ash	Sorbus aucuparia

	Siberian elm	Ulmus pumila

“ISA” means International Society of Arboriculture.

“ISA TRAQ,” tree risk assessment qualified, is a designation administered by the International Society of Arboriculture.

“Landmark tree” means a significant tree that is equal to or greater than 22 inches DBH.

“Landscape architect” means an individual currently licensed by the State of Washington as a landscape architect.

“Land use application” means an application, supplied by the Department, which must be completed and accompany any submittal packet for the desired development permit.

“Limits of disturbance” means the boundary between the area of minimum protection around a tree and the allowable site disturbance as determined by a qualified arborist.

“Multi-stemmed tree” means a tree that has one trunk at ground level but that splits into two or more trunks above ground level. Trees whose trunks diverge below ground level are considered separate trees.

“Normal and routine maintenance” means the standard practice and care of trees and vegetation normally required to maintain life, including watering, feeding or fertilizing, spraying, pruning and trimming according to best management practices, and removing of dead or unhealthy branches.

“Nuisance tree” is a species that is known to be weak-wooded and unstable, or one that exhibits other traits that render it prone to creating nuisance conditions for persons and property located in close proximity to such trees. Tree species categorized as nuisance trees in the City are listed below. The City may determine that additional tree species should be classified as nuisance trees if the species clearly exhibits the detrimental characteristics of nuisance species.

	Common Name	Species Name

	Red alder	Alnus rubra

	Black cottonwood	Populus trichocarpa

“Protected tree” means a tree and associated understory vegetation that are identified for retention and protection on an approved tree protection and replacement plan and/or permanently protected by easement, tract, or covenant restriction.

“Pruning” means cutting back of limbs larger than one and one-half inches in diameter.

“Qualified arborist” is an individual who is a certified professional with academic and field experience that makes them a recognized expert in urban forestry and tree protection during development. A qualified arborist shall be a member of the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and/or the Association of Consulting Arborists and shall have specific experience with urban tree management in the State of Washington. Additionally the qualified arborist shall be a certified arborist or board certified master arborist, as certified by the ISA, and be ISA tree risk assessment qualified and have the necessary training and experience to use and apply the appraisal methodology prescribed in the current edition of the ISA Plant Appraisal Guide.

“Remove” or “removal” is the act of removing a tree by digging up, cutting down, or any act which causes the tree to die within a period of three years, including, but not limited to: damage inflicted on the root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compacting, or changing the ground level in the area of the tree root system; damage inflicted on the tree permitting infections or infestation; excessive pruning; topping; paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the dripline; or any other action which is deemed harmful to the tree.

“Risk” in the context of trees is the likelihood of a tree failure occurring combined with the severity of the associated consequences of such failure to a target.

“Significant tree” for purposes of this chapter, means a tree that is in a healthy condition and is a noninvasive species, which is:

(1) Any deciduous tree that is 12 inches or more in diameter at DBH;

(2) Any coniferous tree that is six inches or more in diameter at DBH;

(3) A required replacement tree of any size; or

(4) Any tree that is six inches or more at DBH that is located within critical areas or the shoreline jurisdiction.

“Target” or “risk target” means people, property, or activities that could be injured, damaged, or disrupted by a tree.

“Tree” means any woody plant characterized by one main stem or trunk and many branches, or multi-stemmed trunks which have a diameter individually or cumulatively of four inches DBH or larger.

“Tree appraisal” is a method of calculating the value of a tree, which shall be based on the “trunk formula method” as set forth in “The Guide for Plant Appraisal” authored by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.

“Tree enhancement plan” means a plan prepared by a qualified arborist and required of all commercial or industrial properties when any tree removal or tree clearing takes place. The tree enhancement plan shall combine tree retention and preservation of existing trees pursuant to CMC 18.45.080(1) with the tree replacement and replanting requirements of CMC 18.45.080(2). The tree enhancement plan shall incorporate trees in as many areas as feasible such as tree tracts, boundary trees, perimeter landscaping, parking lot landscaping, street and driveway trees, facade landscaping, or other viable stands of trees, considering the type of commercial or industrial development.

“Tree harvesting” means tree logging, felling, cutting, or taking of trees, standing or down, on privately or publicly owned land for sale or for commercial, industrial, or other use, governed under RCW 76.09.470.

“Tree inventory” means a detailed list of all trees of four inches DBH or larger, located on a site for which a tree permit is required, and which is prepared by a qualified arborist. A tree inventory shall be included on a site plan drawn to scale, and provide the number, size, approximate height, specific location, and tree species of all trees of four inches DBH or larger, with a summary of all significant trees in sufficient detail for the City to review.

“Tree owner” means the owner of the real property where 51 percent or more of the diameter of the trunk of the tree at ground level is located.

“Tree risk assessment” means the systematic process conducted by a qualified arborist or tree risk assessor to identify, analyze, and evaluate tree risk. Tree risk assessment shall be conducted in accordance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 and the current edition of the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) BMPs: Tree Assessment.

“Tree risk management” means the application of policies, procedures and practices used to identify, evaluate, mitigate, monitor, and communicate tree risk.

“Tree topping” is an extreme form of crown reduction that removes whole tops of trees or large branches and/or trunks from the tops of trees, leaving stubs or lateral branches that are too small to assume the role of a terminal leader, which is the vertical stem at the top of the trunk. Tree topping severely cuts back large trees to a predetermined size in a manner that:

(1) Leaves large exposed wounds that can become infested;

(2) Ruins tree structure;

(3) Removes too much foliage, disrupting the tree energy storage;

(4) Stimulates vigorous new growth, which is prone to breakage;

(5) Increases tree maintenance costs; or

(6) Destroys a tree’s appearance and value.

“Tree tract” is a separate portion of land, specifically set aside for the preservation, retention or protection of existing trees or the planting of new trees to maintain a beneficial tree canopy in a subdivision or on a development site and that meets minimum tree preservation requirements of this code. The tree tract shall be a separate designated lot(s) or tract(s) shown on the subdivision plat map, site development plan, or binding site plan and shall be recorded on the property title with the King County Recorder’s Office with appropriate description of purposes and restrictions. Restrictions applied to the tree tract will reserve the tract for the protection and preservation of trees in perpetuity. Tree tracts can be used for other open space uses when such use is compatible with trees and will not impact tree health. The tract shall be dedicated to, and owned and maintained by, the home owner(s), property owners association, or comparable entity.

“Understory vegetation” means small trees, shrubs, and ground cover plants growing within the dripline or critical root zone (CRZ) of a significant tree.

“Viable (tree)” means a significant tree that a qualified arborist has determined to be in good health with a low risk of failure, is relatively windfirm if isolated or exposed, is a species that is suitable for its location, and is therefore worthy of long-term retention. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.040 Applicability of regulations.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all residential, commercial, and industrial lots, and property located outside the public right-of-way, including but not limited to parcels, tracts, and easements owned by public agencies such as parks and stormwater ponds.

(2) When any other chapter of the Covington Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the provision that provides more protection to the environment, critical area or shoreline judication shall apply, unless the provision conflicts with Federal or State laws or regulations. Provided, in the event of a conflict between the definitions set forth in this chapter and the definitions set forth in Chapter 18.20 CMC, the definitions in this chapter shall prevail.

(3) If there is any conflict between this chapter and Chapter 16.05 or 18.65 CMC requirements the most restrictive applies. Should a conflict occur between the provisions of this chapter or between this chapter and the laws, regulations, codes, or rules promulgated by any other authority having jurisdiction within the City, the requirement which most supports the provisions of Chapter 18.65 or 16.05 CMC shall be applied, except when constrained by Federal or State law, or where specifically provided otherwise. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.050 Exemptions from tree permits.

The activities below are exempt from both the minor tree removal permit and major tree clearing permit requirements of CMC 18.45.060, 18.45.070, and 18.45.080. Provided, replanting pursuant to CMC 18.45.080(3) is still required. Exempt tree removal, without a permit, and as allowed herein, shall be reported to the City on a form provided by the City within 21 days of removal. The use of the exemptions listed below for the removal of replanted trees and landscaping as required pursuant to Chapter 18.40 CMC is prohibited, unless such trees disturb any critical area or critical area buffer, or identified shoreline jurisdiction, or unless such trees cause a major adverse impact to runoff and diversion of stormwater or streams, erosion, risk of landslide, infiltration of pollution into ground water, or other major adverse impacts to safety and security of adjacent properties, as determined by the Director:

(1) Emergency Removal. Removal of trees necessary to protect public safety or public or private property from imminent danger in response to emergencies declared by the City, County, State or Federal governments. In the case of a declared emergency, the written approval requirement herein shall be waived.

(2) Emergency Removal of an At-Risk Tree or Trees. Removal of an at-risk tree following a tree risk assessment and recommendation by a qualified arborist that the tree is a safety risk and should be removed. For a tree to be considered an at-risk tree it must be defective either in some part or as a whole, with risk for failure and a target that is threatened. Trees are declared at risk if a tree risk assessment has been completed and mitigation is required to prevent a failure from causing damage affecting the target. The City may, at its sole discretion and in consideration of ISA tree risk assessment guidance, waive the qualified arborist requirement if City staff conducts an on-site inspection and determines that a tree clearly and obviously constitutes a risk. City staff should consider the following conditions when conducting a tree risk assessment:

(a) Whether the tree is dead, diseased, decayed, dying, burned, or otherwise damaged;

(b) Whether the tree has multiple weak branch attachments, broken and/or hanging limbs;

(c) Whether the foliage is sparse and/or discolored;

(d) Whether there is evidence of root rot/exposed, undermined or pruned roots or a restricted root area;

(e) If leaning, what the degree of such lean is and whether roots are broken or the soil heaving or cracking;

(f) Whether the tree top is broken on conifers; and

(g) Whether there are targets such as buildings, parking, or traffic or pedestrian facilities below the tree and whether those target(s) can be moved.

Upon such inspection, staff may determine that further review by a qualified arborist is required before making a determination as to whether a tree constitutes a risk.

(3) Normal and Routine Maintenance of Existing Trees. Any normal and routine maintenance of existing trees, but not to include utility easements; provided, that said maintenance does not involve removal of healthy trees and is not detrimental to the health of any trees. Trenching or digging to a depth of greater than one foot within the critical root zone and tree topping is not allowed.

(4) Commercial and Wholesale Nurseries and Tree Farms. Removal of trees which are being grown within commercial and wholesale nurseries or tree farms to be sold as landscape or Christmas trees.

(5) Tree Harvesting with a Forest Practices Permit. Any harvesting with a forest practices permit issued by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources under RCW 76.09.470.

(6) Removal of an invasive tree if located outside of a designated critical area and associated buffer, or within shoreline jurisdiction.

(7) Removal of a nuisance tree if located outside of a designated critical area or its associated buffer, or within shoreline jurisdiction.

(8) Removal of Trees on City-Owned Property for Installation of Utilities and Public Facilities and/or Maintenance of Property. Removal of trees on any City-owned right-of-way or tract for installation of any public infrastructure, including streets, utilities or public facilities, or for maintenance and operation of any existing facilities. This exemption includes the removal of trees on all publicly owned land, parks, storm ponds, and critical area tracts dedicated to the City.

(9) Removal of trees where the trunks are located within 10 feet of an existing building that will remain on a site.

(10) The removal of three trees on lots less than or equal to 7,200 square feet and one additional tree for every 7,200 square feet of lot area up to a maximum of six significant trees per lot within a 36-month period.

(11) Removal of significant trees in emergency situations involving immediate danger to life or property or substantial fire hazards as determined by the City in its sole discretion. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.060 Permits and permit requirements.

Unless exempted under CMC 18.45.050, any person engaged in removal of trees or tree clearing in the City shall first obtain either a minor tree removal permit or major tree clearing permit as outlined below and shall meet the prescribed tree preservation or tree enhancement requirements in this chapter. If any future development or construction is anticipated, such permits shall be reviewed and issued in conjunction with any required land use permit, engineering design permit, site development permit, binding site plan, subdivision, or building permit. A separate permit shall be required for each individual site on which the tree removal or land clearing is proposed. If no development or construction activity is currently anticipated, individual tree removal or tree clearing permits may be applied for, reviewed, and issued according to this section as separate, freestanding permits. All critical area regulations set forth in Chapter 18.65 CMC and all shoreline regulations set forth in Chapter 16.05 CMC are applicable. Additionally, within the shoreline jurisdiction, a shoreline exemption permit may be required in conjunction with the tree removal permit in some cases.

(1) Minor Tree Removal Permits.

(a) Minor tree removal permits are those permits involving removal of trees or understory vegetation on any lots less than one acre in size, or on property or easements granted to public utilities, unless the activity falls within an exemption listed in CMC 18.45.050, in which case no permit is required;

(b) The minor tree removal permit required by this subsection shall be in addition to any other permit(s) which will or have been issued by the City or any other governmental agency with jurisdiction over all or part of the proposed activity or land which is part of the activity;

(c) A minor tree removal permit, with prescribed fee, shall require an application and site plan with two copies on a form to be provided by the Director, in accordance with permit submission requirements outlined in subsection (3) of this section;

(d) The Director shall review the minor tree removal permit application and accompanying site plan and take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit. The City may ask for more detailed submittal information to meet the requirements of this code;

(e) A minor tree removal permit shall be a Type I permit governed by Chapter 14.30 CMC;

(f) A minor tree removal permit may be applied for as a freestanding permit by itself or in conjunction with any other associated land use application, engineering design permit, site development permit, binding site plan, subdivision, or building permit application.

(2) Major Tree Clearing Permits.

(a) Major tree clearing permits are those permits involving any removal of trees, clearing and grading of land with trees, shrubs, or understory vegetation on sites one acre in size or greater, unless the activity falls within an exemption listed in CMC 18.45.050, in which case no permit is required;

(b) The major tree clearing permit required by this subsection shall be in addition to any other permit(s) which will or have been issued by the City or any other governmental agency with jurisdiction over all or part of the proposed activity or land which is part of the activity;

(c) A major tree clearing permit, with prescribed fee, shall require an application and site plan with two copies on a form provided by the Director, in accordance with permit submission requirements outlined in subsection (3) of this section;

(d) The Director shall review the major tree clearing permit application and accompanying site plans and take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit. The City may ask for more detailed submittal information to meet the requirements of this code;

(e) A major tree clearing permit shall be a Type II permit governed by Chapter 14.30 CMC;

(f) A major tree clearing permit may be applied for as a freestanding permit by itself or in conjunction with any other associated land use application, engineering design permit, site development permit, binding site plan, subdivision, or building permit application.

(3) Permit and Application Submission Requirements.

(a) Minor Tree Removal Permit Submission Requirements. Minor tree removal permits shall be submitted on application forms provided by the Director and shall contain the following information outlined below:

(i) Completed application form, with one copy and appropriate fee;

(ii) The legal description or tax parcel number, and street address for the site;

(iii) If critical areas and their buffers, as defined in Chapter 18.65 CMC, or shorelines, as defined in Chapter 16.05 CMC, exist on the property, then their exact location shall be identified on a topography map showing contours at not greater than five-foot intervals, as determined by a land surveyor. Any proposed tree cutting, land clearing, landscaping, and replanting activity, within or near such critical areas or shoreline, shall be included on such map;

(iv) A scaled site plan that clearly depicts the limits of disturbance, existing trees and their critical root zones, the location of any critical area or shoreline within 200 feet of the property and the applicable buffers and setbacks, property lines, structures, north arrow, and date;

(v) A tree inventory completed by a qualified arborist, identifying the species type, size, approximate height, location, and number of both existing trees and those specific trees to be removed;

(vi) A statement explaining the scope of work and time schedule for tree removal;

(vii) Information showing the location of existing and proposed improvements, if any, including but not limited to structures, roads, utilities, driveways and trails;

(viii) The approximate location of all critical areas and critical area buffers, and shoreline jurisdiction areas; and

(ix) Any other information, such as erosion and sediment control plans, if applicable, that the Director deems necessary and reasonable for an effective evaluation of the application for a minor tree removal permit.

(b) Major Tree Clearing Permit Submission Requirements. Major tree clearing permits shall be submitted on application forms provided by the Director, with any land use application, engineering design permit, site development permit, binding site plan, subdivision, or building permit on the same site; or by itself as a freestanding permit for any major tree clearing, land clearing or grading permit when no land use or building permit is anticipated. Permit submissions shall contain the following information:

(i) Three copies of the completed application form and appropriate fee;

(ii) The legal description or tax parcel number, and street address for the site;

(iii) If critical areas and their buffers, as defined in Chapter 18.65 CMC, or shorelines and their buffers and setbacks, as defined in Chapter 16.05 CMC, exist on the property, then their exact location shall be identified on a topography map showing contours at not greater than five-foot intervals, as determined by a land surveyor. Included shall be any proposed tree cutting, land clearing, landscaping, and replanting activity, within or near such critical areas or shoreline;

(iv) A scaled site plan that clearly depicts the limits of disturbance, existing trees and their critical root zones, the location of any critical area or shoreline within 200 feet of the property and the applicable buffers and setbacks, property lines, north arrow and date, showing the location of existing and proposed improvements;

(v) A tree inventory completed by a qualified arborist with the date of inventory, showing the location, number, size, height, species, and condition of existing trees, and designating any trees to be removed, proposed scope of work, a north arrow, and scale;

(vi) The location, number, height, caliper, and species of any replanted trees on site that were planted pursuant to any tree replanting or tree enhancement plan requirements;

(vii) Erosion and sediment control plans and mitigation;

(viii) A tree protection plan with fencing details during construction;

(ix) A proposed time schedule for tree clearing, replanting, land restoration, and implementation of erosion control measures;

(x) A discussion and calculations demonstrating that the conditions and standards set forth in CMC 18.45.070 and 18.45.080 are satisfied;

(xi) A performance guarantee quantity worksheet consistent with CMC 18.45.120; and

(xii) Any other information which the Director deems necessary for an effective evaluation of the application for a major tree clearing permit.

(4) Permit Review – Administrative Provisions and Authority.

(a) Decision Types. Minor tree removal permits are a Type I decision, and major tree clearing permits are a Type II decision as defined in Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(b) Extent of Authority Within Permit Review Process. The Director shall have the authority to approve, modify, approve with conditions, or deny such permits in accordance with the intended purposes of this chapter as well as the standards and requirements set forth in this section and CMC 18.45.070 and 18.45.080. If the Director determines that the application complies with all criteria and standards set forth in this chapter, then a minor tree removal or major tree clearing permit shall be issued.

(c) Length of Permit Validity. Permits granted hereunder as a freestanding permit and not associated with another land use or building permit shall be valid for 180 days. One 180-day extension is allowed by the Director for reasonable, extenuating circumstances, and must be requested in writing prior to the expiration date. Otherwise a new permit shall be required. Permits granted hereunder which are associated with and accompany another land use, site development, or building permit shall be valid for the length of time associated with the accompanying land use permit, engineering design permit, site development permit, binding site plan, subdivision, or building permit.

(d) Suspension or Revocation Allowed. Approved permits may be suspended or revoked by the Director on the basis of inaccurate or misleading information within the application therefor or upon the violation of any provision of this chapter.

(5) Tree Protection and Tree Fencing Standards. The following tree protection, fencing, and tree care standards shall be implemented and followed prior to, during, and subsequent to any subdivision, development, redevelopment, construction, tree clearing, or tree replacement as part of the conditions of any permit, unless exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(a) No tree clearing shall be allowed on a site until all required permits have been obtained;

(b) A tree protection area, corresponding to the critical root zone of a significant tree, shall be identified by a qualified arborist during the construction stage, and temporary fencing in accordance with subsection (5)(d) of this section shall be installed around the tree protection area prior to any tree clearing and/or grading. Fencing shall remain throughout construction. No disturbance to the tree protection area is authorized and, if any sign of disturbance is observed within the tree protection area by the City, a stop work order may be issued until corrections are made and any damage is restored;

(c) No impervious surfaces, fill, excavation, or storage of construction materials shall be permitted within tree protection zones or within the surrounding construction fencing required herein;

(d) Construction fencing shall be placed at a minimum of five feet from the boundary of the significant tree’s critical root zone or tree tract. The location and material of the fence must be shown on the approved tree enhancement plan, tree clearing permit or clearing and grading plan. The fence material must be in place before any clearing, grading, tree cutting, or construction begins on the site and must remain in place until construction and final inspection are complete. The fence must meet one of the following standards:

(i) Five-foot high, orange, plastic, secured to the ground with seven-foot metal posts or T-posts; or

(ii) Five-foot high, steel or chain link, attached to concrete blocks.

The fence must be maintained in satisfactory condition throughout construction and repaired immediately if damaged, and failure to maintain said fence may result in a stop work order being issued until such time as the tree protection fence is repaired;

(e) A tree designated for preservation shall not have the soil grade altered within its critical root zone or within six feet of its trunk, whichever is greater. The grade may be lowered if a qualified arborist with the concurrence of the Director determines the impact of lowering the grade within the area described in this subsection will not adversely affect the health of the tree;

(f) Trees shall not be designated for preservation if they are dead, diseased, or an at-risk tree;

(g) Grade level changes described in subsection (5)(e) of this section shall be done according to a plan prepared by a qualified arborist that includes measures to reduce adverse impacts on trees;

(h) No work shall be allowed within the critical root zone unless approved by the Director with appropriate mitigation measures;

(i) Any trees which are staked at the time of planting shall have stakes removed when no longer needed for stability, but in no case longer than three years after planting, unless new staking measures are approved by the Director; and

(j) Alternative tree protection methods may be used if determined by the Director to provide equal or greater tree protection.

(6) Permit Fees. Fees for minor tree removal permits and major tree clearing permits shall be as specified in a fee resolution or by another method approved by the Covington City Council.

(7) Additional Permit Restrictions or Requirements.

(a) Bald Eagle and Other Federal and State Requirements. All permittees and their agents must comply with all applicable Federal and State laws, rules and regulations, including, without limitation, the Endangered Species Act, the Bald Eagle Protection Act, and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, as now existing or hereinafter adopted or amended.

(b) Reporting Requirements for Removal of At-Risk Tree(s). Emergency removal of at-risk tree(s), without a permit, and as allowed herein, shall be reported to the City on a form provided by the Director within 21 days of the emergency removal.

(c) Permits and Written Reports for Public Utilities Pruning or Removal of Trees. Pruning for aboveground utility facilities and lines are allowed, but such utilities and/or their contractors shall submit a written statement to the City, in lieu of a permit, prior to tree pruning, indicating that no trees will be removed during pruning, and that any tree pruning will not cause significant structural defect to the trees. If trees are to be removed, the minor tree removal permit procedures shall apply, but replanting with appropriate trees for ROW or utility easement locations shall be required of the public utility, unless the Director determines in writing such replanting is inappropriate.

(d) Critical Areas and Shoreline Jurisdiction Exceptions and Limitations. Any removal or clearing of trees, ground cover, or other vegetation from critical areas or from the shoreline jurisdiction shall be governed by Chapters 16.05 and 18.65 CMC, as now existing or hereinafter adopted or amended and must comply with all limitations and restrictions for alterations of critical areas and critical area buffers in Chapter 18.65 CMC and for alterations of shoreline jurisdiction areas in Chapter 16.05 CMC.

(e) Permits Required for Removal of Trees in Tree Tracts, Tree Conservation Easements or as Part of Tree Enhancement Plans. Any trees required as part of any tree tract, tree conservation easement or tree enhancement plan under provisions of this chapter shall remain permanently unless a minor tree removal permit or major tree clearing permit under this section is obtained and replacement trees are planted in accordance with standards of this chapter. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.070 Permit standards and conditions for all minor tree removal and major tree clearing.

Unless otherwise approved by the Director pursuant to any applicable exemption(s), all minor tree removal and major tree clearing permits within the City shall conform to the following standards and conditions and shall be governed by such criteria for their issuance, denial, or revocation:

(1) The tree clearing activity shall not significantly create or contribute to blowdowns, landslides, accelerated soil creep, settlement, subsidence or other hazards associated with strong ground motion and soil liquefaction;

(2) No topping of trees, as defined herein, shall be allowed as part of any regulated activity;

(3) The tree clearing activity shall not create or contribute to flooding, erosion or increased turbidity, siltation or other forms of pollution in any waters of the State;

(4) Tree clearing activity shall be conducted so as to expose the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time, consistent with the anticipated construction schedule;

(5) Timber harvesting and conversion of forested lands to non-forestry use within the City of Covington shall not be permitted until such time as a valid forest practices application, permit and notification, under the State Forest Practices Act and Rules, have been submitted, evaluated and issued by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources. If, prior to tree harvesting or conversion of forested lands to non-forestry use, a lot owner has not received a permit for future conversion of the site to some non-forestry use or other permitted land use activity, the City shall prohibit application for any land use, development or engineering permit(s) for that site for a period of 10 years. This condition applies to the site, not site owner, and runs with the land. All landowners of timbered or forested lands falling within applicable regulations of RCW 76.09.470 shall notify the City of Covington and the State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and show proof of full compliance with RCW 76.09.470. Upon being contacted by a landowner under RCW 76.09.470, the City of Covington shall notify the State DNR and ensure compliance with such regulations; and

(6) To assure protection of the critical root zone, visual marking of the critical root zone with fencing shall be installed and remain in place throughout any construction. Those trees or ground cover designated for preservation shall not be damaged by scarring, grade changes, dumping or storage of materials, back filling or compaction of soil around trees, or by any other activity that can damage roots or trunks. Land clearing equipment and machinery shall at all times remain outside the critical root zone of any tree designated for retention, except where such area encompasses any road or constructed pathway, during which approved mitigation will be required for encroachment into such critical root zone. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.080 Tree retention, preservation, and tree replacement requirements.

(1) Tree Retention and Preservation for All Zones. The following tree retention and preservation percentages apply to all residential, commercial, and industrial zoned properties unless exempt pursuant to CMC 18.45.050, Exemptions from tree permits:

(a) R-1 Zoned Lots. A minimum of 40 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by critical areas and outside shoreline jurisdiction.

(b) R-4 and R-6 Zoned Lots. A minimum of 35 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by critical areas and outside shoreline jurisdiction.

(c) R-8, R-18, and MHO Zoned Lots. A minimum of 25 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by critical areas and outside shoreline jurisdiction.

(d) CC, GC, MC, TC, and I Zoned Lots. A minimum of 25 percent of the significant trees shall be retained within areas unconstrained by critical areas and outside shoreline jurisdiction.

(2) Tree Replacement Required. Any significant tree lawfully removed pursuant to the provisions of CMC 18.45.050, Exemptions from tree permits, or 18.45.060, Permits and permit requirements, shall be subject to the following replacement requirements:

(a) Each significant tree shall be replaced by two replacement trees;

(b) Each landmark tree shall be replaced by three replacement trees;

(c) Each heritage tree shall be replaced by five replacement trees;

(d) Replacement coniferous trees shall be at least six feet in height;

(e) Replacement deciduous trees shall be at least two and one-half inches DBH;

(f) In order to restore and enhance a site as nearly as practicable to its pre-removal character and function, replacement trees shall be primarily conifer and native species to Washington;

(g) Nonnative replacement trees shall be recommended by a qualified arborist as having characteristics suitable to the proposed location of planting, or shall be otherwise approved by the City;

(h) The condition of replacement trees shall meet or exceed current American Nursery and Landscape Association or equivalent organization standards for nursery stock;

(i) Financial guarantees for replacement trees may be required consistent with the provisions of Chapter 14.105 CMC;

(j) Installation of required replacement trees shall be in accordance with the International Society of Arboriculture best management practices for arboriculture including, but not limited to, soil assessment, sampling, amendments, and conservation, which ensure the tree’s long-term health and survival;

(k) The Director may consider smaller-sized replacement trees if the applicant can demonstrate that smaller trees are more suited to the species, the site conditions, and the purposes of this section, and that such trees will be planted in sufficient quantities to meet the intent of this section;

(l) Replacement trees that are less susceptible to laminated root rot shall be considered for tree replacement. Douglas fir trees shall not be allowed as a replacement species. The following less susceptible trees may be used as replacement trees:

(i) Coast redwood,

(ii) Incense cedar,

(iii) Ponderosa pine,

(iv) Jeffrey pine,

(v) Lodgepole pine,

(vi) Knobcone pine,

(vii) Sugar pine,

(viii) Western white pine,

(ix) White bark pine,

(x) Limber pine,

(xi) Sitka spruce,

(xii) Western red cedar,

(xiii) Alaskan cedar, and

(xiv) All hardwoods;

(m) All replacement trees shall, upon planting, be designated as significant trees regardless of their size. Replacement trees shall not be removed after planting. Exemptions to allow for tree removal, as provided in CMC 18.45.050, do not apply to replacement trees;

(n) Tree replacement in conjunction with tree removal within critical areas shall be consistent with the replacement ratios required in this section;

(o) Tree replacement within the shoreline jurisdiction, as regulated by Chapter 16.05 CMC, has the potential for different replacement ratios. Additionally, a shoreline letter of exemption is likely to be required for tree removal and planting within the shoreline jurisdiction.

(3) Incentives. The following incentives are available for higher levels of landmark or heritage tree preservation:

(a) Landmark Trees or Heritage Trees. The permanent preservation of a healthy landmark or heritage tree pursuant to this section shall receive a tree retention credit as follows:

(i) One hundred fifty percent tree credit for a landmark tree or 200 percent credit for a heritage tree pursuant to the following provisions:

(A) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must be part of a continuous canopy adjacent to an environmentally critical area and associated buffer;

(B) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must be part of a continuous canopy adjacent to a public park and/or other protected open space; or

(C) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must be part of any other on-site and/or off-site continuous canopy.

(ii) One hundred twenty-five percent credit for a landmark tree or 150 percent credit for a heritage tree pursuant to the following provisions:

(A) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must provide relief from identified environmental impacts;

(B) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must provide perimeter connectivity and/or off-site screening;

(C) Preservation of a landmark or heritage tree must be able to be incorporated into required landscaping; or

(D) An isolated cluster of landmark or heritage trees.

To qualify for this incentive, all landmark or heritage trees proposed for permanent preservation shall be outside of any environmentally critical area and associated buffer.

(4) Location for Tree Replacement – On Site. The location of replacement trees shall be consistent with a report produced by a qualified arborist and peer reviewed by a qualified professional to ensure land capability. Unless approved for one or more of the alternatives set forth in subsection (5) of this section, replacement trees shall be planted on the site from which significant trees are removed and may be approved for the following areas on site:

(a) On-site replacement trees approved to be located within environmentally critical areas and associated buffers shall receive a 125 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(b) On-site replacement trees approved to be located within the perimeter of a stormwater facility shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(c) On-site replacement trees approved to be located in places other than subsections (4)(a) and (b) of this section shall receive a 100 percent credit toward the tree replacement requirement.

(5) Location for Tree Replacement – Alternatives Sites Subject to City Approval. The location of replacement trees shall be consistent with a report produced by a qualified arborist. Replacement costs, including materials plus labor, shall be at the applicant expense. When on-site replacement cannot be completely achieved, the following alternatives may be considered, subject to City approval:

(a) Off-Site Tree Replacement.

(i) The number of replacement trees shall be the same as described in subsection (2) of this section. Replacement costs (material plus labor) shall be at the applicant’s expense.

(ii) Allowable sites for receiving off-site replacement plantings may include public lands, open space areas, open space tracts, delineated environmentally critical areas and associated buffers. A receiving site shall be within the Covington city limits or upon land owned by the City, if the City determines off-site planting is appropriate and warranted.

(iii) Allowable sites for receiving off-site replacement plantings may include private properties and other properties owned by a homeowner association, including but not limited to open space areas, open space tracts, recreational tracts, delineated environmentally critical areas and associated buffers. An agreement between the receiving site and the sending site shall be executed and recorded against the title of both properties, and an easement shall be granted to the City allowing entry to the property to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and survivability of the trees. Trees to be replaced shall be contained within a tree protection easement and subject to the financial guarantee provisions of Chapter 14.105 CMC.

(b) Fee in Lieu. It is the City’s intent to preserve and replace trees on site. Only in rare cases, and as a last resort, may a fee in lieu of tree replacement be allowed, subject to approval by the Director. The Director may allow up to 25 percent of the required replacement trees to be converted to a tree unit credit basis through the fee in lieu of tree replacement. The amount of the fee shall cover the cost of a tree, installation (labor and equipment including staking and mulching), maintenance (including watering, warranty, and monitoring) for five years, and fund administration. Such costs shall be determined by the City. All fees shall be paid to the City prior to final site plan or final plat approval, or the issuance of a tree removal permit, or any permit authorizing removal of trees to be replanted pursuant to this chapter, whichever applies. In no case shall a tree credit in lieu replacement be less than $2,000 per tree. Funds generated by fees in lieu of tree replacement shall be used to plant replacement trees on public property.

(c) Landscape Restoration. Where appropriate, other measures designed to mitigate the loss of trees by restoring all or parts of the forest landscape and its associated benefits may be considered. Measures, as determined by the Director, may include, but are not limited to:

(i) Creation of wildlife snags from trees that would otherwise be removed;

(ii) Replacement of certain ornamental trees with native shrubs and ground cover;

(iii) Replacement of at-risk or short-lived trees with healthy new trees that have a greater chance of long-term survival;

(iv) Daylighting and restoration of stream corridors with native vegetation consistent with Chapter 18.65 CMC; and

(v) Protection of nonsignificant trees to provide for the successional stages of forest development.

(6) Tree Replacement Guidelines and Requirements. The following order of preference shall be considered for tree replacement:

(a) Replacement trees should be planted to reestablish or enhance tree clusters where they previously existed;

(b) Where possible, replacement trees should be planted adjacent to environmentally critical areas and the shoreline jurisdiction. Replacement trees may be planted within a designated open space tract, environmentally critical area tract, or shoreline buffer where it is determined by a qualified arborist in conjunction with a qualified biologist that such planting enhances and complements existing vegetation and environmental functions;

(c) Replacement trees shall be planted in locations appropriate to the species’ growth habits and horticultural requirements;

(d) Replacement trees shall be located away from areas where damage is likely;

(e) Replacement trees shall be located to provide screening of the development from adjacent properties, where appropriate;

(f) Replacement trees shall be planted in areas that connect or are adjacent to a designated open space tract or environmentally critical area tract or other open space, where appropriate;

(g) Replacement trees shall be integrated into the required landscape plans, if any, for a development; and

(h) Replacement trees to be planted next to or under power lines shall be selected with consideration of the trees’ maturation and maintenance requirements.

(7) Tree Maintenance. All required retention trees, replacement trees, and relocated trees shown on an approved permit, whether located on site or off site, shall be maintained in healthy condition by the applicant throughout the life of the project, unless otherwise approved by the Director in a subsequent permit or approval. Healthy condition can be achieved by employing, as appropriate, the following preventative measures, consistent with best management practices for maintaining the health of the tree:

(a) Trees shall not be topped;

(b) Excessive canopy raising shall not be allowed unless necessary to protect life and property;

(c) Visible deadwood on trees to be protected or relocated shall be pruned;

(d) Fertilizer shall be applied to enhance the vigor of stressed trees;

(e) Use of soil amendments and soil aeration in tree protection and planting areas;

(f) Application of mulch over tree dripline areas; and

(g) Proper water availability during and immediately after construction. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.090 Tree protection standards.

(1) Trees retained, preserved, or replaced within all applicable residential, commercial, or industrial zoned properties, whether part of a formal subdivision or any development or redevelopment permit, shall be preserved within tree tracts or a tree conservation easement, regardless of the size or number of lots. Property owners are responsible for the viability of protected trees, including normal care, maintenance, and pruning, so that such trees can achieve their 30-year maturity goals. Should a protected tree become diseased to the point that it must be removed or die, the property owner is responsible for replacing the protected tree with a tree or trees that will achieve the original canopy coverage for which the protected tree was planted to achieve.

(2) There shall be no minimum tree tract size or percentage of land required to be devoted to tree preservation or tree enhancement. The tree tract shall be designed and sized appropriately to protect the critical root zone associated with all trees designated for retention, preservation, and replacement, at full mature age, pursuant to the provisions of CMC 18.45.080; however, the following measures are required:

(a) Location of Tree Tract or Tree Conservation Easement. Tree tracts or easements shall be located according to the priority location list in subsection (5) of this section.

(b) No portion of a tree tract shall be less than 20 feet in width.

(3) Designation. Any application and/or plan required for new development shall show all significant trees designated for protection. These areas may be shown by labeling them as “Significant Trees” or such other designation as approved by the Director. Protected vegetation, including protected trees, shall not be modified, harmed, or removed except as provided in this section.

(4) Preservation. An approval for new development shall require the significant trees to be retained are permanently preserved within a tract, easement, or other permanent protective mechanism. The location, purpose, and restrictions of these protected areas shall be shown on the face of the deed, plat, binding site plan, covenant, or similar document, and shall be recorded with the King County Recorder’s Office or its successor. The recorded document shall include the requirement that the protected areas shall not be removed, amended, or modified without the written approval of the City.

(5) Priority Location of Tree Tracts. Placement of tree tracts is encouraged in certain areas to enhance their viability and to complement natural and environmental features of the property. The priority locations below are encouraged for placement of all trees in designated tree tracts. When such tree tracts are located according to the following priority, a subdivision or development is eligible for up to a one percent reduction in the tree retention percentage requirement outlined in CMC 18.45.080.

(a) Priority Locations for Tree Tracts.

(i) Adjacent to identified critical areas and critical area buffers.

(ii) Adjacent to existing public or private parks.

(iii) Adjacent to existing trails or trail systems.

(iv) Adjacent to existing stands of significant trees on adjacent property boundaries.

(v) Adjacent to existing stormwater retention systems.

(vi) Adjacent to significant wildlife habitat areas.

(vii) Adjacent to contrasting land uses where establishing a tree buffer will enhance both properties and reduce potential impacts of dissimilar land uses.

(6) Maintenance of Tree Tracts. All tree tracts required under this code shall require a permanent maintenance agreement to be approved by the City on forms provided by the Director, which designates the private homeowners association, property owner association, or other private entity responsible for said maintenance of trees. All tree tracts shall provide a guarantee for reasonable accessibility for future tree maintenance.

(7) Pacific Northwest Native Trees Required. Any tree(s) to be planted as part of the requirements of this chapter to fulfill tree tract, tree conservation easement, tree preservation or tree enhancement plan standards for residential, commercial or industrial property, when sufficient trees do not exist on site, shall be Pacific Northwest native trees included on the City-published list; however, the Director may approve climate-appropriate, drought-tolerant alternatives if they demonstrate there is a reason not to use native trees. In addition, they shall be at least two-inch caliper and shall contain a mix of at least 60 percent coniferous trees.

(8) Three-Year Survivability. Any original or replanted trees required under a tree tract requirement, tree conservation easement or tree enhancement plan as part of the provisions of this chapter shall survive at a rate of 90 percent of the required trees for at least three years from either the date of issuance of the freestanding tree removal permit or tree clearing permit, the date of acceptance of final construction in a subdivision plat, the date of final occupancy for any development or redevelopment permit, or the date of final occupancy for any building permit, whichever is applicable. Required trees that do not meet the 90 percent survival rate for three years shall be replanted at the property owner expense. Such replanted trees shall then be required to again survive for three years or be replanted at the owner expense. A financial guarantee for all planting or replanting of required trees under this chapter shall be required on forms acceptable to the City as prescribed in CMC 18.45.120(1). Tree planting or replanting shall occur between October 1st and May 1st of each year, unless written approval is granted by the Director and reasonable provisions are made for irrigation and survivability of replanted trees. Tree planting may be deferred to the next appropriate planting season upon written request and approval by the Director. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.100 Tree maintenance standards and best pruning practices.

The Director shall prepare and distribute educational materials describing any required, recommended, or accepted tree maintenance and tree care standards for any tree tracts, preservation or enhancement trees, or replacement trees required under this chapter and any best pruning practices, policies, techniques, and procedures for any trees required under this chapter. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.110 Tree preservation modification and departure options.

(1) The purpose of this section is to provide an opportunity for departure from or modification of the prescribed tree tract standards or tree enhancement plans under a major tree clearing permit when the specific prescriptive standards of the code are difficult to meet, while encouraging creative or unique design of viable tree stands in the preservation of trees and tree tracts on all regulated sites. The Director shall have authority, consistent with the special conditions stated herein, to modify specific requirements and/or impose alternative standards and requirements in unique or special circumstances to assure the fulfillment of the stated purpose of this chapter and to allow for flexibility and creative design of viable tree stands in preservation of significant trees. Any modification or departure cannot reduce the requirements of Chapter 18.65 or 16.05 CMC.

(2) In order to grant a specific modification or departure from prescribed requirements for tree preservation or tree tracts, an applicant, through an alternative tree preservation and mitigation plan, must: (a) demonstrate reasonable efforts to save as many trees as possible, (b) submit a tree preservation and mitigation plan, prepared by a qualified arborist, that adequately mitigates for the loss of trees from proposed development, and (c) indicate how the alternative tree preservation and mitigation plan equally or better meets the intent and purpose of this chapter and its tree preservation goals. Alternative options for preservation and mitigation of trees shall include a combination of new tree planting and preservation of a reasonable number of existing significant trees on site, when feasible.

(3) A departure or modification of the prescriptive standards for tree preservation or tree tracts shall be allowed when existing regulations seriously restrict development of the site, in the opinion of the Director, and only if tree tracts detract from the site ability to accomplish at least two of the following special site conditions:

(a) The ability to preserve natural or native plant areas;

(b) The ability to preserve unique wildlife habitat;

(c) The ability to preserve large numbers of significant, landmark, or heritage trees;

(d) Opportunities to support the value and functions of critical areas or critical area buffers;

(e) Instances where insufficient significant trees exist on a site that has a unique size, shape or topography;

(f) Instances where the only significant trees are isolated, scattered throughout a site, and/or not able to be concentrated in viable tree tracts;

(g) A site must comply with special vegetation or view easements or corridors; or

(h) Instances where provision of required infrastructure and public safety access requires removal of significant trees. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.120 Performance guarantees, liability, insurance and licensing.

(1) Performance Guarantees.

(a) Prior to the issuance of a major tree clearing permit pursuant to CMC 18.45.060, the applicant shall post with the City a form of performance guarantee/financial security, in the amount of 150 percent of the estimated cost of replacing and planting trees consistent with the tree preservation requirements, but in any event not less than $3,000. Said financial security shall be executed by the owner and/or applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Washington as a surety. All guarantees shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall include penalty provisions consistent with this chapter for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit.

(b) The City shall withhold issuance of a major tree clearing permit until the required performance guarantee/financial security is approved by the City Attorney and filed with the City. The City may enforce said guarantees according to their terms and pursuant to any and all legal and equitable remedies.

(c) The performance guarantee shall be released pursuant to a prescribed timeline in the agreement to assure survival of any trees preserved or replanted.

(2) Liability. The owner of private property for which a major tree clearing permit application is submitted may be required to enter into a hold harmless/indemnification agreement and covenant not to sue approved by the City and recorded with King County prior to the issuance of the permit. Said agreements shall be negotiated and in a form approved by the City Attorney, and shall run with the land and be binding on the applicant and his/her successors, heirs and assigns for such period of time as shall be determined appropriate by the City. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe and healthy condition the trees upon their property.

(3) Insurance. Prior to issuing a permit or approving an application, the City may require the applicant to provide a certificate of general liability insurance, with limits of liability in an amount acceptable to the City Attorney, from an insurance company authorized to do business in Washington State, insuring against injury to persons and damage to property, and may require that the City be named as an additional insured.

(4) Licensing. Any person, individual, or corporation, unless an employee or direct agent operating under authority of the City, involved in any tree removal, tree clearing, or tree replanting as part of tree preservation or enhancement related to this chapter, shall first have obtained a valid and current business license from the City of Covington. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.130 Enforcement, violations and penalties.

(1) Enforcement, Interpretation and Administration. It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce and interpret the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall have authority to interpret the intent, purpose, provisions, conditions, and standards contained herein; to issue permits and impose conditions on such permits; to enforce the provisions and requirements of this chapter; to establish administrative procedures and guidelines necessary to administer the provisions of this chapter; to conduct inspections; and to prepare the forms necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

(2) Authorized Actions. In addition to other remedies, the City may bring injunctive, declaratory or other actions to enforce this chapter.

(3) Stop Work Orders/Permit Revocation. The Director may suspend work or revoke a permit, as appropriate, if it is found that:

(a) Land clearing or tree removal is not authorized by a valid permit;

(b) Inaccurate information was used to obtain a permit;

(c) The permittee is not complying with any terms of the permit or approved plans;

(d) Work, in the Director’s judgment, that is an imminent danger to property or public safety, is adversely affecting or about to adversely affect adjacent property or rights-of-way, a drainage way, watercourse, environmentally critical area, or stormwater facility, or is otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare;

(e) Adverse weather is causing significant problems on or off site;

(f) Any land clearing or tree removal is being done prior to or outside of other required land use, engineering, building, or site development permits; or

(g) The required project surety has been expended to the point that it no longer provides assurance of the completion of the project in compliance with the terms of the permit.

The Director may issue the permittee/violator a written stop work order specifying the nature of the violation which must be remedied prior to resuming any work on the project. If the permittee does not comply with the order within the time specified, the Director may enter the project site and perform the required work. All costs incurred by the City in performing such work shall be drawn against any financial guarantee posted by the permittee to ensure the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. In the absence of sufficient financial guarantee or surety, the City may place a lien against the property in the amount of funds expended to perform the required work and any corrective action.

(4) Mitigation and Restoration Plan. Violators of this chapter or a permit issued hereunder shall be responsible for restoring unlawfully damaged areas in conformance with a plan, approved by the Director, which provides for mitigation, repair of any tree damage, and restoration of the site, and which results in a site condition that, to the greatest extent practical, equals the site condition that would have existed in the absence of the violation(s). Violators shall be liable for environmental damage caused thereby and shall be required to mitigate such damage as follows:

(a) Mitigation and Assessment of Tree Value.

(i) In assessing the environmental damage resulting from a violation of this chapter, the Director shall determine the amount and value of the trees and/or ground cover improperly removed or damaged, the cost of replacing said trees and vegetation, and the extent and value of any other environmental damage occasioned by any violation. To determine those values, the Director shall utilize the recommendations of the International Society of Arboriculture.

(ii) In assessing the environmental damage resulting from a violation of this chapter, a qualified arborist shall prepare and submit to the Director a report describing the likely condition of the site had the land clearing activities been conducted in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(iii) The Director may also estimate the probable worth of trees and/or ground cover removed by analyzing the best case growing capability of the site, taking into consideration the soil conditions, the health of surrounding tree stands and the type of species believed to have been removed, or whatever resources are available to determine environmental damage.

(iv) Under no circumstances shall environmental damage be less than cost of planting and maintenance to comply with the minimum tree preservation or replanting requirements.

(b) Restoration and Timely Compliance.

(i) When the Director has determined the value of the environmental damage by a violation of this chapter, the Director shall have a comprehensive plan prepared for the restoration of the site which shall include a time schedule for compliance. The cost of preparing such plan shall be assessed against the violator. Said plan shall provide for the rehabilitation of the site and for the installation of new trees and/or ground cover whose value is commensurate to the value of the environmental damage.

(ii) If the Director determines that the cost of restoring the site is less than the value of environmental damage occasioned to the site, then the City may utilize said funds for planting trees, shrubs or other native vegetation in other areas of the City.

(iii) Within the time established in the plan for completion of the mitigation, the applicant and/or property owner shall complete all restoration required therein, including maintenance of trees for three years.

(iv) In the event the violator does not timely implement the restoration plan, the City shall implement the plan by utilizing City employees or by employing a private contractor. Upon completion of said work, the costs thereof shall be due and owing to the City from the violator and the surety, if any, as a joint and separate liability. In addition, the City may seek restitution from the violator through liens or any other available legal means. The violator and the surety shall be jointly and severally responsible for any restoration costs and attorneys’ fees incurred by the City.

(5) Prohibition of Further Approvals. The City shall not accept, process, or approve any application for a subdivision or any other land use, building or development permit, or issue a certificate of occupancy for property on which a violation of this chapter has occurred until the violation is cured by restoration or other means accepted by the Director and by payment of any penalty imposed for the violation.

(6) Penalties.

(a) Initial Violation – Civil Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any term or provision of this chapter or of an exemption, a minor tree removal, or major tree removal permit issued under this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction violation. Each day the violations are ongoing without remedy shall be a separate infraction. Civil infraction violations of this chapter shall be assessed a monetary penalty of $300.00 per inch of DBH of any significant tree, $600.00 per inch of DBH of any landmark tree, or $900.00 per inch of DBH of any heritage tree removed or damaged in violation of this chapter. If the DBH cannot be measured, the monetary penalty shall be assessed per inch based on the diameter of the remaining tree stump. Removal of any tree in violation of this chapter shall require replacement planting as described in CMC 18.45.080. All civil infraction violations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(b) Subsequent Violation – Criminal Penalties. Any person who engages and/or causes another to engage in a subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor, and if found guilty, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate violation and each day that passes before such violation is resolved shall be considered a separate criminal misdemeanor offense. In the event of any subsequent violation within five years of the first criminal violation, such violation shall constitute a gross misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 365 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Removal of any tree in violation of this chapter shall require replacement planting as described in CMC 18.45.080. All criminal infraction violations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 9.05 CMC.

(c) Revocation of Business License and Prohibition of Future Tree Removal or Tree Clearing Activity. Any person who commits, participates in, assists or maintains such violation of this chapter may have their Covington business license revoked for one year and may be prohibited from conducting business within the City.

(7) Public Nuisance. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or a violation of a permit issued hereunder is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated through proceeding for injunctive or similar relief in superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.140 Appeals.

(1) Minor Tree Removal Permits (Type I Decision). Minor tree removal permits are Type I decisions with no administrative appeal as specified in Chapter 14.30 CMC.

(2) Major Tree Clearing Permits (Type II Decision). Major tree clearing permits are Type II decisions and may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner as specified in Chapters 2.25 and 14.45 CMC.

(3) Appeal of Director Interpretation and Determination of This chapter. The Director determination or interpretation while administering or enforcing any and all provisions of this chapter, including issuance, conditioning or denial of any permit, or tree preservation plan, or tree enhancement plan, may be appealed to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with Chapters 2.25 and 14.45 CMC.

(4) Hearing Examiner Modification of Director Decision. The City Hearing Examiner may modify or amend the Director determination or interpretation based on the following criteria:

(a) Whether the violation involved tree removal for monetary gain;

(b) Whether the appellant has previously violated or intentionally violated provisions of this chapter;

(c) Whether the Director determination or interpretation substantially exceeds or understates the actual intent and purpose of this chapter; or

(d) Whether the violation was intended or was in reckless disregard of provisions of this chapter.

(5) Appeals Involving Determination of Environmental Damages. For any appeals involving determination of environmental damage as outlined in CMC 18.45.130(4)(a), the Hearing Examiner shall not reduce the Director valuation of any environmental damage if said amount does not exceed the actual cost of restoring the site pursuant to said restoration plan. If an appeal involves determination of environmental damages as outlined in CMC 18.45.130(4)(a), and if the Hearing Examiner determines that the Director valuation of environmental damage should be reduced, then the Examiner shall compute the amount of said reduction based upon the following factors:

(a) Whether the appellant voluntarily cooperated with the City efforts to view and restore the site;

(b) Whether the appellant demonstrated due diligence and/or substantial progress in implementing the site restoration plan; and

(c) Whether the appellant has presented a genuine issue pertaining to the interpretation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-09 § 12; Ord. 04-08 § 2)


18.45.150 Severability.

If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-20 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 04-08 § 2)


Chapter 18.47 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF LANDMARKS, LANDMARK SITES AND DISTRICTS

Sections:

18.47.010    Protection and preservation of landmarks, landmark sites and districts.

18.47.020    Repealed.

18.47.030    Repealed.

18.47.040    Repealed.

18.47.050    Repealed.

18.47.060    Repealed.

18.47.070    Repealed.

18.47.080    Repealed.

18.47.090    Repealed.

18.47.100    Repealed.

18.47.110    Repealed.

18.47.120    Repealed.

18.47.130    Repealed.

18.47.140    Repealed.


18.47.010 Protection and preservation of landmarks, landmark sites and districts. 

The following sections of King County Code Chapter 20.62 are adopted by reference, as amended below, for the protection and preservation of landmarks, landmark sites and districts within the City of Covington:

(1) K.C.C. 20.62.020 – Definitions, except as follows:

(a) Paragraph H is changed to read:

“Director” means the Director of the City of Covington Department of Community Development or their designee.

(b) Add paragraph:

Z. “Council” is the City of Covington City Council.

(2) K.C.C. 20.62.040 – Designation Criteria, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “City of Covington.”

(3) K.C.C. 20.62.050 – Nomination Procedure, except that an additional requirement that all nominations must have the prior written consent of the property owner(s) is added.

(4) K.C.C. 20.62.070 – Designation Procedure, except all references to “King County” are changed to read “City of Covington.”

(5) K.C.C. 20.62.080 – Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure, except the last sentence of paragraph A thereof.

(6) K.C.C. 20.62.100 – Evaluation of Economic Impact.

(7) K.C.C. 20.62.110 – Appeal Procedure, except that appeals shall be filed with the City of Covington City Clerk for decision by the Covington Hearing Examiner.

(8) K.C.C. 20.62.130 – Penalty for Violation of Section 20.62.080 (subsection (5) of this section).

(9) K.C.C. 20.62.140 – Special Valuation for Historic Properties, except that the reference to “King County” in subsection C is changed to “City of Covington.”

(10) Development proposals and permit applications for changes to landmark properties shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to subsection (5) of this section. Upon receipt of an application for a development proposal or permit which affects a City of Covington landmark or an historic resource that has received a preliminary determination of significance as defined in subsection (1) of this section, the application circulated to the King County Historic Preservation Officer shall be deemed an application for a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to subsection (5) of this section if accompanied by the additional information required to apply for such certificate. (Ord. 14-17 § 4)


18.47.020 Definitions. 

Repealed by Ord. 16-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.020). Formerly 14.40.020)


18.47.030 Landmarks and Heritage Commission created – Membership and organization. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.030). Formerly 14.40.030)


18.47.040 Designation criteria. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.040). Formerly 14.40.040)


18.47.050 Nomination procedure. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.050). Formerly 14.40.050)


18.47.060 Designation procedure. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.070). Formerly 14.40.060)


18.47.070 Certificate of appropriateness procedure. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.080). Formerly 14.40.070)


18.47.080 Evaluation of economic impact. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.100). Formerly 14.40.080)


18.47.090 Appeal procedure. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.110). Formerly 14.40.090)


18.47.100 Funding. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.120). Formerly 14.40.100)


18.47.110 Penalty for violation of CMC 18.47.070.

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.130). Formerly 14.40.110)


18.47.120 Special valuation for historic properties. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.140). Formerly 14.40.120)


18.47.130 Historic resources – Review process. 

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.150). Formerly 14.40.130)


18.47.140 Administrative rules.

Repealed by Ord. 14-17. (Ord. 20-07 § 61; Ord. 41-02 § 2 (20.62.160). Formerly 14.40.140)


Chapter 18.50 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – PARKING AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

18.50.010    Purpose.

18.50.020    Authority and application.

18.50.030    Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

18.50.040    Shared parking requirements.

18.50.050    Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRFs) and senior citizen assisted housing.

18.50.060    Parking for the disabled.

18.50.070    Loading space requirements.

18.50.080    Stacking spaces and restrictions for drive-through facilities.

18.50.090    Transit and rideshare provisions.

18.50.100    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

18.50.110    Off-street parking plan design standards.

18.50.120    Off-street parking construction standards.

18.50.130    Compact car allowance requirements.

18.50.140    Internal circulation street standards.

18.50.150    Trail improvements and connections.

18.50.160    Electric vehicle charging station requirements – Downtown zones. 

18.50.170    Electric vehicle charging station requirements – R-18, MR, NC, CC, RCMU, and I zones.

18.50.180    Electric vehicle charging station design standards.

18.50.190    Recreational vehicles – Parking, storage, and habitation.


18.50.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses allowed in this title; to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, rideshare and bicycles; and to increase pedestrian mobility in urban areas by:

(1) Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that assure safe, convenient and adequately sized parking facilities within activity centers;

(2) Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements;

(3) Providing for parking and storage of bicycles;

(4) Providing safe direct pedestrian access from public rights-of-way to structures and between developments;

(5) Requiring uses which attract large numbers of employees or customers to provide transit stops; and

(6) Ensure compliance with the Covington design manual. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.010))


18.50.020 Authority and application. 

(1) Before an occupancy permit may be granted for any new or enlarged building or for a change of use in any existing building, the use shall be required to meet the provisions of this chapter. Downtown zones shall be subject to the parking access and circulation standards in accordance with Chapter 18.31 CMC unless otherwise specified by Chapter 18.31 CMC.

(2) If this chapter does not specify a parking requirement for a land use, the Director shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of anticipated parking demand. Transportation demand management actions taken at the site shall be considered in determining anticipated demand. In the study the applicant shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, or an equally qualified individual as authorized by the Director.

(3) If the required amount of off-street parking has been proposed to be provided off-site, the applicant shall provide written contracts with affected landowners showing that required off-street parking shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The contracts shall be reviewed by the Director for compliance with this chapter, and if approved, the contracts shall be recorded with the County Records and Elections Division as a deed restriction on the title to all applicable properties. These deed restrictions may not be revoked or modified without authorization by the Director. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.020))


18.50.030 Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

(1) Except as modified in CMC 18.50.070(2) and (3), off-street parking areas shall contain at a minimum the number of parking spaces as stipulated in the following table. Off-street parking ratios expressed as a number of spaces per square feet mean the usable or net square footage of floor area, exclusive of nonpublic areas. Nonpublic areas include but are not limited to building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets or restrooms. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of one-half or greater rounding up and fractions below one-half rounding down.

(2) Minimum off-street parking requirements for the downtown zones are subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.31 CMC.

	Land Use	Minimum Parking Spaces Required

	Residential (CMC 18.25.030):

	Single detached/townhouse	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Apartment:	 

	Studio units (8)	1.2 per dwelling unit

	One-bedroom units (8)	1.5 per dwelling unit

	Two-bedroom units (8)	1.7 per dwelling unit

	Three-bedroom units or larger	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Mobile home park	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Senior citizen assisted	1 per 2 dwelling or sleeping units

	Community residential facilities	1 per two bedrooms

	Dormitory, including religious	1 per two bedrooms

	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	1 per guest room, plus 2 per facility

	Recreation/Cultural (CMC 18.25.040):

	Recreation/culture uses	1 per 400 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Bowling center	5 per lane

	Golf course	3 per hole, plus 1 per 300 square feet of club house facilities

	Tennis club	4 per tennis court plus 1 per 300 square feet of clubhouse facility

	Golf driving range	1 per tee

	Park/playfield	Director decision

	Theater	1 per 3 fixed seats

	Conference center	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet used for assembly purposes without fixed seats, or 1 per bedroom, whichever results in the greater number of spaces

	General Services (CMC 18.25.050):

	General services uses (9)	1 per 400 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Funeral home/crematory	1 per 50 square feet of chapel area

	Day care I	2 per facility

	Day care II	2 per facility, plus 1 space for each 20 children

	Church, synagogue, temple	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes

	Outpatient and veterinary clinic offices	1 per 400 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms

	Nursing and personal care facilities	1 per 4 beds

	Hospital	1 per bed

	Elementary schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	Secondary schools:	 

	Middle/junior high schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	High schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per 10 students

	High schools with stadiums	Greater of 1 per classroom plus 1 per 10 students, or 1 per 3 fixed seats in stadium

	Vocational schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per five students

	Specialized instruction schools	1 per classroom, plus 1 per two students

	Artist studios	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of area used for studios

	Government/Business Services (CMC 18.25.060):

	Government/business services uses	1 per 400 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Public agency yard	1 per 400 square feet of offices, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor storage or repair areas

	Public agency archives	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area, plus 1 per 50 square feet of waiting/reviewing areas

	Courts	3 per courtroom, plus 1 per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas

	Police facility	Director decision

	Fire facility	Director decision

	Construction and trade	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 1 per 3,000 square feet of storage area

	Warehousing and storage	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area

	Self-service storage	1 per 3,500 square feet of storage area, plus 2 for any resident Director’s unit

	Outdoor advertising services	1 per 400 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area

	Heavy equipment repair	1 per 400 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor repair areas

	Office	1 per 400 square feet

	Retail/Wholesale (CMC 18.25.070):

	Retail trade uses (9)	1 per 400 square feet

	Exceptions:	 

	Farmers’ and public markets	2 per vendor space

	Food stores, less than 15,000 square feet (9)	3 plus 1 per 400 square feet

	Gasoline service stations without grocery	3 per facility, plus 1 per service bay

	Gasoline service stations with grocery, no service bays	1 per facility, plus 1 per 400 square feet of store

	Restaurants	1 per 75 square feet in dining or lounge areas

	Wholesale trade uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet

	Retail and wholesale trade mixed-use	1 per 400 square feet

	Manufacturing (CMC 18.25.080):

	Manufacturing uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet

	Winery/brewery (9)	0.9 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 50 square feet of tasting area

	Resources (CMC 18.25.090):

	Resource uses	Director decision

	Regional (CMC 18.25.100):

	Regional uses	Director decision

(3) An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by providing that parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement. In such cases, the Director may approve a reduction of up to 50 percent of the minimum required number of spaces.

(4) When the City has received a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitations of the shell permit. When the range of possible uses results in different parking requirements, the Director will establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses.

(5) Where other provisions of this code stipulate maximum parking allowed or reduced minimum parking requirements, those provisions shall apply.

(6) In any development required to provide six or more parking spaces, bicycle parking shall be provided. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified.

(a) Off-street parking areas shall contain at least one bicycle parking space for every 12 spaces required for motor vehicles except as follows:

(i) The Director may reduce bike rack parking facilities for patrons when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location.

(ii) The Director may require additional spaces when it is determined that the use or its location will generate a high volume of bicycle activity. Such a determination will include but not be limited to the following uses:

(A) Park/playfield;

(B) Library/museum/arboretum;

(C) Elementary/secondary school;

(D) Sports club; or

(E) Retail business (when located along a developed bicycle trail or designated bicycle route).

(b) Bicycle facilities for patrons shall be located within 50 feet of the building entrance and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement.

(c) All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.

(d) When more than 10 people are employed on site, enclosed locker-type parking facilities for employees shall be provided. The Director shall allocate the required number of parking spaces between bike rack parking and enclosed locker-type parking facilities.

(e) One indoor bicycle storage space shall be provided for every two dwelling units in townhouse and apartment residential uses, unless individual garages are provided for every unit. The Director may reduce the number of bike rack parking spaces if indoor storage facilities are available to all residents.

(7) All developments that require off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of the electric vehicle charging station requirements in CMC 18.50.160 through 18.50.180.

(8) In the MR and RCMU zones, the following standards shall apply to residential units in a mixed-use or multifamily building:

(a) Studio and one-bedroom units: 1.0 per dwelling unit.

(b) Two-bedroom units: 1.5 per dwelling unit.

(c) Three-bedroom units: 2.0 per dwelling unit.

(d) One visitor space for every 10 dwelling units rounded upward to the nearest multiple of 10.

(e) On-street parking on streets along the lot frontage can be used to meet a portion of the required number of parking spaces with an approved parking study.

(9) In the MR and RCMU zones, on-street parking on streets adjacent to the lot frontage can be used to meet all or a portion of the required number of parking spaces with an approved parking study. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 09-09 § 6; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.030))


18.50.040 Shared parking requirements.

The amount of off-street parking required by CMC 18.50.030 may be reduced by an amount determined by the Director when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

(1) The total parking area exceeds 8,000 square feet; 

(2) The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use involved is more than 800 feet from the most remote shared facility; 

(3) The amount of the reduction shall not exceed 20 percent for each use, unless: 

(a) The normal hours of operation for each use are separated by at least one hour; or 

(b) A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer and submitted by the applicant documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict and those uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized; 

(c) The Director will determine the amount of reduction subject to subsection (4) of this section;

(4) The total number of parking spaces in the common parking facility is not less than the minimum required spaces for any single use;

(5) A covenant or other contract for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the Director. This covenant or contract must be recorded with King County Records and Elections Division as a deed restriction on both properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the Director; and 

(6) If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the Director or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless a satisfactory alternative remedy is approved by the Director. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.040))


18.50.050 Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRFs) and senior citizen assisted housing. 

(1) The minimum requirement of one off-street parking space per two bedrooms for CRFs and one off-street parking space per two senior citizen assisted housing units may be reduced by up to 50 percent, as determined by the Director based on the following considerations:

(a) Availability of private, convenient transportation services to meet the needs of the CRF residents;

(b) Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation; and

(c) Pedestrian access to health, medical, and shopping facilities.

(2) If a CRF or senior citizen assisted housing is no longer used for such purposes, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required in compliance with this chapter prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.050))


18.50.060 Parking for the disabled. 

Off-street parking and access for physically disabled persons shall be provided in accordance with of the regulations adopted pursuant to Chapter 19.27 RCW, State Building Code, and Chapter 70.92 RCW, Public Buildings – Provisions for Aged and Disabled. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.060))


18.50.070 Loading space requirements.

(1) Every nonresidential building engaged in retail, wholesale, manufacturing or storage activities, excluding self-service storage facilities, shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area (square feet)	Required Number of Loading Spaces

	10,000 to 16,000 	1 

	16,001 to 40,000	2

	40,001 to 64,000	3

	64,001 to 96,000	4 

	96,001 to 128,000 	5

	128,001 to 160,000 	6

	160,001 to 196,000 	7

	For each additional 36,000 	1 additional

(2) Every building engaged in hotel, office building, restaurant, hospital, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, sports arena/stadium or other similar use shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below:

	Gross Floor Area (square feet)	Required Number of Loading Spaces 

	40,000 to 60,000	1

	60,001 to 160,000	2

	160,001 to 264,000	3

	264,001 to 388,000	4

	388,001 to 520,000	5

	520,001 to 652,000	6

	652,001 to 784,000	7

	784,001 to 920,000	8

	For each additional 140,000	1 additional

(3) Each loading space required by this section shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, 30 feet long, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any public right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces. All loading areas shall be screened from public view and oriented away from any public right-of-way when possible. 

(4) Any loading space located within 100 feet of areas zoned for residential use shall be screened and operated as necessary to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, beams, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation.

(5) Multi-story self-service storage facilities shall provide two loading spaces, and single story facilities one loading space, adjacent to each building entrance that provides common access to interior storage units. Each loading berth shall measure not less than 25 feet by 12 feet with an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Any floor area additions or structural alterations to a building shall be required to provide loading space or spaces as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.070))


18.50.080 Stacking spaces and restrictions for drive-through facilities. 

(1) A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to a service window of a drive-through facility. A stacking space shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other parking space areas. Stacking spaces for drive-through or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces.

(2) Uses providing drive-up or drive-through services shall provide vehicle stacking spaces as follows:

(a) For each drive-through lane of a bank/financial institution, business service, or other drive-through use not listed, a minimum of five stacking spaces shall be provided; and 

(b) For each drive-through lane of a restaurant, a minimum of seven stacking spaces shall be provided. 

(3) Restrictions on the Location of Drive-Through Facilities.

(a) In the commercial zones, drive-up windows shall not face a public right-of-way.

(b) Stacking spaces for an approved drive-up window shall be screened from public view through the use of architectural or structural barriers, beams, walls, or landscape material.

(c) In the neighborhood commercial zone, drive-up windows are limited to espresso and pharmacy uses. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.080))




18.50.090 Transit and rideshare provisions. 

(1) All land uses listed in CMC 18.25.060 (government/business services) and in CMC 18.25.080 (manufacturing), hospitals, high schools, vocational schools, universities and specialized instruction schools shall be required to reserve one parking space of every 20 required spaces for rideshare parking as follows: 

(a) The parking spaces shall be located closer to the primary employee entrance than any other employee parking except disabled;

(b) Reserved areas shall have markings and signs indicating that the space is reserved; and

(c) Parking in reserved areas shall be limited to vanpools and carpools established through rideshare programs by public agencies and to vehicles meeting minimum rideshare qualifications set by the employer; 

(2) The Director may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces when one or more scheduled transit routes provide service within 660 feet of the site. The amount of reduction shall be based on the number of scheduled transit runs between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. each business day up to a maximum reduction as follows: 

(a) Four percent for each run serving land uses for government/business services and manufacturing up to a maximum of 40 percent; and 

(b) Two percent for each run serving land uses for recreation/culture, general services and retail/wholesale up to a maximum of 20 percent; and 

(3) All uses which are located on an existing transit route and are required under the computation for required off-street parking spaces in CMC 18.50.030(1) to provide more than 200 parking spaces may be required to provide transit shelters, bus turnout lanes or other transit improvements as a condition of permit approval. Uses which reduce required parking under subsection (2) of this section shall provide transit shelters if transit routes adjoin the site. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.090))


18.50.100 Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access. 

(1) Pedestrian and bicycle parking standards for the downtown zones are provided in Chapter 18.31 CMC.

(2) All permitted nonresidential uses in the community and neighborhood commercial zones shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided:

(a) Approximately every 300 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways; and 

(b) At all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between developments.

(3) Residential Uses. 

(a) All permitted residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided:

(i) Approximately every 800 to 1,000 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways; and 

(ii) At all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit and school bus stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between sites.

(b) Residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide for nonmotorized circulation between cul-de-sacs or groups of buildings to allow pedestrian and bicycle access within and through the development to adjacent activity centers, parks, common tracts, dedicated open space intended for active recreation, schools or other public facilities, transit and school bus stops, and public streets.

(c) Access shall only be required to school bus stops that are within or adjacent to a proposed residential use of five or more dwelling units and that are identified by the affected school district in response to a notice of application. In order to allow school districts to identify school bus stops, the Department shall send a notice of application to affected school districts on all applications for residential uses of five or more dwelling units.


[IMAGE]


Walkways Running Parallel to Parking

(4) Walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access point onto the site, or any parking space, is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination and as follows:

(a) All developments which contain more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings; 

(b) All nonresidential buildings set back from the public right-of-way shall provide for direct pedestrian access from the building to buildings on adjacent lots; and 

(c) Walkways across parking areas shall be located as follows:

(i) Walkways running parallel to the parking rows shall be provided for every six rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways; and

(ii) Walkways running perpendicular to the parking rows shall be no further than 20 parking spaces. Landscaping, barriers or other means shall be provided between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways;


[IMAGE]


Walkways Running Perpendicular to Parking

(5) Pedestrian and bicycle access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic;

(b) Access and walkways shall be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed width and meet the surfacing standards of the City of Covington road standards for walkways or sidewalks and the provisions of the design manual; 

(c) The minimum standard for walkways required to be accessible for persons with disabilities shall be designed and constructed to comply with the current State Building Code regulations for barrier-free accessibility; 

(d) A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles.

(6) Blocks in excess of 460 feet shall be provided with a crosswalk at the approximate midpoint of the block. 

(7) The Director may waive or modify the requirements of this section when:

(a) The standards conflict with specific design requirements for development in the downtown zone, as provided in Chapter 18.31 CMC;

(b) Existing or proposed improvements would create an unsafe condition or security concern;

(c) There are topographical constraints, or existing or required structures effectively block access;

(d) The land use would not generate the need for pedestrian or bicycle access; or

(e) The public is not allowed access to the subject land use. 

The Director’s waiver may not be used to modify or waive the requirements of this section relating to sidewalks and safe walking conditions for students. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.100))




18.50.110 Off-street parking plan design standards.

(1) Off-street parking areas shall not be located more than 600 feet from the building they are required to serve, unless approved by the Director, for all uses except those specified as follows; where an off-street parking area does not abut the building it serves, the required maximum distance shall be measured from the nearest building entrance that the parking area serves:

(a) For all single detached dwellings, the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve;

(b) For all other residential dwellings, at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the building or building(s) they are required to serve;

(c) For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones, the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve and at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the nearest building entrance they are required to serve;

(d) In designated activity, community business and neighborhood business centers, parking lots shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings. Relief from this subsection (1)(d) may be granted by the Director only if the applicant can demonstrate that there is no practical site design to meet this requirement. The Director may allow only the number of parking spaces that cannot be accommodated to the rear or sides of buildings to be located to the front of buildings;

(e) Parking lots shall be so arranged as to permit the internal circulation of vehicles between parking aisles without re-entering adjoining public streets;

(f) Parking for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with CMC 18.50.060; and

(g) In the MR and RCMU zones, off-street surface parking shall be separated from a street by a building except when:

(i) Parking is located adjacent to a building facade that is not oriented to a street frontage; or

(ii) Parking is located in the driveway of a single-family detached residence or townhouse; or

(iii) Parking is located in a park; or

(iv) Parking is located along up to 20 percent of the applicable street frontage and is screened by landscaping or other physical barrier, such as a berm, wall or sight-obscuring fence.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(2) The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on the table in this subsection. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the Director. Regardless of the parking angle, one-way aisles shall be at least 10 feet wide, and two-way aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide. If dead end aisles are used in the parking layout, they shall be constructed as two-way aisles. Parking plans for angle parking shall use space widths no less than eight feet six inches for a standard parking space design and eight feet for a compact car parking space design.

Minimum Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions* 

	A	B	C	D	E	F

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle Width	Unit Depth 

	1-Way	2-Way 	1-Way	2-Way

	0	8.0*

Min. 8.5

Desired 9.0	20.0* 

22.5

22.5	8.0

8.5 

9.0	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

29.0

30.0	**

37.0

38.0

	30	8.0*

Min. 8.5

Desired 9.0	16.0*

17.0

18.0	15.0

16.5 

17.0	10.0

10.0

10.0	20.0 

20.0 

20.0	**

42.0

44.0 	**

53.0

54.0

	45	8.0*

Min. 8.5

Desired 9.0	11.5*

12.0

12.5	17.0*	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

50.0

51.0 	**

58.0

59.0

	60	8.0*

Min. 8.5

Desired 9.0	9.6*

10.0

10.5	18.0

20.0

21.0	18.0

18.0

18.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	** 

58.0

60.0	**

60.0

62.0

	90	8.0*

Min. 8.5

Desired 9.0	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

18.0

18.0	24.0

24.0

23.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	** 

60.0 

60.0 	** 

60.0 

60.0 

*     For compact stalls only. 

**     Variable with compact and standard combinations.


[IMAGE]


(3) Any parking spaces abutting a required landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe. 

(4) The parking space depth may be reduced if vehicles overhang a walkway or landscaping under the following conditions:

(a) Wheel stops or curbs are installed; 

(b) The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 48 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians;

(c) The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of 18 inches; and

(d) Landscaping is designed in accordance with CMC 18.40.080(5).

(5) Driveways providing ingress and egress between off-street parking areas and abutting streets shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12.60 CMC, City of Covington Street Standards. Driveways for single detached dwellings, no more than 20 feet in width, may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 15 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is eliminated by the driveway. Joint use driveways may be located within required landscaping or setback areas. Driveways for all other developments may cross or be located within required setbacks or landscaped areas to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, if no more than 10 percent of the required landscaping is displaced by the driveway and the driveway is located no closer than five feet from any property line except where intersecting the street. 

(6) Parking spaces required under this title shall be located as follows:

(a) For single detached dwelling units the required parking spaces shall be outside of any required setbacks or landscaping, but driveways crossing setbacks and required landscaping may be used for parking. However, if the driveway is a joint use driveway, no vehicle parked on the driveway shall obstruct any joint user’s access to the driveway or parking spaces;

(b) For all other developments parking spaces may be permitted by the Director in setback areas in accordance with an approved landscape plan; and

(c) For nonresidential uses in residential zones, parking is permitted in setback areas in accordance with CMC 18.30.250.

(7) Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets.

(8) Tandem or end-to-end parking is allowed in residential developments. Apartment or townhouse developments may have tandem parking areas for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas. 

(9) All vehicle parking and storage for single detached dwellings must be in a garage, carport or on an approved impervious surface, as defined in CMC 18.20.625. Any impervious surface used for vehicle parking or storage must have direct and unobstructed driveway access.

(10) Per each single-family dwelling unit, the total number of vehicles parked or stored outside of a permanent fully enclosed building or carport, regardless of zone, shall not exceed six vehicles on lots 12,500 square feet or less and eight vehicles on lots greater than 12,500 square feet, including recreational vehicles, boats and trailers. In no case shall vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats and trailers be parked between the single-family dwelling unit and the street unless located on approved impervious surface. For properties with a legally established accessory dwelling unit an additional vehicle is allowed.

(11) Vanpool or carpool parking areas shall meet the following minimum design standards:

(a) A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet three inches shall be provided to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool or carpool parking spaces are located in a parking structure; and 

(b) A minimum turning radius of 26 feet four inches with a minimum turning diameter, curb to curb, of 52 feet five inches shall be provided from parking aisles to adjacent carpool or vanpool parking spaces.

(12) Direct access from the street right-of-way to off-street parking areas shall be subject to CMC 18.75.070.

(13) No dead end alley may provide access to more than eight off-street parking spaces. (Ord. 10-19 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.110))


18.50.120 Off-street parking construction standards. 

(1) Off-street parking areas shall have dust-free, all-weather surfacing and lighting. Typical approved sections are illustrated below. Frequently used (at least five days a week) off-street parking areas shall conform to the standards shown in A below or an approved equivalent. If the parking area is to be used more than 30 days per year but less than five days a week, then the standards to be used shall conform to the standards shown in B below or an approved equivalent. An exception to these surfacing requirements may be made for certain uses that require intermittent use of their parking facilities less than 30 days per year. Any surface treatment other than those graphically illustrated below must be approved by the Director.

Minimum Surfacing Requirements
[IMAGE]


(Landscape improvements not shown)

(2) Grading work for parking areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 15.05 CMC. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 13.25 CMC.

(3) Asphalt or concrete surfaced parking areas shall have parking spaces marked by surface paint lines or suitable substitute traffic marking material in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Standards. Wheel stops are required where a parked vehicle would encroach on adjacent property, pedestrian access or circulation areas, right-of-way or landscaped areas. Typically approved markings and wheel stop locations are illustrated below.


[IMAGE]


(City of Covington 3-2001)

(Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.120))


18.50.130 Compact car allowance requirements.

In any development containing more than 20 parking spaces, up to 50 percent of the total number of spaces may be sized to accommodate compact cars, subject to the following:

(1) Each space shall be clearly identified as a compact car space by painting the word “COMPACT” in capital letters, a minimum of eight inches high, on the pavement at the base of the parking space and centered between the striping; 

(2) Aisle widths shall conform to the standards set for standard size cars; and

(3) Apartment developments with less than 20 parking spaces may designate up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces as compact spaces. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.130))


18.50.140 Internal circulation street standards.

Internal access roads to off-street parking areas shall conform with the surfacing and design requirements for private commercial roads set forth in Chapter 12.60 CMC, City of Covington Street Standards. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.140))


18.50.150 Trail improvements and connections.

Any development providing trail connections in accord with Chapter 18.35 CMC shall improve those segments to the following standards:

(1) All trail segments shall be fully accessible in accord with the provisions of the Americans with Disability Act (ADA).

(2) All segments shall be paved to a minimum width of 10 feet. Additional width may be required as determined by the Department.

(3) All paved improvements shall be consistent to approved City standards.

(4) Signage shall be provided at each trail entrance, crossing and intersection. Signage shall be consistent to approved City standards.

(5) Lighting shall be provided to ensure the safe use of all trail facilities where appropriate and consistent with approved City standards. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.18.150))


18.50.160 Electric vehicle charging station requirements – Downtown zones.

This section applies to all electric vehicle charging stations located in off-street parking facilities or parking garages in the TC, MC, GC, and MHO zones.

(1) New development located in the TC and GC zones shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station for every 100 vehicle parking spaces. 

(2) New commercial development located in the MC and MHO zones shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station for every 50 vehicle parking spaces. 

(3) Any new government services (CMC 18.31.080) shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station regardless of the number of vehicle parking stalls required for the site. If the number of required off-street vehicle parking stalls exceed the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, then those regulations shall apply. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.50.170 Electric vehicle charging station requirements – R-18, MR, NC, CC, RCMU, and I zones.

This section applies to all electric vehicle charging stations located in off-street parking facilities or parking garages in the R-18, MR, NC, CC, RCMU and I zones.

(1) New development located in the R-18 and MR zones shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station for every 30 vehicle parking stalls.

(2) New development located in the NC, CC and I zones shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station for every 50 vehicle parking stalls. New development located in the RCMU zone shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station for every 100 vehicle parking stalls.

(3) Any new park (CMC 18.25.040) that is publicly owned and maintained and any new government services (CMC 18.25.060) shall provide a minimum of one Level 2 or Level 3 electric vehicle charging station regardless of the number of vehicle parking stalls required for the site. If the number of required off-street vehicle parking stalls exceeds the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, then those regulations shall apply. (Ord. 03-14 § 1; Ord. 01-14 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.50.180 Electric vehicle charging station design standards.

(1) An electric vehicle charging station may be included in the calculation for minimum required parking spaces as required in CMC 18.31.110(4) and 18.50.030. 

(2) The Director may reduce or waive the requirement for the installation of electric vehicle charging stations if the applicant can demonstrate:

(a) That a shared parking facility provides access to an adjacent parking facility with a minimum of two existing electric vehicle charging stations; or

(b) That the proposed parking facility is providing cross-access to an adjacent parking facility with a minimum of two existing electric vehicle charging stations; and

(c) The applicant has a contract for the shared use of the above-required electric vehicle charging stations between the appropriate property owners. The contract shall be recorded with King County Records and Elections as a deed restriction that cannot be modified or revoked without approval by the Director. 

(3) Where electric vehicle charging stations are required in parking lots or parking garages, accessible vehicle charging stations shall be provided. 

(a) Accessible electric vehicle charging stations should be located in close proximity to the building or facility entrance and shall connect to a barrier-free accessible route of travel. It is not required to designate the charging station exclusively for the use of disabled persons. 

(4) The provision of electric vehicle parking will vary based on the design and use of the primary parking lot. The following required and additional location and design criteria are provided in recognition of the various parking lot layout options. Where provided, parking for electric vehicle charging purposes shall include the following:

(a) Each charging station space shall be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. Days and hours of operation shall be included if time limits or tow away provisions are to be enforced. Refer to the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for electric vehicle and parking signs, specifically D9-11b, D9-11bP, R7-2, and R7-108, and as amended. 

(b) Charging station equipment shall be maintained, including the functioning of the charging equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the charging station equipment for reporting when the equipment is not functioning or when other problems are encountered.

(c) Where charging station equipment is provided within an adjacent pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or accessible route to the building entrance, the charging equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with ADA accessibility requirements. 

(d) Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate site lighting shall exist, unless charging is for daytime purposes only.

(e) Charging station outlets and connector devices shall be no less than 36 inches and no higher than 48 inches from the surface where mounted, and shall contain a retraction device or a place to hang permanent cords and connectors sufficiently above the ground or paved surface.

(f) Except for parallel parking stalls, adequate equipment protection, such as wheel stops or concrete-filled steel bollards, shall be used. Curbing may be used in lieu of wheel stops or bollards if equipment is set back a minimum of 24 inches from the face of the curb.

(5) Parking for electric vehicles should also consider the following:

(a) Information on the charging station identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information.

(b) Installation of directional signs at the parking lot entrance and at appropriate decision points to guide motorists to the charging station space(s). Refer to the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for electric vehicle and directional signs, specifically D9-11b, D9-11bP and M6-1, and as amended. 

(6) To allow for maintenance and notification, the owner of any private new electric vehicle infrastructure station that will be publicly available shall be required to provide information on the station’s geographic location, date of installation, equipment type and model, and owner contact information. 

(7) On-street electric vehicle charging stations shall conform to the following:

(a) On-street electric vehicle charging stations are not permitted in the R-1 through R-18 zones. 

(b) On-street electric vehicle charging stations in the TC, MC, GC and MHO zone shall be installed at either end of designated on-street parking. 

(c) Subsequent on-street electric vehicle charging stations should be installed adjacent to existing stations. 

(d) Charging station equipment shall be installed in a well-lit area, on a hard surface, near the front of the designated parking space and should provide a minimum of 24 inches’ clearance from the face of the curb and not impede the required minimum ADA accessible route on the sidewalk. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (Exh. 1))


18.50.190 Recreational vehicles – Parking, storage, and habitation.

(1) The parking or storage of recreational vehicles, except for loading and unloading activities completed within a three-day period within any given two-week period, is not permitted unless there is compliance with the following:

(a) The recreational vehicle is housed within a vented garage or within a carport which is sight-screened from abutting properties by solid board fencing or sight-obscuring landscaping at least six feet in height.

(b) The recreational vehicle may be located within a side or rear yard if in compliance with setback requirements applicable to accessory structures and sight-screened from abutting properties by solid board fencing or sight-obscuring landscaping at least six feet in height. The recreational vehicle does not need to be parked on an approved impervious surface if parked within a side or rear yard.

(c) If there is no reasonable access to a rear or side yard, one recreational vehicle may be located in the front yard driveway as follows:

(i) In the driveway perpendicular to the right-of-way, provided setback requirements applicable to the primary structure are met.

(ii) A recreational vehicle stored under this subsection (1)(c) must be licensed and operable.

(2) For purposes of this section, all sides of a property which abut a right-of-way constitute a front yard.

(3) It is a violation of this section to sleep in, or use for any other habitation or residential purposes, a recreation vehicle or boat parked, placed, or situated on private property for more than 14 days in any 90-day period, except as allowed by subsections (4), (5), and (6) of this section. Should there be any discrepancy between the provisions of subsections (4), (5), and (6) of this section and Chapter 18.85 CMC, Nonconformance, Temporary Uses, and Re-Use of Facilities, the provisions of subsections (4), (5), and (6) of this section shall prevail.

(4) One recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary dwelling on a lot already containing another dwelling unit for a period not to exceed 30 days upon issuance of a temporary use permit by the City pursuant to the provisions of this subsection and CMC 18.85.100.

(a) The temporary use permit issued must be affixed to the recreational vehicle in such a manner that it is prominently displayed and visible, to the extent possible, from a public right-of-way.

(b) Recreational vehicles meeting the requirements of this subsection may be parked within a front yard driveway, need not be sight-screened, and need not comply with accessory structure setback requirements for the effective period of the temporary use permit.

(c) No more than one temporary use permit may be granted for a given property within any six-month period.

(5) As to recreational vehicles only, the requirements of this section shall not apply to a residence if one or more occupants thereof has a current windshield placard or special license plate issued to them by the State of Washington as a qualified disabled person in accordance with RCW 46.19.010. Persons claiming this exemption shall apply to the Director for approval thereof. The Director shall establish procedures and standards for acting on exemption requests hereunder. Only one recreational vehicle per residence may be exempted under this provision.

(6) Based on a written request, the Director may permit a recreational vehicle of any size to be used as a temporary dwelling on a single-family residential lot where the primary dwelling unit is unsafe to occupy by reason of disaster or accident such as fire, wind, earthquake, or other similar circumstance, provided:

(a) The recreational vehicle may be occupied for a maximum of 12 months from the date the primary dwelling was damaged. One 12-month extension may be granted by the Director based on demonstration of continuing hardship and documented good faith efforts to complete construction.

(b) Occupancy of the recreational vehicle shall cease within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for reconstruction of the primary dwelling unit at the property.

(c) The recreational vehicle may be located within the required front yard setback but may not obstruct sight distance at driveways and intersections. The recreational vehicle may not be in required side or rear yard setbacks.

(d) Generators shall not be utilized.

(e) The Director’s approval is revocable at any time if the requirements of this section are not met.

(f) The Director shall provide a copy of the approval letter to the applicant, property owner (if different from the applicant), and all adjoining property owners. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.55 SIGNS

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

18.55.010    Intent and purpose.

18.55.020    Applicability and exclusions.

18.55.030    Interpretation.

18.55.040    Definitions.

Article II. Administration

18.55.050    Prohibited signs.

18.55.060    Sign permits – Exemptions.

18.55.070    Sign permits – Temporary signs.

18.55.080    Comprehensive sign program.

18.55.090    Sign permits – Permanent signs.

18.55.100    Sign variances.

18.55.110    Maintenance – Removal.

18.55.120    Nonconforming signs.

18.55.130    Compliance and enforcement.

Article III. Regulations for Temporary Signs

18.55.140    Temporary signs – General regulations.

18.55.150    Temporary signs – Residential properties.

18.55.160    Temporary signs – Mixed-use development properties.

18.55.170    Temporary signs – Institutional properties.

18.55.180    Temporary signs – Commercial properties.

18.55.190    Temporary signs – ROW and public spaces.

18.55.200    Temporary signs – Other properties.

Article IV. Permanent Signs – Regulations

18.55.205    Permanent signs – Applicability of regulations.

18.55.210    Permanent signs – Structural components.

18.55.220    Permanent signs – Placement.

18.55.230    Permanent signs – Design criteria.

18.55.240    Permanent signs – Residential properties.

18.55.250    Permanent signs – Nonresidential properties – Freestanding signs.

18.55.260    Permanent signs – Nonresidential properties – Building-mounted signs.

Article I. General Provisions


18.55.010 Intent and purpose.

(1) Intent. Signs have a strong visual impact on the character and quality of our community. As a prominent part of the scenery, they attract or repel the viewing public, affect the safety of vehicular traffic, and their suitability or appropriateness helps to set the tone for our community. The City relies upon its physical setting and beauty to attract commerce and aesthetic considerations assume economic value. The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance both the City’s residential character and its economic base using appropriate and aesthetic signage.

(2) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements that:

(a) Promote and accomplish the goals and policies of the City’s comprehensive plan and zoning code, and the City Council’s vision, mission, and goals statement;

(b) Provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare, and promote traffic safety by controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, size, location, and maintenance of signs and sign structures and discouraging excessive numbers of signs;

(c) Recognize free speech rights by regulating signs in a content-neutral manner;

(d) Promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage caused by or which may be fully or partially attributable to cluttered, distracting, and/or illegible signage;

(e) Promote a positive visual image of the City and protect the beauty of the City’s built environment by encouraging signs that are compatible with the architectural style, characteristics, and scale of the building to which they may be attached; appropriate to the size of the subject property and amount of street frontage adjacent to the subject property; and compatible with adjacent buildings and businesses;

(f) Protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the City’s streetscape;

(g) Provide consistent sign design standards;

(h) Protect and encourage creative and innovative approaches to signage and signs that are of a quality design, pleasing in appearance, and are appropriate in size, materials, and illumination to the surrounding neighborhood or commercial district;

(i) Provide an improved visual environment for the citizens and visitors of the City;

(j) Adopt clear, understandable regulations that will assure equal protection and fair treatment under the law through consistent application of the regulations and consistent enforcement of this chapter;

(k) Balance both public and private business needs with the specific objectives of creating a community with an unmatched quality of life and a strong focus on economic well-being, aesthetics, community and family, the environment, and public infrastructure;

(l) Support and enhance the economic well-being of all businesses within the City and recognize the needs of all businesses to identify their premises and advertise their products and services; and

(m) Recognize that the aesthetic value of the total environment affects economic values and that an unrestricted proliferation of signs detracts from the economic value of the community. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.020 Applicability and exclusions.

(1) Applicability. This chapter applies to all signs within the jurisdictional limits of the City, regardless of the type or nature.

(2) Exclusions. The following are exempted from the regulations and requirements of this chapter, but may be subject to regulation under other portions of the CMC:

(a) Signs that are not visible from any public right-of-way, public space, or another property.

(b) Signs inside a building; however, signs inside windows are not exempt.

(c) Signs required by local, State, or Federal law if the sign is no more than 32 square feet in area or is painted directly on a pavement.

(d) Signs installed by a City, County, State, or Federal governmental agency for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, including, but not limited to, the following:

(i) Emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil defense;

(ii) Traffic and/or wayfinding signs erected and maintained by an authorized public agency;

(iii) Signs required to be displayed by law;

(iv) Signs showing the location of public facilities; and

(v) Any sign, posting, notice, or similar sign placed by or required by a governmental agency.

(e) Any sign on a vehicle, unless such vehicle is regularly parked in any prominently visible location from a public right-of-way or other public space for the primary purpose of attracting public attention to the sign, which is prohibited pursuant to CMC 18.55.050.

(f) Public art, as defined by CMC 18.55.040.

(g) Utility art/wrap on utility boxes/equipment displaying noncommercial copy only.

(h) Temporary signs located on fences for screening of a construction site, as long as there is an active development permit, grading permit, or building permit approval that includes external work or modifications of the site.

(i) Historic or memorial plaques and gravestones.

(j) String lights on private property.

(k) Signs placed on, worn by, or held by a person. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.030 Interpretation.

(1) This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to, restrict speech based on its content, viewpoint, or message.

(2) No part of this chapter shall be construed to favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.040 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word, term, or phrase used in this chapter that is not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Chapter 18.20 CMC. Any word, term, or phrase used in this chapter that is not defined in this section or Chapter 18.20 CMC shall have its normal dictionary meaning:

“Abandoned sign” means any sign remaining in place after such sign has not been maintained or, if the activity conducted on the subject property ceases, for 180 or more consecutive days.

“Animated sign” means any sign, or any portion of the sign, affected by the movement of air or other atmospheric or mechanical means, or that uses natural or artificial changes of lighting, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. Animated signs include, but are not limited to, flashing signs, inflatable signs, rotating signs, pennants, streamers, balloons, searchlights, spinners, and propellers. Changeable copy signs and electronic changeable copy signs are not considered animated signs for the purposes of this chapter.

“Athletic field” means facilities used for sporting activities such as softball, baseball, football, soccer, running track, tennis, and other nonmotorized sports. Athletic fields may include bleachers, concession stands, lights, restrooms, and other supporting facilities.

“Awning or canopy sign” means a nonelectric sign that is printed on, painted on, or attached to the vertical surface or flap of an awning or canopy.

“Banner” means a sign composed of flexible material, such as fabric, pliable plastic, or other similar nonrigid material, with no enclosing framework or electrical components and that is supported or anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners, or along either one edge or two corners with weights installed that reduce the reaction of the sign to wind.

“Building-mounted signs” means any sign attached to the face of a building, including, without limitation, wall signs, marquee signs, under canopy signs, and projecting signs.

Canopy Sign.” See “Awning or canopy sign.”

“Changeable copy sign” means a sign with copy that can be changed or altered by manual, electric, electromechanical, or electronic means and without changing or altering the sign frame, sign supports, or electrical parts. A sign on which the copy changes more than eight times in a 24-hour period shall be considered an electronic changeable copy sign, and not a changeable copy sign, for the purposes of this chapter.

“Commercial sign” means any sign, display, or device designed, intended or used to encourage or promote purchase or use of goods or services.

“Comprehensive sign plan (CSP)” means a coordinated program of all signs, including exempt and temporary signs for a business, or businesses if applicable, located on a development site. The sign program shall include, but not be limited to, indications of the locations, dimensions, colors, letter styles, and sign types of all signs to be installed on a site.

“Copy” means the graphic content of a sign surface, including, but not limited to, graphics, letters, numbers, figures, symbols, and trademarks.

“Electric sign” means a sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used.

“Electronic changeable copy sign” means an electronically activated sign with a copy that is changed, either in whole or in part, more than eight times in a 24-hour period by means of electronic programming.

“Exposed building face” means the building exterior wall of a single occupant building or the building exterior wall of an individual tenant’s leased space in a multi-tenant complex, viewed as a vertical plane between the finished grade and the roofline. This vertical plane will be used to calculate the sign area for building-mounted signs. In the case of an interior business without a separate exterior entrance, the exposed building face will be the vertical plane of the entrance wall measured between the floor and ceiling. As an option, for those businesses having oblique walls, the exposed building face is that area between the finish grade and the roofline that is shown on the elevation drawing submitted with the required drawings for a building permit.

“Flag” means any piece of cloth of individual size, color, and design, hoisted on a pole permanently affixed to the ground or displayed via a pole bracket permanently affixed to a building. If any single dimension of a flag is more than three times greater than any other single dimension, for the purposes of this chapter such a flag is classified and regulated as a banner, regardless of how it is anchored or supported.

“Flashing sign” means an electric sign or any portion of an electric sign that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts, or switches on and off in a constant pattern (e.g., strobe lights). Changeable copy signs and electronic changeable copy signs are not considered flashing signs for the purposes of this chapter.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign on a frame, pole, or other support structure that is not attached to any building.

“Frontage, building” means the length of an outside building wall.

“Frontage, property” means the length of the property line along the public right-of-way or private street on which it borders.

“Graffiti” means writing or drawings scribbled, scratched, or sprayed illicitly on a wall or other surface in public right-of-way or public space, or on a private property viewable from a public right-of-way, public space, or another private property.

“Height” means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to either the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less.

“Illuminated sign” means a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for illuminating the sign.

“Inflatable sign” means any object enlarged or inflated that floats, is tethered in the air, is activated by air or moving gas, or is located on the ground or on a building with or without copy or other graphics. These signs include large single displays or a display of smaller inflatable items, such as balloons, connected in some fashion to create a larger display.

“Institutional property” means property developed as governmental, educational, health, cultural and recreational centers, places of worship, and cemeteries. They may include government owned and operated facilities or be privately owned and operated.

“Kiosk” means a small structure in a public area used for providing information, often incorporating an interactive display.

“Lawn sign” means a freestanding sign made of lightweight materials such as cardboard or vinyl that is supported by a frame, pole, or other support structure placed directly in the ground without foundation or other anchors.

“Maintenance” means the cleaning, painting, and minor repair of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.

“Marquee sign” means any sign attached to or supported by a marquee, which is a permanent roof-like projecting structure attached to a building.

“Monument sign (ground sign)” means a freestanding sign having the appearance of a solid base that is 100 percent or greater of the sign face width, made of landscape construction materials such as brick, stucco, stonework, textured wood, tile, or textured concrete, which are harmonious with the materials of the primary structure on the subject property.

“Multi-tenant complex” means a complex containing two or more uses or businesses.

“Neon (outline tubing) sign” means a sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon gas or other similar gas, which glows when an electric current is sent through it.

“Noncommercial sign” means a sign which contains no message, statement, or expression related to commercial interests. Noncommercial signs include, but are not limited to, signs expressing political views, religious views, or information about and/or announcements of nonprofit organizations.

“Nonconforming sign” means any sign that was constructed, erected, and maintained in conformance with all King County or City of Covington rules and regulations in effect at the time the sign was established and that no longer conforms to the rules and regulations of this chapter.

“Pedestal sign” means freestanding signs supported permanently upon the ground by one or more solid bases, which base or bases shall be of a width equal to or greater than 50 percent of the sign width.

“Pole or pylon signs” means freestanding signs supported permanently upon the ground by one or more solid bases, which base or bases are less than 50 percent of the sign width.

“Portable sign” means a sign that is not permanently affixed and that is designed for or capable of being moved, except those signs explicitly designed for people to carry on their persons or that are permanently affixed to motor vehicles. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, A-frame signs, portable reader boards, lawn signs, and similar signs.

“Projecting sign” means a sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.

“Public art” means original artwork that is accessible to the public and/or public employees and has been approved as public art by the City.

“Right-of-way” means land owned, dedicated, or conveyed to the public and used primarily for the movement of vehicles, wheelchair, and pedestrian traffic, and land privately owned and used primarily for the movement of vehicles, wheelchair, and pedestrian traffic, so long as such privately owned land has been constructed in compliance with all applicable laws and standards for a public right-of-way.

“Roadway” means the portion of a street that is improved for motor vehicle or bicycle travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

“Roofline” means that lowest portion of a pitched or flat roof visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property.

“Rotating sign” means a sign that revolves on a fixed axis.

“Sign area” means the entire area of a sign on which copy is placed, excluding the sign’s structure, architectural embellishments, and framework. Sign area is calculated by measuring the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the module or sign face containing the copy; provided, however, that separated copy using a canopy, awning, or wall as the background and that is without added decoration or change in the canopy, awning, or wall shall have a sign area calculated by measuring the perimeter enclosing the separate copy and totaling the square footage of all such perimeters included as part of the sign.

“Sign face” means the area of a sign on which the copy is placed.

“String light” means small electric lights spaced evenly along a cable and used for decoration.

“Temporary sign” means any sign not permanently affixed or attached to the ground or a structure.

“Tenant space” means a portion of a structure occupied by a single commercial leaseholder with its own public entrance from the exterior of the building or through a shared lobby, atrium, mall, or hallway and separated from other tenant spaces by walls.

“Vacant lot” means any parcel of land that is without a primary use or structure.

“Wall sign” means either a sign applied with paint or similar substance on the surface of a wall or a sign with no copy on the sides or edges and attached essentially parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building.

“Window signs” mean all signs located inside and affixed to a window and intended to be viewed from the exterior of the structure. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))

Article II. Administration


18.55.050 Prohibited signs.

Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, no person shall erect, alter, maintain, or relocate any of the following signs in the City and such existing signs must be removed:

(1) Animated Signs. Any animated sign as defined in CMC 18.55.040, except as permitted under CMC 18.55.140 through 18.55.200.

(2) Nuisance Signs. Any signs that emit smoke, visible particles, odors, and/or sound, except that speakers in signs on the premises of a drive-through facility shall be allowed.

(3) Hazardous Signs. Any sign that is dangerous or confusing to motorists and pedestrians, including any sign that by its color, wording, design, location, or illumination resembles or conflicts with any official traffic control device or that otherwise impedes the safe and efficient flow of traffic.

(4) Impediment to Access. No sign may impede free ingress and egress from any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, door, window, or exit way required by building and fire regulations.

(5) Portable signs on wheels (trailer signs) and outdoor electric portable signs.

(6) Abandoned signs as defined by CMC 18.55.040.

(7) Signs within the public right-of-way, public property, public easements or structures, including, but not limited to, medians, roundabouts, sidewalks, utility poles and cabinets, street light poles, traffic poles and signals, and street trees, except as allowed pursuant to CMC 18.55.190.

(8) Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with the primary purpose of serving as a sign not otherwise allowed by this chapter.

(9) Graffiti.

(10) Signs without a Proper Permit. Signs erected, constructed, or structurally altered that are required to have a permit for such action and that were erected, constructed, or altered without obtaining a permit for such action.

(11) Sound. No sign shall emit any sound that is intended to attract attention beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located or that creates a public nuisance. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.060 Sign permits – Exemptions.

The following signs, and activities relating to signs, are exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter:

(1) Changes to the face or copy of changeable copy signs, digital signs, and electronic copy signs, provided such changes do not change the material or appearance of the sign as originally permitted by the City.

(2) The normal repair and maintenance of conforming or legal nonconforming signs.

(3) Temporary signs meeting the requirements in this chapter, except for those required to be permitted pursuant to Article III of this chapter.

(4) Any signs required to be posted pursuant to the Covington Municipal Code or any other local, State, or Federal regulation.

(5) Any sign on a vehicle, unless such vehicle sign is prohibited pursuant to CMC 18.55.050. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.070 Sign permits – Temporary signs.

(1) Permit Required. No person shall erect, alter, or relocate any temporary sign without first receiving an approved temporary sign permit from the City pursuant to the requirements herein, unless the temporary sign is exempt from permitting requirements in accordance with Article II of this chapter.

(2) Review Type. The review and approval of temporary sign permits is a Type I land use decision that shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 14.30 CMC, as amended.

(3) Application. Applications for temporary sign permits shall be submitted to the City on forms provided by the City.

(4) Fee. The applicable permit application fee, pursuant to the City’s current fee schedule in effect at the time of application, shall be paid upon submission of each temporary sign permit application. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.080 Comprehensive sign program.

(1) Comprehensive Sign Program. A comprehensive sign program (CSP) may be approved as an alternative to the requirements set forth in Articles III and IV of this chapter. The purpose of a CSP is to provide flexibility and promote superior sign design and wayfinding. The CSP is intended to provide a process where special consideration can be given to multiple signs that are looked at comprehensively in relation to each other and their context in the overall development with an expectation of high quality design and a holistic approach demonstrating the integration of signage into the development and buildings on the subject property. This flexibility is offered in exchange for a coordinated program of signage to ensure a higher standard of design quality for such signs. The flexibility in size, type and location of signs is not a matter of right, and a proposed CSP must be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of this section. The City may allow deviations from the requirements of this chapter consistent with the criteria listed in subsection (6) of this section.

(2) Applicability. A CSP may be submitted for the following uses and developments:

(a) Multi-tenant building or complex;

(b) Single use building over 100,000 square feet;

(c) Hospitals, including stand-alone emergency room centers;

(d) Approved subarea plans; and

(e) Residential subdivisions and short plats where newly constructed dwellings are currently for sale or lease.

(3) Review Process. An application for a CSP under this section will be reviewed and decided upon by the Community Development Director. Prior to issuing a decision, the Community Development Director may consult, at the applicant’s expense, with the City’s architectural review consultant.

(4) Design Standards.

(a) Illumination. Illumination shall reduce light trespass.

(b) The design of the components shall use the architectural style of the development being identified. Features to be used in designing the structural components include colors, materials, textures, and shapes of the development’s architecture.

(5) Application Requirements. A complete CSP application shall consist of the following:

(a) Application Form. A completed CSP application shall be submitted to the City on a form provided by the City. If the applicant is not the property owner(s), then the property owner must be identified, and the application must include an affidavit from the property owner(s), verifying that the property owner has given permission to the applicant for the submission of the CSP application.

(b) Narrative. The application shall include a narrative and plans that identify how the CSP meets the review criteria in subsection (6) of this section.

(c) Site Plan. A site plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed buildings, off-street parking areas, internal circulation, landscaped areas, storm drainage facilities, critical areas, public spaces, adjoining streets, pedestrian pathways, sidewalks, and trails.

(d) Building Elevation(s). Signs proposed to be mounted on a building require a building elevation(s) drawn to scale that specifies the locations and dimensions of the signs and drawings or photographs that show the scale of the sign in context with the building. Freestanding signs require a site plan indicating the proposed sign location as it relates to property lines, adjacent streets, and adjacent buildings.

(e) Scaled Design Drawing. Design descriptions of all signs including allowable sign type, shapes, size of typography, lighting, exposed structures, colors, and materials, and any information on the frequency of changeable graphics, if applicable. A colored rendering or scaled drawing, including dimensions of all sign faces, and descriptions of materials to be used, including color samples.

(f) Scaled Installation Drawing. A scaled drawing that includes the sign description, proposed materials, size, weight, manner of construction, and method of attachment, including all hardware necessary for proper sign installation.

(g) Lighting. A drawing indicating the location and fixture type of all exterior lighting for the proposed signs. The drawings shall specify wattage and bulb type to ensure compatibility with the lighting standards in this chapter.

(h) Calculations. Calculations of the proposed sign area and number.

(i) Site-Specific CSP Design. The CSP shall include design guidelines to ensure that all features of proposed signage, including the illumination, support structure, color, lettering, height and location shall be designed so that it will be an attractive and complementary feature of the building and/or development which it serves.

(j) Fees. The applicable permit application fee, pursuant to the City’s current fee resolution in effect at the time of application, shall be paid upon submission of the CSP application.

(6) Criteria for Approval. The City may approve a CSP if:

(a) Placement. All signs shall be placed where they are visible and legible. Factors to be considered include its location relative to traffic movement and access points, site features, other structures, and orientation relative to viewing distances and viewing angles. Wall signs may be approved on building walls other than the wall of the space occupied by the tenant in commercial centers in which some tenants have little or no visibility from the street. A sign may be ground or wall mounted or designed into and constructed as part of an integrated architectural feature of a building.

(b) Lighting. Signs shall not be oriented or illuminated so that they adversely affect the surrounding area, particularly existing nearby residential uses or structures.

(c) Quantity. The number of signs that may be approved within any development shall be sufficient to provide necessary facilitation of internal circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and way finding for safety of the occupants of vehicles and pedestrians. Factors to be considered shall be those that impact safety considerations such as the size of the development.

(d) Size. All signs shall be no larger than necessary for visibility and legibility. Factors to be considered in determining appropriate size include topography, volume and speed of traffic, viewing distances and angles, proximity to adjacent uses, and placement of display. In no event shall a CSP contain a freestanding sign that exceeds by more than 50 percent any maximum height standard permitted by this chapter. Consistent with the exemptions set forth in this chapter, there shall be no limit on the amount by which a CSP may allow a freestanding sign to exceed the height restrictions permitted on the site when the freestanding sign is placed or oriented so as to be visible only internally to the development. In no event shall a CSP contain a wall sign that exceeds by more than 25 percent any maximum size (area) standard permitted by this chapter.

(e) Design Features and Materials.

(i) The CSP shall exhibit design excellence, inventiveness, and sensitivity to the context.

(ii) High quality and thought through signage design, placement, and wayfinding are demonstrated as part of the CSP.

(iii) Sign design themes and materials shall be compatible with the architecture, colors, and materials of the associated development. Sign design should reflect the existing or desired character of the area.

(iv) Signs shall be professionally designed and fabricated from quality, durable materials.

(f) Development Standards. The Community Development Director may not reduce any sign development standard to less than 50 percent of any minimum standard, nor increase any sign development standard by more than 100 percent of the maximum standard. The Community Development Director shall not base any decision on the message content of a sign.

(7) Notice of Final Decision. The Director shall issue a notice of decision incorporating the findings based on the criteria for approval of a CSP.

(8) Need for Sign Permit. Individual sign permits regulated by a CSP Program are required prior to installation of each sign demonstrating consistency with the approved CSP except as provided for under CMC 18.55.060.

(9) Minor Modifications. The Community Development Director may grant a minor modification to the approved CSP if:

(a) The modification does not increase the sign area of the subject property approved in the original CSP.

(b) The modification maintains visual similarity with those elements specifically identified in the original CSP as integral to the design theme of the subject property (for example: location(s), color(s), material(s), or type(s)).

(10) Major Modifications. Modifications requested that do not meet the requirements of this section shall submit a new CSP application or meet the criteria for the requested sign type as outlined in this chapter.

(11) Appeals. The decision of the Community Development Director in approving or denying a CSP application under subsection (3) of this section or modifications granted under subsections (9) and (10) of this section may be appealed using the Type II land use decision procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC, as amended. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.090 Sign permits – Permanent signs.

(1) Permit Required. Except as provided for under CMC 18.55.060, no person shall erect, alter, or relocate any permanent sign without first receiving an approved sign permit from the City pursuant to the requirements herein.

(2) Review Type. The review and approval of permanent sign permits is a Type I land use decision pursuant to Chapter 14.30 CMC, as amended.

(3) Application Requirements. A complete permit application for permanent signs shall consist of the following:

(a) Application Form. A completed permanent sign permit application shall be submitted on a form provided by the City. If the applicant is not the property owner, then the property owner must be identified and the application must include an affidavit from the property owner, verifying that the property owner has given permission to the applicant for the submission of the sign permit application and for the installation/posting of the sign on the property owner’s property.

(b) Building Elevation/Site Plan. Signs proposed to be mounted on a building require a building elevation drawn to scale that specifies the location of the sign and drawings or photographs that show the scale of the sign in context with the building. Freestanding signs require a site plan indicating the proposed sign location as it relates to property lines, adjacent streets, and adjacent buildings.

(c) Scaled Design Drawing. A colored rendering or scaled drawing, including dimensions of all sign faces, and descriptions of materials to be used, including color samples.

(d) Scaled Installation Drawing. A scaled drawing that includes the sign description, proposed materials, size, weight, a manner of construction, and method of attachment, including all hardware necessary for proper sign installation.

(e) Lighting. A drawing indicating the location and fixture type of all exterior lighting for the proposed sign. The drawing shall specify wattage and bulb type to ensure compatibility with the lighting standards in this chapter.

(f) Fees. The applicable permit application fee, pursuant to the City’s current fee resolution in effect at the time of application, shall be paid upon submission of the sign permit.

(4) Criteria for Approval. Sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director for consistency with the standards in this chapter, according to the sign type and all other applicable regulations. A sign permit shall not be issued unless the Director makes findings that the criteria applicable to each sign type, as well as the general standards in this chapter, are satisfied. Sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Building Official for consistency with the Building Code.

(5) Notice of Final Decision. The Director shall issue a notice of decision incorporating the decision on the sign permit application not more than 120 days after issuance of the determination of completeness for the same application.

(6) Expiration of Permit. A permanent sign approved under a permanent sign permit must be installed within 180 days of issuance of the permit or the permanent sign permit will expire. No sign may be erected if a sign permit has expired. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.100 Sign variances.

(1) Approval Required. A variance may be granted from the strict application of the regulations in this chapter that apply to:

(a) Sign placement on a parcel or building frontage;

(b) Sign area; or

(c) Sign height, as regulated in this chapter.

A variance may not be granted to allow any prohibited signs or prohibited sign features, as included in CMC 18.55.050, or for any other purpose not listed in this subsection (1).

(2) Review Type. Sign variances under this section shall be processed as a Type II land use decision pursuant to the procedures as set forth in Chapter 14.30 CMC, as amended.

(3) Need for Sign Permit – Consolidation of Processing. A sign variance application may be submitted before or concurrent with the associated sign permit application. No sign permit application requiring a variance for issuance will be processed without a sign variance application.

(4) Application Requirements. A complete sign variance application shall consist of the following:

(a) Application Form. A completed sign variance application on a form provided by the City. If the applicant is not the property owner, then the property owner must be identified and the application must include an affidavit from the property owner verifying that the property owner has given permission to the applicant for the submission of the sign variance application and for the installation/posting of the sign on the property owner’s property.

(b) Sign Permit Application. A sign permit application pursuant to CMC 18.55.090; provided, that the applicant may submit a variance application without a sign permit application as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(c) A narrative report which describes the requested variance in detail. The report shall identify all sections of this chapter from which the applicant is requesting a variance, as well as the nature and extent of the variance.

(d) The narrative report shall also include the applicant’s description of the manner in which the sign variance satisfies all the variance criteria in subsection (5) of this section.

(e) Fees. The applicable permit application fee, pursuant to the City’s current fee schedule in effect at the time of application, shall be paid upon submission of the variance application.

(5) Criteria for Approval. To approve any sign variance, the Director must make written findings to show that all the following criteria have been met. The Director may impose conditions or restrictions to ensure that a requested variance will conform to the required findings.

(a) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter creates an unnecessary hardship to the property or business owner; and

(b) The sign variance is necessary due to special circumstances, preexisting conditions of the building or lot caused by the unique size, shape, layout, or topography; and

(c) The sign will not create a health or safety hazard; and

(d) The sign will not violate any State statute or any City Code provision (other than the provisions identified in this chapter relating to signs); and

(e) The sign will not negatively affect adjacent property, the general public, or businesses; and

(f) The sign will be in keeping with the general character of the surrounding area and the granting of the variance would not result in an alteration of the essential character of the surrounding area and minimize view obstruction; and

(g) The proposed variance is consistent with the purposes and intent of the zoning code and the purposes of this chapter; and

(h) The proposed variance is the minimum necessary to grant relief to the applicant; and

(i) The applicant has established that there are practical difficulties in complying with the provision(s) of this chapter and that the proposed sign is a reasonable use of the property (economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties); and

(j) The plight of the applicant is due to circumstances unique to the property, which were not created by the applicant or landowner; and

(k) The variance will not permit any sign or use that is not allowed in the zoning district where the affected land is located, nor will it allow any sign or sign feature prohibited under CMC 18.55.050.

(6) Notice of Final Decision. The Director shall issue a notice of decision incorporating the decision on the variance application not more than 120 days after issuance of the determination of complete application.

(7) Expiration of Variance. If the sign variance is approved, the sign identified in the variance must be installed within 180 days or the variance will expire. No sign may be erected if there is no sign permit for the sign, or if the variance or the sign permit has expired. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.110 Maintenance – Removal.

(1) Maintenance Required.

(a) It is unlawful for any owner of record, lessor, lessee, manager, or other person having lawful possession or control over a building, structure, or parcel of land to fail to maintain any signs on the building, structure, or parcel in compliance with this chapter and any other applicable provisions of the Covington Municipal Code. Failure to maintain a sign constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement under the enforcement provisions of this chapter.

(b) All signs, whether or not in existence prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be maintained and kept in good repair and in a safe condition at all times. Maintenance of a sign shall include, but is not limited to, periodic cleaning, replacement of flickering, burned out or broken light bulbs or fixtures, repair or replacement of any faded, peeled, cracked, or otherwise damaged or broken parts of a sign, and any other activity necessary to restore the sign so that it continues to comply with the requirements and contents of the sign permit issued for its installation, if required, and the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Removal.

(a) Every person maintaining a sign must, upon vacating the premises where a sign is maintained, remove or cause to be removed said sign within 180 days from the date of vacating the premises. When the Director determines that said sign has not been removed within said period, the Director shall remedy and enforce said violation in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this chapter.

(b) Any vacant and/or unused sign support structures, angle irons, sign poles, or other remnants of old signs which are currently not in use or are not proposed for immediate reuse by a sign permit application for a permitted sign shall be removed.

(c) In addition to the remedies in Chapter 1.30 CMC, the Director shall have the authority to require the repair, maintenance, or removal of any sign or sign structure which has become dilapidated or represents a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the public, at the cost of the sign and/or property owner.

(d) Any sign posted in violation of this chapter on public property or on public rights-of-way shall be subject to CMC 18.55.130.

(e) Any person responsible for any sign posting made in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the City for the costs incurred by the City in removal thereof and, in event of failure to pay, for billing and collection charges, including interest and reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.120 Nonconforming signs.

(1) Legally Nonconforming. Except as otherwise provided in this section, signs in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but that were constructed, erected, or maintained in full compliance with previous regulations, will be regarded as legal nonconforming.

(2) Compliance Required. Signs in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that are not legal nonconforming or that are prohibited pursuant to CMC 18.55.050 shall be immediately made to comply with the provisions of this chapter or be abated in accordance with the procedure established in Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(3) Sign Face Change. A sign face or copy change on a nonconforming sign is not allowed when the affected property and sign structure have been abandoned pursuant to CMC 18.55.040.

(4) Repair – Restoration. Any part of a sign or sign structure may be repaired as normal maintenance, or restored to a safe condition, without loss of legal nonconforming status. Damage from acts of nature or vandalism to a nonconforming sign will keep its nonconforming status if the cost of the repair is less than 50 percent of the cost of replacing the nonconforming sign with a conforming sign; provided, that the replacement sign must be restored to the original design or a more conforming design.

(5) Alterations – Relocation – Replacement. Except for as provided herein, any legally nonconforming sign that is structurally altered, relocated, or replaced must immediately be brought into compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(6) Expansion or Change of Use. Any legally nonconforming sign on a nonresidential property must be brought into conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter prior to any expansion or change in use which requires a development proposal or conditional use permit. No building permits for new construction may be issued until compliance with this provision is assured.

(7) Hazardous Signs. Any legally nonconforming sign or sign structure on private property, which, consequently, is a hazard to life and property, or which by its condition or location presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, must be removed or otherwise brought into compliance with this chapter pursuant to the enforcement provisions of this chapter.

(8) Variances. Variances may be granted using the variance procedure of this chapter to alleviate unusual hardships or extraordinary circumstances which exist in bringing nonconforming signs into conformity. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.130 Compliance and enforcement.

(1) Compliance with Other Codes. All signs erected or altered under this chapter must comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations relating to signs, including, without limitation, the provisions of this chapter and the International Building Code. If any provision of this chapter is found to conflict with any code provision of the City, or any other Federal, State, or local regulation, the provision that establishes the more restrictive standard shall prevail.

(2) Inspection. The Director is empowered to enter or inspect any building, structure, or premises in the City upon which any sign is located for inspection of the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours, unless an emergency exists.

(3) Financial Guarantee. The City may require a financial guarantee to ensure compliance with any aspect of this chapter.

(4) Violation – Penalty.

(a) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, or maintain any sign or sign structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(b) Each day any person allows a violation of this chapter to continue shall be considered a separate violation.

(c) Whenever the City has determined that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring, the City shall remedy the violation by issuing a civil infraction, punishable by a monetary penalty in accordance with Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(d) Any sign or sign structure that is erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, demolished, equipped, used, or maintained in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.

(e) All signs abated by the City shall be available for recovery by the sign’s owner for a period of 14 calendar days and upon payment of the costs of removal and storage, if any, after which time the sign will be destroyed. The City shall not be responsible for damages or loss incurred during removal and/or storage of any sign.

(5) Additional Remedies. In addition to the other remedies provided by this chapter, the City may abate said public nuisance or seek any other equitable relief authorized by Chapter 1.30 CMC and the laws and regulations of the State of Washington.

(6) Joint and Several Liability. The property owner(s) and each tenant or occupant may be jointly and severally liable for violations of any penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))

Article III. Regulations for Temporary Signs


18.55.140 Temporary signs – General regulations.

The following provisions apply to all temporary signs placed within the City:

(1) Sign Placement. All temporary signs must be placed totally within the site/property pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except when allowed to be placed within the right-of-way under CMC 18.55.190.

(2) Materials – Construction. Temporary signs may be made of any durable material; provided, that the temporary sign otherwise conforms to the requirements of this chapter. A temporary sign may be of rigid or nonrigid construction.

(3) Lighted Signs. Temporary signs that have either internal or external illumination shall not be displayed from the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.

(4) Prohibited Placement. In addition to the limitations on the placement of temporary signs within the public right-of-way pursuant to CMC 18.55.190, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, temporary signs are prohibited from being in the following places:

(a) No temporary sign may be placed on a roof of a building or structure.

(b) No temporary sign may be placed on fences.

(c) No temporary sign shall be so located as to physically obstruct any door or exit from a building.

(d) No temporary sign shall be located to be hazardous to a motorist’s or pedestrian’s ingress and egress from buildings or parking areas.

(e) No temporary sign shall be in the sight-distance triangle pursuant to the City’s Design and Construction Standards adopted pursuant to Chapter 12.60 CMC, or in any other area which may obstruct the vision of motorists to create a safety hazard. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.150 Temporary signs – Residential properties.

Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, temporary signs on residential properties are allowed pursuant to the following regulations:

(1) Noncommercial. All temporary signs on residential properties shall only display noncommercial copy, except as provided in subsection (6) of this section.

(2) Sign Types – Construction – Materials. There is no restriction on the type of temporary sign (i.e., the sign construction or materials used) allowed on residential properties, if all other regulations and provisions of this chapter are met.

(3) Quantity. There is no restriction on the number of temporary signs allowed on residential properties.

(4) Duration. Temporary signs shall not be limited in duration, except as required in CMC 18.55.140.

(5) Size.

(a) Temporary Freestanding Signs. No temporary freestanding sign shall be greater than 12 square feet in size, with no sign face exceeding six square feet and shall not exceed six feet in height.

(b) Building-Mounted Signs. Building-mounted temporary signs attached flush to the face of the building:

(i) Shall not have a maximum height; provided, that no sign shall extend beyond the roofline of the building; and

(ii) In aggregate (i.e., the total of all building-mounted temporary signs) shall not cover more than 20 percent of the building’s facade.

(c) Window Signs. Temporary signs placed on the inside of windows shall, in aggregate, not exceed 50 percent of the area of the window on which they are displayed.

(d) The size requirements of this section shall not apply to a flag(s) placed on a permanent flagpole or bracket.

(6) Temporary Signs for Properties Actively for Sale or Lease. One temporary sign displaying a commercial message that does not exceed eight square feet in size can be placed on the property or attached to the dwelling unit when the property is actively for sale or lease. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.160 Temporary signs – Mixed-use development properties.

(1) Residential Uses. Residential uses on mixed-use development properties shall be subject to the temporary sign regulations pursuant to CMC 18.55.150.

(2) Commercial Uses. Commercial uses on mixed-use development properties shall be subject to the temporary sign regulations pursuant to CMC 18.55.180.

(3) Institutional Uses. Institutional uses on mixed-use development properties shall be subject to the temporary sign regulations pursuant to CMC 18.55.170. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.170 Temporary signs – Institutional properties.

Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, temporary signs on institutional properties are allowed pursuant to the following regulations:

(1) Noncommercial. All temporary signs on institutional properties shall display only noncommercial copy.

(2) Sign Types – Construction – Materials. There is no restriction on the type of temporary sign (i.e., the sign construction or materials used) allowed on institutional properties, if all other regulations and provisions of this chapter are met.

(3) Quantity.

(a) Banners. One temporary banner sign is allowed per each 500 feet of street frontage, not to exceed four banners per property. Temporary banners may be placed on fences on the property.

(b) All Other Temporary Signs. There is no restriction on the number of all other temporary signs allowed on institutional properties.

(4) Size.

(a) Banners. Banners shall not be greater than five feet in height, unless attached to the face of the primary structure on the property, in which case there is no maximum height restriction so long as the banner does not extend above the roofline of the building. Any banner shall not be larger than a total of 32 square feet in size.

(b) All other temporary signs displayed on an institutional property shall each not be greater than three feet in height and shall not be greater than six square feet in size.

(c) Window Signs. Temporary signs placed on windows shall, in aggregate, not exceed 50 percent of the area of the window on which they are displayed.

(d) The size requirements of this section shall not apply to a flag(s) placed on a permanent flagpole or bracket. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.180 Temporary signs – Commercial properties.

Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, all temporary signs placed on commercial properties shall conform to the following provisions:

(1) Permit Required. Only temporary banner signs placed on commercial properties require a permit issued by the City pursuant to CMC 18.55.070.

(2) Commercial and Noncommercial Signs. Temporary signs on commercial properties may be commercial or noncommercial in their messaging.

(3) Features. No temporary sign on a commercial property may have direct or internal illumination, changing image sign features, or electronic elements.

(4) Banners. Temporary banner signs on commercial properties shall be limited to the following:

(a) Quantity.

(i) One temporary banner sign is allowed per tenant space on the property.

(ii) The property owner (or landlord), if not also a tenant, may be allowed one temporary banner sign.

(b) Size. The maximum size of a banner shall be 32 square feet.

(c) Placement. A banner shall be attached to the face of the building and may not extend above the roofline.

(d) Duration. Each tenant space, or the property owner pursuant to subsection (4)(a)(ii) of this section, shall be allowed to display a temporary banner for no more than a total of 120 days in a calendar year.

(5) Portable Signs.

(a) Quantity. One temporary portable sign is allowed per tenant space on the property.

(b) Size. The sign shall be no more than 12 square feet in size, with no single sign face larger than six square feet. No portable sign face shall be greater than four feet in height.

(c) Placement. Portable signs must be placed entirely on private property.

(d) Duration. Portable signs may be placed from sunrise to sunset, 365 days a year.

(6) Window Signs. Temporary signs placed on the inside of windows shall, in aggregate, not exceed 50 percent of the area of the window on which they are displayed.

(7) Temporary Freestanding Sign. Where a commercial property, either in whole or in part, is actively listed for sale or lease, one additional temporary freestanding sign for each street frontage on the site is allowed pursuant to the following:

(a) The sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in area. Temporary freestanding signs may have an additional face up to 32 square feet in size if the angle between the sign faces is less than 90 degrees. The sign shall not exceed seven feet in height;

(b) The sign must be placed totally on private property; and

(c) The sign must be immediately removed upon the termination or closing of a sale or lease of any listed property or tenant space. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.190 Temporary signs – ROW and public spaces.

(1) Right-of-Way. Except as prohibited pursuant to CMC 18.55.050, temporary signs may be placed in the right-of-way if they meet all the following standards:

(a) Noncommercial Copy. All temporary noncommercial copy signs in public right-of-way shall abide by subsections (1)(c) through (1)(i) of this section, and shall not be limited in quantity or duration;

(b) Commercial Copy. All temporary commercial copy signs in public right-of-way shall abide by subsections (1)(c) through (1)(i) of this section, and shall:

(i) Be limited in quantity to no more than six signs per open house, business, or event at any time;

(ii) Be limited for display from sunrise to sunset and only when an owner, agent, or employee is on site and the open house, business, or event location is open to the public;

(iii) Be allowed to be displayed up to seven days per week;

(iv) Require a temporary sign permit. The temporary sign permit for temporary commercial signs displayed in public ROW shall be valid for 365 days from the date of sign issuance;

(c) Only temporary lawn and portable signs are allowed;

(d) The sign shall not be placed in medians, traffic islands, roundabouts, or other areas within the roadway;

(e) The sign shall not be placed on a sidewalk or obstruct pedestrian or wheelchair access to the sidewalk;

(f) The sign shall not be placed in parking spaces or identified pedestrian or bicycle routes;

(g) The sign shall be placed entirely outside of the sight-distance-triangle of a right-of-way corner, curb-cut, or drive entrance pursuant to the City’s Design and Construction Standards adopted under Chapter 12.60 CMC. Where no curb exists, the sign must be placed outside the roadway at least five feet from the edge of the roadway;

(h) The sign shall be no larger than 12 square feet in size, with no single sign face larger than six square feet in size, and no portion of the sign shall exceed three feet in height; and

(i) The sign shall remain portable and may not be attached or anchored in any way to trees or to public property including, but not limited to, utility or light poles, utility boxes, street signs, parking meters, fences, or pavement.

(2) Street Pole Banners and String Lights. Temporary banner signs and string lights may be placed on public right-of-way if they meet all the following standards:

(a) Banners across Public Right-of-Way. All temporary banner signs located over public right-of-way shall:

(i) Only be allowed across SE 272nd Street on permanent sign poles designed specifically to display banners;

(ii) Display noncommercial copy only;

(b) Banners Placed on Street Light Poles. All temporary banner signs displayed on street light poles in public right-of-way shall:

(i) Only be allowed in the (TC) town center, (MC) mixed commercial, (GC) general commercial, (MHO) mixed housing/office, and RCMU (regional commercial mixed use) zoning districts;

(ii) Only be attached to street light poles with brackets designed for the display of signs;

(iii) Display noncommercial copy only;

(iv) Require a temporary sign permit;

(v) Be limited in duration to 365 days per permit;

(vi) Be limited in quantity to 75 banners per applicant;

(vii) Only be installed and maintained by City staff or the street light pole owner, with all installation, maintenance, and removal costs paid by the applicant;

(c) String Lights on Street Trees. All temporary string lights placed in public right-of-way shall:

(i) Only be placed on street trees that have an electrical outlet at the base of the tree. Electrical cords or string lights shall not cross any roadway, sidewalk, planter strip, or undeveloped right-of-way, and shall not be strung from tree to tree or from a tree to any structure or private property;

(ii) Shall not flash or blink;

(iii) Shall be outdoor rated string lights only;

(iv) Shall only be allowed with the approval of the adjacent property owner;

(v) Shall require a right-of-way use permit if placement or removal of the string lights will affect street traffic.

(3) Public Spaces. Temporary signs shall not be placed in any public park, trail, open space, or other public space, except for those signs placed by the City, which signs shall only display noncommercial copy. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.200 Temporary signs – Other properties.

Properties with primary uses other than those regulated under CMC 18.55.150 (residential properties), 18.55.170 (institutional properties); 18.55.180 (commercial properties), or 18.55.190 (ROW) shall be subject to the temporary sign regulations in CMC 18.55.180 (commercial properties). (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))

Article IV. Permanent Signs – Regulations


18.55.205 Permanent signs – Applicability of regulations.

CMC 18.55.210 to 18.55.230 shall apply to all permanent signs within the City. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.210 Permanent signs – Structural components.

To the maximum extent possible, signs should be constructed and installed so that angle irons, guy wires, braces, and other structural elements are not visible. This limitation does not apply to structural elements that are an integral part of the overall design such as decorative metal or wood. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.220 Permanent signs – Placement.

(1) Obstructing and Hazardous Placement Prohibited. No sign shall be so located to physically obstruct any door or exit from a building. No sign shall be located to be hazardous to a motorist’s or pedestrian’s ingress and egress from buildings or parking areas.

(2) Sight Distance. All signs are subject to the current City of Covington Design and Construction Standards regarding sight distances, pursuant to Chapter 12.60 CMC, as amended, and CMC 18.30.240 – Sight distance requirements. No sign shall obstruct the vision of motorists to create a safety hazard.

(3) Sign Setback Requirements. The required setback from the property lines for all signs shall be not less than five feet from the property line in residential zones and not less than three feet from the property line in all other zones. Kiosk freestanding signs with commercial copy shall be set back 50 feet from all property lines. The distance between a sign and a property line shall be measured along a straight line representing the shortest distance between the sign and the property line. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.230 Permanent signs – Design criteria.

(1) Sign Base. The base of the sign must be constructed with brick, stucco, stonework, textured wood, tile, or textured concrete, or materials that are similar with the character of the primary structures on the property and subject to the Director’s approval. No visible gap shall be allowed between the sign base and the finished grade.

(2) Sign Face. The color, shape, material, and other architectural details of the sign face and all visible sides of the sign shall be consistent with the character of the primary structure or development.

(3) Landscaping around Freestanding Signs. To improve overall appearance of the sign and to reduce the risk of motor vehicles hitting the sign or supports of the sign, an area adjacent to the base of each freestanding sign must be landscaped equal to the sign area; provided, however, that the City will not require more than 200 square feet of landscaped area. This landscaping must include vegetation and may include other materials and components such as brick or concrete bases as evidenced in plazas, patios and other pedestrian areas, planter boxes, pole covers, or decorative framing.

(4) Illumination. No sign may contain or utilize any of the following (does not apply to neon signage):

(a) Any exposed incandescent lamp with a wattage more than 25 watts.

(b) Any exposed incandescent lamp with an internal or external reflector.

(c) Any continuous or sequential flashing device or operation.

(d) Except for electronic changeable copy signs, any incandescent lamp inside an internally lighted sign.

(e) External light sources directed towards or shining on vehicular or pedestrian traffic or on a street.

(f) Internally lighted signs using 800-milliamp or larger ballasts if the lamps are spaced closer than 12 inches on center.

(g) Internally lighted signs using 425-milliamp or larger ballasts if the lamps are spaced closer than six inches on center.

(5) Design Compatibility. Where more than one sign is allowed for a property, all signs for that property shall be compatible in design, style, color, and method of illumination. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.240 Permanent signs – Residential properties.

(1) Generally. No sign permit shall be issued for any permanent sign on a residential property unless such sign complies with the sign type, maximum number, maximum sign area, maximum height, location, duration, and all other allowances and limitations for those uses as required by this chapter.

(2) Residential Developments. Residential subdivision, short plat, and manufactured home park developments are allowed signs pursuant to the following:

(a) Two monument signs only are allowed per development entrance from a public right-of-way by which the subdivision gains entrance;

(b) No sign shall exceed five feet in height and no sign face shall exceed 32 square feet in size;

(c) Any sign shall be contained in a tract specifically created for a sign;

(d) Internal illumination is not allowed;

(e) The area around the sign shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet of landscaped area;

(f) Only noncommercial copy is allowed.

(3) Properties Issued a Business License. On residential properties for which the City has issued a valid City business license for a home occupation or home industry, one permanent sign is allowed pursuant to the following:

(a) The sign must be a wall sign placed on the facade of the primary structure; the sign may be of a commercial or noncommercial nature.

(b) The maximum sign size shall not be greater than four square feet in size.

(c) Where a sign placed on the building’s facade cannot be seen from a public street due to the distance the building is set back from the street, the Director may approve an alternative sign size, type, or location.

(d) The sign shall not cover or obscure important architectural details of a building, such as stair railings, windows, doors, decorative louvers, or similar elements, intended to be decorative features of a building design.

(e) The sign must appear to be a secondary feature of the building facade.

(f) The sign shall not project above the roofline of the exposed building face to which it is attached.

(g) The sign shall be installed to appear flush-mounted.

(h) Illumination is not allowed. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.250 Permanent signs – Nonresidential properties – Freestanding signs.

All nonresidential properties shall be designated as either qualifying for a high-profile, medium-profile, or low-profile freestanding sign based upon the following criteria:

(1) Freestanding Signs – High-Profile.

(a) A commercial property meeting all the following criteria is allowed a high-profile freestanding sign:

(i) A zoning designation of GC (general commercial) or MC (mixed commercial);

(ii) A minimum of 250 feet of frontage on one public right-of-way;

(iii) Multi-tenant complex; and

(iv) A minimum site of 15 acres.

(b) Sign Types. A freestanding high-profile sign may be a pedestal sign, monument sign, or kiosk sign.

(c) Sign Features. A freestanding high-profile sign may be an electric sign, illuminated sign, neon sign, electronic changeable copy sign, or changeable copy sign.

(d) Sign Height. Pedestal or monument signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Kiosk signs shall not exceed seven feet in height.

(e) Sign Area. Pedestal or monument signs shall not be larger than 160 square feet for the total of all sign faces, with no one face exceeding 80 square feet. Kiosk signs shall not be larger than 60 square feet per sign, with no one sign face exceeding 30 square feet.

(f) Number of Signs. A property qualifying for a freestanding high-profile sign may have the following maximum number of signs:

(i) Pedestal or monument signs: one per street frontage. In addition, two monument signs are allowed per entrance from a public right-of-way, not to exceed five feet in height and 40 square feet in size per sign; and

(ii) Kiosk signs: one for 15 or fewer tenant spaces. An additional kiosk sign is allowed for every additional 15 tenant spaces.

(2) Freestanding Signs – Medium-Profile.

(a) Criteria. Except as provided for in this section, commercial, mixed use development, and multifamily complex uses in the GC (general commercial) or MC (mixed commercial) zoned properties that do not qualify for a freestanding high-profile sign pursuant to subsection (1) of this section or is zoned I (industrial), MHO (mixed housing/office), TC (town center), or RCMU (regional commercial mixed use) is allowed a medium-profile freestanding sign.

(b) Sign Type. A freestanding medium-profile sign may be a pedestal sign, monument sign, or kiosk sign.

(c) Sign Features. A freestanding medium-profile sign may be an electric sign, illuminated sign, neon sign, electronic changeable copy sign, or changeable copy sign.

(d) Sign Height. Pedestal or monument signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height for a public street frontage more than 200 feet in length. Pedestal or monument signs shall not exceed eight feet in height for a public street frontage less than 200 feet in length. Kiosk signs shall not exceed seven feet in height.

(e) Sign Area.

(i) For signs with public right-of-way frontage more than 200 feet in length, the maximum sign area is 128 square feet for the total of all sign faces on each permitted sign, with no one sign face exceeding 64 square feet.

(ii) For signs with public right-of-way frontage 200 feet or less in length, a sign area of 100 square feet for the total of all sign faces on each permitted sign with no one sign face exceeding 50 square feet.

(iii) Kiosk signs: 60 square feet per sign with no one sign face exceeding 30 square feet.

(f) Number of Signs. A property qualifying for a freestanding medium-profile sign may have the following maximum number of signs:

(i) Pedestal or monument sign: one per street frontage. In addition, two monument signs are allowed per entrance from a public right-of-way, not to exceed five feet in height and 40 square feet in size per sign; and

(ii) Kiosk sign: one sign for up to 15 tenant spaces. An additional kiosk sign is allowed for every additional 15 tenant spaces.

(3) Freestanding Signs – Low-Profile.

(a) Criteria. A property located in the NC (neighborhood commercial) or CC (community commercial) zones, and commercial, institutional, mixed-use development, and multifamily complex uses located in the residential zones are allowed low-profile freestanding signs.

(b) Sign Type. A freestanding low-profile sign may be a pedestal or monument sign.

(c) Sign Features. Any freestanding low-profile sign may be an electric sign, an illuminated sign, and/or a neon sign.

(d) Sign Height. A freestanding low-profile sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.

(e) Sign Area. A freestanding low-profile sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign with no sign face exceeding 50 square feet.

(f) Number of Signs. A property qualifying for a freestanding low-profile sign may have one per street frontage. In addition, two monument signs are allowed per entrance from a public right-of-way, not to exceed five feet in height and 40 square feet in size.

(4) Freestanding Signs – Drive-Up Window Use.

(a) Criteria. A property with a drive-up window use shall be allowed freestanding signs in addition to subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section.

(b) Sign Type. A sign associated with a drive-up window use may be a pedestal or monument sign.

(c) Sign Features. Any sign associated with a drive-up window use may be an electric or illuminated sign.

(d) Sign Height. Any sign associated with a drive-up window shall not exceed six feet in height.

(e) Sign Area. Any sign associated with a drive-up window shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.

(f) Number of Signs. A drive-up window use may have two signs per stacking lane.

(g) Screening. All signs associated with a drive-up window use shall be fully obscured from view from a public right-of-way with a vegetative screen, fence, building, or other methods, as approved by the Director.

(5) Freestanding Signs – Athletic Field Uses.

(a) Criteria. An institutional property that has an athletic field may have a freestanding sign in addition to subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section as follows:

(b) Sign Type. A sign associated with an athletic field may be a pedestal or monument sign.

(c) Sign Features. A property qualifying for a sign associated with an athletic field:

(i) Can be an electric sign, illuminated sign, electronic changeable copy sign, or changeable copy sign;

(ii) Shall not contain commercial copy.

(d) Number of Signs. One sign is allowed per athletic field.

(e) Sign Height. Any sign associated with an athletic field shall not exceed 20 feet in height.

(f) Sign Area. Any sign associated with an athletic field shall not exceed 200 square feet in size.

(g) Sign Location. A property qualifying for a sign associated with an athletic field:

(i) Shall not be located within 50 feet of a property line;

(ii) Shall not face a public ROW or a residential property; and

(iii) Shall have a vegetative screen along the backside of the sign.

(6) Combined Sign Package for Adjacent Property Owners. The owners of two or more properties that abut or are separated only by a vehicular access easement or tract may propose a combined sign package through a comprehensive sign program submittal to the City. The City will review and decide upon a combined sign package by reviewing the proposal as if the combined parcels were one development. The City may approve the combined sign package if it will provide more coordinated, effective, and efficient signs. The allowable sign area, sign type, sign height, and the number of signs will be determined as if the applicants were one multi-tenant complex. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.55.260 Permanent signs – Nonresidential properties – Building-mounted signs.

All nonresidential properties shall be allowed permanent building-mounted signs pursuant to the following criteria:

(1) Sign Types. The following may be building-mounted signs and are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts:

(a) Awning or canopy signs;

(b) Changeable copy signs;

(c) Electronic changeable copy signs;

(d) Marquee signs;

(e) Window signs;

(f) Projecting signs; and

(g) Wall-mounted signs.

(2) Sign Features. Any building-mounted sign may be an electric sign, an illuminated sign, and/or a neon sign.

(3) Sign Height. No sign shall project above the roofline of the exposed building face to which it is attached.

(4) Sign Area. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the total sign area of building-mounted signs for each business or tenant, excluding under canopy signs, shall not exceed 15 percent of the exposed building face to which it is attached; provided, however, that no individual sign shall exceed a sign area of 240 square feet and every applicant is entitled to a minimum sign area of 30 square feet.

(5) Number of Signs.

(a) The number of building-mounted signs allowed each user is dependent upon the surface area of the largest single exposed building face of the building as follows:

	Largest Exposed Building Face	Maximum Number of Signs

	Less than 999 square feet	2

	1,000 – 2,999 square feet	3

	3,000 – 3,999 square feet	4

	4,000 and over square feet	5

(b) Primary users with more than one business (i.e., a grocery store with a banking facility, cleaner, etc.), which must obtain a business license and without a separate entrance, are allowed one sign for each different business in addition to the number allowed above. The area of such additional signage must not exceed 15 percent of the exterior wall of the separate business.

(c) An applicant is not allowed to transfer sign area calculated pursuant to this section from one building face to another but can move allotted signs from one building face to another.

(d) Each business or use may be allowed a sign underneath a canopy in addition to the other allowed building-mounted signs subject to the size and separation requirements set forth in this title.

(6) Window Signs.

(a) Permanent window signs shall, in aggregate, not exceed 30 percent of the area of the window on which they are displayed.

(b) A permit is not required for the display of permanent window signs. (Ord. 08-18 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.60 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – MINERAL EXTRACTION

(Repealed by Ord. 11-17)


Chapter 18.65 CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Administration

18.65.010    Purpose.

18.65.020    Applicability.

18.65.030    Appeals.

18.65.040    Critical areas rules.

18.65.045    Relationship to other regulations.

18.65.046    Fees.

18.65.047    Exemptions.

18.65.048    Partial exemptions.

18.65.049    Unauthorized alterations and enforcement.

18.65.050    Allowed alterations of critical areas.

18.65.060    Agricultural and keeping of livestock activities development standards.

18.65.062    Shoreline variance required.

18.65.070    Public agency/utility exceptions.

18.65.075    Reasonable use exception.

18.65.090    Disclosure by applicant.

18.65.100    Critical area review.

18.65.110    Critical area report requirement.

18.65.120    Sequential steps for mitigation, including avoiding impacts.

18.65.130    Mitigation and monitoring.

18.65.135    Off-site mitigation.

18.65.140    Financial guarantees.

18.65.160    Critical area markers, signs, fencing and installation.

18.65.170    Recording notice on title of critical areas.

18.65.180    Critical area tracts and designations on site plans.

18.65.200    Building setbacks from critical area buffer.

Article II. Frequently Flooded Areas

18.65.230    Frequently flooded areas.

Article III. Geologically Hazardous Areas

18.65.250    Applicability and designation – Geologically hazardous areas.

18.65.260    Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

18.65.270    Erosion and seismic hazard areas – Protection measures and specific mitigation.

18.65.280    Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and alterations.

18.65.290    Steep slope hazard areas – Development standards and alterations.

18.65.300    Additional critical area report requirements – Geologically hazardous areas.

Article IV. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas

18.65.311    Critical aquifer recharge areas –Designation.

18.65.312    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Reclassification or declassification.

18.65.313    Repealed.

18.65.314    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Protection.

18.65.315    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development regulations.

18.65.316    Critical aquifer recharge areas – Evaluation and implementation.

Article V. Wetlands

18.65.318    Wetland – Identification and evaluation.

18.65.319    Wetlands – Classes and categories.

18.65.320    Wetlands – Buffers.

18.65.340    Wetlands – Specific mitigation requirements.

Article VI. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas

18.65.350    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Applicability.

18.65.355    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Designation and purpose.

18.65.358    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Classification.

18.65.360    Streams and shorelines – Standard buffers.

18.65.365    Streams and shoreline associated buffers – Development standards and alterations.

18.65.370    Streams – Permitted alterations.

18.65.375    Streams – Removal from culverts and pipes.

18.65.380    Streams – Specific mitigation requirements.

18.65.385    Naturally occurring ponds, less than 20 acres in area, and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat.

18.65.390    Other fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards.

18.65.395    Fish and wildlife habitat corridors and networks.

18.65.400    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Modification.

18.65.405    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Mitigation standards.

18.65.410    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Additional provisions for critical areas report.

18.65.420    Process to identify additional species and habitat of local importance.

18.65.430    Fish protection measures.

18.65.440    Endangered, threatened, and sensitive species protection measures.

Article I. General Provisions and Administration


18.65.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW, Washington State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, and the Covington Comprehensive Plan, which call for protection of the natural environment and the public health and safety by:

(1) Establishing development and alteration standards to protect functions and values of critical areas; 

(2) Protecting members of the general public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, property damage or financial loss due to flooding, erosion, landslides, seismic and volcanic events, soil subsidence or steep slope failures; 

(3) Protecting unique, fragile and valuable elements of the environment including but not limited to fish and wildlife and their habitats and maintaining and promoting City-wide native biodiversity; 

(4) Requiring mitigation of unavoidable impacts to critical areas by regulating alterations in or near critical areas; 

(5) Preventing cumulative adverse environmental impacts on water availability, water quality, ground water, wetlands and streams; 

(6) Measuring the quantity and quality of wetland and stream resources and preventing overall net loss of wetland and stream functions; 

(7) Protecting the public trust as to navigable waters, aquatic resources, and fish and wildlife and their habitat; 

(8) Meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; 

(9) Alerting members of the public including but not limited to appraisers, owners, potential buyers or lessees to the development limitations of critical areas; and 

(10) Providing City officials with sufficient information to protect critical areas. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.020 Applicability.

(1) This chapter applies to all land uses, activity, and development in the City of Covington, and all persons within the City shall comply with this chapter.

(2) City shall not approve any permit or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first ensuring compliance with this chapter.

(3) Approval of a development proposal in accordance with this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with this chapter.

(4) This chapter applies to all forest practices over which the City has jurisdiction under Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222. 

(5) Unless exempted in CMC 18.65.047 or 18.65.048, these critical area regulations shall apply to all developments within one or more of the following critical areas or their associated buffers, regardless of whether the site has been previously identified as a critical area. Critical areas include any of the following areas or ecosystems as defined in RCW 36.70A.030 and WAC 365-190-030 and the corresponding buffers and setbacks:

(a) Frequently flooded areas;

(b) Geologically hazardous areas;

(c) Critical aquifer recharge areas;

(d) Wetlands; and

(e) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (includes streams). (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.030 Appeals.

An applicant may appeal a decision under this chapter to approve, condition or deny a development proposal according to and as part of the appeal procedure for the underlying permit or approval involved. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.040 Critical areas rules. 

The City of Covington is authorized to adopt, in accordance with Chapter 2.75 CMC, such public rules and regulations as are necessary and appropriate to implement this chapter and to prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.045 Relationship to other regulations.

(1) Nothing in this chapter in any way limits, or may be construed to limit, the authority of the City under any other applicable law, nor in any way decreases the responsibility of the applicant to comply with all applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations.

(2) These critical areas regulations shall apply in addition to zoning and other regulations adopted by the City.

(3) When any other chapter of the Covington Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the provision that provides more protection to environmentally critical areas shall apply unless specifically provided in this chapter or unless the provision conflicts with Federal or State laws or regulations.

(4) Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not constitute compliance with other Federal, State, and local regulations and permit requirements that may be required. The applicant is responsible for complying with these requirements, in addition to the process established in this chapter.

(5) If any provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any part of the City’s Shoreline Master Program, herein referenced as the City’s SMP, and codified as Chapter 16.05 SMP, the regulations in RCW 90.58.020 shall apply, as determined by the City.

(6) Provisions of this chapter that are not consistent with the State Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW and supporting Washington Administrative Code chapters, shall not apply to the City’s shoreline jurisdiction.

(7) Critical Areas within Shoreline Jurisdiction. Critical areas, critical area buffers, and shoreline buffers located within shoreline jurisdiction, as defined in CMC 16.05.040, shall be regulated by this chapter, with the following clarifications and modifications. Additional clarifications and modifications are included where applicable in the body of this chapter.

(a) The reasonable use exception provisions (CMC 18.65.075) and the public agency/utility exception provisions (CMC 18.65.070) of this chapter shall not apply in shoreline jurisdiction. Exceptions within shoreline jurisdiction shall require a shoreline variance based on the variance criteria listed in CMC 16.05.090 and WAC 173-27-170.

(b) The allowed alteration provisions of CMC 18.65.050 shall not apply to Type S waters (shorelines of the State) or their buffers (shoreline buffers). Activities and alterations to shorelines of the State and their buffers shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.05 CMC.

(c) Shoreline buffer widths are defined in CMC 16.05.280.

(d) Future amendments to this chapter shall require Ecology approval of an amendment to Chapter 16.05 CMC to incorporate updated language.

(e) If provisions of this chapter conflict with provisions of Chapter 16.05 CMC, the provisions most protective of the ecological resource shall apply, as determined by the City.

(f) If there are provisions of this chapter that are not consistent with the Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW, and supporting Washington Administrative Code chapters, those provisions shall not apply in shoreline jurisdiction. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.046 Fees.

(1) Fees shall be collected for the permit administration, plan review and other services provided by the City for critical areas review consistent with the critical area review fees set forth in the current fee resolution. Fees shall include but not be limited to cost recovery for engineering and planning review time, site inspection time, administration, third-party peer review, and any other special costs attributable to the critical areas review process.

(2) The applicant shall be responsible for the initiation, preparation, submission, and expense of all required reports, assessments, studies, plans, reconnaissance, or other work prepared in support of or necessary to review the application, unless otherwise provided in this title. 

(3) In addition to critical area review fees, as set forth in this section, other fees required by the Covington Municipal Code may be applicable to the critical area review and associated application, including but not limited to Shoreline Management Act, SEPA, tree preservation, and clearing and grading review fees. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.047 Exemptions.

The following activities and developments are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. All exempted activities shall use reasonable methods to avoid potential impacts to critical areas. An exemption from this chapter is not an endorsement to degrade a critical area, ignore risk from natural hazards, or otherwise limit the ability of the Director to identify and abate such actions that may cause degradation to a critical area.

(1) Activities and development in response to emergencies that threaten public health, safety or welfare, or that pose an immediate risk of damage to property and that require remedial or preventive action in a time frame too short to allow for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. In the event a person determines that the need to take emergency action is so urgent that there is insufficient time for review by the Department, such emergency action may be taken immediately. Such action shall be reported to the Department within one working day of the commencement of the emergency activity on a form provided by the City. The Director will determine if the action was in response to an emergency and if any mitigation shall be required to protect health, safety, welfare, or environment or to repair any resource damage.

(2) Operation, maintenance, or repair of existing public improvements, utilities, public roads, parks, trails, or drainage systems if the activity does not further alter or increase impact to, or encroach further within, the critical area or buffer and there is no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed operation, maintenance, or repair, and no new clearing of native vegetation beyond routine pruning.

(3) Normal maintenance and repair, internal reconstruction or remodeling or improvements to existing structures that do not increase the previously approved building footprint, provided the improvements or repairs are not the result of or required due to a flood or floodplain hazard.

(4) Recreation, education, and scientific research activities that do not require grading, native vegetation clearing, or placement of structures.

(5) Site reconnaissance necessary for preparing land use or building permit applications. Any disturbance of the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to conduct the site reconnaissance and the area shall immediately be restored to its previous condition.

(6) Removal by hand of invasive and noxious vegetation. Removal by hand does not include using mechanical equipment or the use of herbicides.

(7) Excavation of cemetery graves in established and approved cemetery. Maintenance, operation, or repair of the cemetery graves as long as any such alteration does not involve the expansion of improvements. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.048 Partial exemptions.

The following activities are partial exemptions to the provisions of this chapter and will require land use approval from the Director. The Director may require supporting application materials, such as documentation, prepared by a qualified professional to demonstrate compliance with partial exemptions: 

(1) Landscaping. Normal maintenance and continuation of existing landscaping and gardens, within an identified critical area, that were legally established prior to City incorporation, provided the area is not expanded. This partial exemption shall be documented by photographs, statements, and/or other evidence provided by the applicant. The use of herbicide is permitted in wetlands and streams and their buffers only for the control of invasive vegetation. A State and Federally approved registered aquatic formulation shall be applied by a licensed aquatic herbicide applicator in wetlands and streams.

(2) Agricultural. Expansion or creation of agricultural uses within an identified critical area is not allowed subject to the provisions of this chapter. Agricultural activities in existence before the date of incorporation, in continuous operation, and for which the activity is supporting agricultural activity, are partially exempted from this chapter as follows: 

(a) Mowing of hay, grass or grain crops;

(b) Tilling, dicing, planting, seeding, harvesting and related activities for pasture, food crops, grass seed or sod if such activities do not take place on steep slopes;

(c) Normal and routine maintenance of existing irrigation and drainage ditches not used by salmonids; and

(d) Normal and routine maintenance of farm ponds, fish ponds, manure lagoons and livestock watering ponds.

(3) Demolition of Structures. The applicant shall submit demolition permit(s) and associated temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan, as applicable. 

(4) Normal and Routine Maintenance. Clearing, pruning, removal of nuisance vegetation, and normal and routine maintenance of trees and vegetation shall be subject to permitting requirements in Chapters 14.60, 16.05, and 18.45 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.049 Unauthorized alterations and enforcement.

(1) When a critical area or its buffer has been altered in violation of this chapter, all ongoing development work shall stop and the critical area shall immediately and completely be restored prior to resuming development work. The City shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to cease all ongoing development work and order restoration, rehabilitation, or replacement measures at the owner’s or violator’s expense to compensate for violation of provisions of this chapter.

(2) Restoration Plan. All development work shall remain stopped until a restoration plan is prepared at the expense of the owner or violator and approved by the City. The plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional using the best available science and shall describe how the actions proposed meet the minimum requirements described in subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section. The Director may, at the owner’s or violator’s expense, seek expert advice in determining the adequacy of the plan. Inadequate plans shall be returned to the owner or violator for revision and resubmittal.

(a) For alterations to critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, wetlands, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, the following minimum performance standards shall be met for the restoration of a critical area:

(i) The historic structural and functional values shall be restored, including water quality and habitat functions;

(ii) The historic soil types and configuration shall be replicated;

(iii) The critical area and buffers shall be replanted with native vegetation that replicates the vegetation historically found on the site in species types, sizes, and densities. The historic functions and values should be replicated at the location of the alteration; and

(iv) Information demonstrating compliance with CMC 18.65.130 (Mitigation and monitoring) shall be submitted to the Director.

(b) For alterations to flood hazard areas and geologically hazardous areas, the following minimum performance standards shall be met for the restoration of critical area:

(i) The hazard shall be reduced to a level equal to, or less than, the predevelopment hazard;

(ii) Any risk of personal injury resulting from the alteration shall be eliminated or minimized; and

(iii) The hazard area and buffers shall be replanted with native vegetation sufficient to minimize the hazard.

(3) Minimum performance standards identified in subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section may be modified if the owner or violator can demonstrate that greater functional and habitat values can be obtained.

(4) Site Investigations. Site investigations necessary to enforce this chapter are authorized pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC.

(5) Penalties. Any development carried out contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.050 Allowed alterations of critical areas.

(1) Within the following critical areas and their buffers alterations are allowed if the alteration complies with the sequential steps for mitigation, including avoiding impacts, applicable development standards, mitigation requirements, and other applicable requirements established in this chapter: 

(a) Critical aquifer recharge area; 

(b) Geologically hazardous areas:

(i) Landslide hazard area under 40 percent slope;

(ii) Erosion hazard area. 

(2) Within the following three critical areas and their buffers only the alterations on the table in subsection (7) of this section are allowed if the alteration complies with conditions in subsection (8) of this section and the development standards, mitigation requirements and other applicable requirements established in this chapter:

(a) Geologically hazardous areas:

(i) Landslide hazard area with a 40 percent or greater slope;

(ii) Steep slope hazard area;

(b) Wetland; and

(c) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (including streams and natural ponds).

(3) Within frequently flooded areas allowed uses are as established in the City of Covington flood damage prevention ordinance (Chapter 16.15 CMC), and the shoreline master program (Chapter 16.05 CMC) if applicable.

(4) The City may require other construction techniques, conditions, and restrictions on development in order to minimize adverse impacts on critical areas.

(5) The applicant is responsible for obtaining permits from the City for the allowed alterations pursuant to CMC 18.65.100. The request for an alteration may be submitted sequentially with other identified City permits or development review. The City may collect fees for the review of the alteration in accordance with CMC 18.65.046. The applicant is responsible for obtaining associated State and Federal permits as applicable and conditioned in this chapter.

(6) Activities and allowed alterations within a shoreline jurisdiction as identified in the City’s SMP (Chapter 16.05 CMC), including Pipe Lake and Type S streams and shoreline buffers, shall be subject only to the provisions set forth in Chapter 16.05 CMC, unless otherwise specified in that chapter.

(7) In the following table where an alteration is included in more than one activity category, the numbered conditions applicable to the most specific description of the alteration govern. Where more than one numbered condition appears for a listed alteration, each of the relevant conditions specified for that alteration within the given critical area applies. For alterations involving more than one critical area, compliance with the conditions applicable to each critical area is required.

 

	Alteration	Landslide Hazard Over 40% and Buffer	Steep Slope Hazard and Buffer	Wetland and Buffer	Stream and Buffer 	Fish and Wildlife Conservation Area/Corridor Area 

	 	KEY: Letter “A” in a cell means alteration is allowed consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If it is blank it is not allowed.

	Construction of single detached dwelling unit 	 	 	A 1, 2	 	 

	Construction of nonresidential structure 	 	 	A 1, 2	A 1, 2	A 1, 2, 3

	Construction of new dock or pier 	 	 	A 4	A 4, 5	 

	Maintenance, repair or replacement of dock or pier	 	 	A 6 	A 6 	A 3

	Clearing and Grading	 	 	 	 	 

	Grading (Chapter 14.60 CMC)	 	A 7	 	A 8	 

	Construction of new slope stabilization	A 9	A 9	A 9	A 9	 

	Maintenance of existing slope stabilization	A 10	A 7, 10	A 10 	A 10 	A 3, 10

	Clearing (Chapters 14.60 and 18.45 CMC). Includes removal of brush, trees, noxious weeds or invasive vegetation and general maintenance not exempt in CMC 18.65.047 and 18.65.048 	A 11	A 11, 12	A 11, 13	A 8, 11, 13	 A 11

	Forest Practices	 	 	 	 	 

	Nonconversion Class IV-G forest practice 	A 14	A 14	A 14	A 14	A 14, 15

	Roads	 	 	 	 	 

	Construction of new public road right-of-way 	A 16	 A 16	A 16	A 5, 16	 A 16

	Expansion of public right-of-way structure/facility, beyond established right-of-way for the purpose of maintenance, operation, repair, modification installation, or construction	A 9, 16	A 16	A 16	A 16	 A 16

	Construction of new driveway or private access road	 	 	A 2 	A 2 	A 2

	Bridges or Culverts	 	 	 	 	 

	Maintenance or repair of bridge or culvert	A 10 	A 10 	A 10 	A 10 	A 10 

	Replacement of bridge or culvert 	A 10	A 10	A 10	A 10, 17	A 10

	Expansion of bridge or culvert	A 10	A 10	A 18	A 18	A 3

	Utilities and Other Infrastructure	 	 	 	 	 

	Expansion or construction of new utility corridor or minor utility facility located beyond the established right-of-way or easement	A 19	A 19	A 29	A 29	A 3

	Construction of a new well or on-site sewage disposal	 	 	A 30	A 30	 

	Maintenance, repair, expansion of a new well or on-site sewage disposal 	A 2, 20, 21	A 2, 20, 21	A 2, 20, 21	A 2, 20, 21	A 3, 20, 21

	Construction, maintenance, or expansion of surface water runoff system, designed in accordance with Chapter 13.25 CMC, to provide surface water quality treatment 	A 19	A 19	A 22	 	A 3

	Maintenance, repair, or replacement of flood protection facility 	A 23	A 23	A 23	A 23	A 23

	Construction of new in-stream structure or in-stream work or maintenance or repair of in-stream structure 	A 10	A 10	A 10	A 10, 24	 A 3

	Recreation Areas	 	 	 	 	 

	Construction of a new publicly accessible nonmotorized trail	A 25	A 25	A 25 	A 5, 25	 A 3, 25

	Maintenance of outdoor public park facility, trail, or improved recreation area	A 26	A 26	A 26	A 26	A 3, 26

	Habitat and Science Projects	 	 	 	 	 

	Habitat restoration or enhancement project	A 27	A 27	A 27	A 27	A 3, 27

	Scientific sampling for salmonids	 	 	A 28	A 28	A 3, 28

(8) The following alteration conditions apply to the table in subsection (7) of this section:

1. May be permitted pursuant to the reasonable use exception permit process in CMC 18.65.075.

2. Pursuant to sequential avoidance measures and specific mitigation requirements for the impacted critical area in CMC 18.65.120 through 18.65.130.

3. Allowed if no clearing, external construction or other disturbance in a wildlife habitat conservation area occurs during active breeding seasons of any species with a habitat that is identified as requiring protection pursuant to CMC 18.65.390.

4. Limited to seasonal floating docks or piers in a Category II, III or IV wetland or stream and associated buffers. Docks and piers proposed along a shoreline, designated as a shoreline of the State, are subject to the regulations in the SMP (Chapter 16.05 CMC).

a. The existing and zoned density of all properties abutting the entire lake shoreline averages three dwelling units per acre or more;

b. At least 75 percent of the lots abutting the shoreline or 75 percent of the lake frontage, whichever constitutes the most lake frontage, has been developed with dwelling units;

c. There is not any significant vegetation where the alteration is proposed and the loss of vegetation was not the result of any violation of law; and

d. The wetland or lake shoreline is not a salmonid spawning area.

5. Not allowed within a severe channel migration hazard area portion of a stream buffer.

6. Allowed in Category II, III or IV wetland or streams and associated buffers subject to the following conditions. Maintenance, repair or replacement of a dock or pier along a shoreline, designated as a shoreline of the State, is subject to the regulations in the SMP (Chapter 16.05 CMC):

a. There is not an increase in the number of pilings or the overall width and length of the dock or pier;

b. Hazardous substances or toxic materials are not used;

c. All piers and docks shall result in no net loss of ecological functions. Docks and piers, including those accessory to single-family residences, shall minimize and mitigate adverse impacts to the stream and its buffers; and

d. There is not an increase in shade for predator species.

7. Limited to regrading and stabilizing of a slope formed as a result of a legal grading activity consistent with Chapter 14.60 CMC.

8. The following are allowed if conducted more than 115 feet from the ordinary high water line:

a. Grading of up to 50 cubic yards on a lot less than five acres, with an approved clearing and grading permit consistent with Chapter 14.60 CMC; and

b. Clearing of up to 1,000 square feet or up to a cumulative 35 percent of the lot, with an approved clearing and grading permit consistent with Chapter 14.60 CMC.

9. Only permitted where erosion or landsliding threatens a structure, utility facility, roadway, driveway, public trail, stream or wetland if, to the maximum extent practical, stabilization work does not disturb the slope and its vegetative cover and any associated critical areas as evaluated in a critical area report prepared by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist licensed in the State.

10. Allowed when performed by or at the direction of a government agency as follows:

a. Construction methods will reduce or not adversely affect geologic hazards; 

b. Use of retaining walls that allow maintenance of existing natural slope areas is preferred over graded artificial slopes, unless an alternative design provides equivalent or greater long-term slope stability;

c. The maintenance does not involve the use of herbicides, hazardous substances, sealants, or other liquid oily substances in streams, wetlands or their buffers; and

d. When maintenance involves work over and within water: 

i. The maintenance is compliant with Washington State Department of Ecology and other applicable State and Federal agencies; and 

ii. The maintenance of culverts is limited to removal of sediment and debris from the culvert and its inlet, invert and outlet and the stabilization of the disturbed or damaged bank or channel immediately adjacent to the culvert and shall not involve the excavation of a new sediment trap adjacent to the inlet.

11. Allowed for the removal of hazard trees and vegetation as necessary pursuant to the following: 

a. Vegetation removal allowed only in buffers for the purpose of enhancing tree growth within the tree canopy area, as determined by a certified biologist in a critical area report subject to mitigation measures as applicable.

b. Removal of noxious and invasive weeds shall be undertaken with hand labor unless otherwise authorized by the King County Noxious Weed Control Board to use riding mowers or light mechanical cultivating equipment and herbicides or biological control methods:

i. The area is stabilized to avoid re-growth or regeneration of noxious weeds; and 

ii. The cleared area is revegetated with native or noninvasive vegetation and stabilized against erosion. 

c. Clearing, pruning, removing, and normal and routine maintenance of trees shall be subject to the regulation, mitigation and permit requirements set forth in Chapters 14.60 and 18.45 CMC.

12. The limited trimming and pruning of vegetation if the soils are not disturbed and the activity will not adversely affect the long-term stability of the slope, erosion or water quality. 

13. Harvesting of plants and plant materials, such as plugs, stakes, seeds or fruits, for restoration and enhancement projects is allowed. 

14. Only if in accordance with Chapter 76.09 RCW and WAC Title 222 and:

a. A long-term management plan is approved for the site by the City; and 

b. The property owner provides a notice of intent in accordance with RCW 76.09.060 that the site will not be converted to nonforestry uses within six years. 

15. Only if in compliance with published Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife and Washington State Department of Natural Resources management standards for the species. If there are no published Washington State standards, only if in compliance with management standards determined by the Director to be consistent with best available science. 

16. Allowed only if: 

a. There is not another feasible location with less adverse impact on the critical area and its buffer, consistent with CMC 18.65.120; 

b. The roadway is not located over habitat used for salmonid rearing or spawning or by a species listed as endangered or threatened by the State or Federal government unless the Department determines there is no other feasible crossing site; 

c. The roadway width is minimized to the extent practical;

d. The construction occurs during approved periods for in-stream and wetland work; and 

e. The roadway will not change or diminish the overall stream flow peaks, duration or volume, flood storage capacity and wetland function. 

17. Allowed only if: 

a. The replacement is made fish passable in accordance with Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife Habitat and Lands Environmental Engineering Division’s Fish Passage Design Manual or with the National Marine and Fisheries Services Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings for Federally listed salmonid species; and 

b. The site is restored with appropriate native vegetation. 

18. Allowed if necessary to bring the bridge or culvert up to current standards and if: 

a. There is not another feasible alternative available with less impact on the stream and wetlands and their buffer; and

b. To the maximum extent practical, the bridge or culvert is located to minimize impacts to the stream and wetland and their buffers. 

19. Limited to transmission pipelines, underground power lines, transmission powerlines, cables, wires, stormwater and support structures of utility facilities if: 

a. There is no other feasible alternative available with less impact on the critical area;

b. The alterations will not subject the critical area to an increased risk of landslide or erosion; 

c. Significant risk of personal injury is eliminated or minimized in the landslide hazard area; 

d. Vegetation removal is the minimum necessary to locate the utility or construct the corridor; 

e. Any crossing over a stream or wetland shall be generally perpendicular to the critical area and shall be accomplished by bridging or other technique designed to minimize critical area disturbance. It shall also be the minimum width necessary to accommodate the intended function or objective;

f. New utility corridors meet all of the following to the maximum extent practical: 

i. Are not located over habitat used for salmonid rearing or spawning or by a species listed as endangered or threatened by the State or Federal government unless the Department determines that there is no other feasible crossing site;

ii. The mean annual flow rate is less than 20 cubic feet per second; and 

iii. Paralleling the channel or following a down-valley route near the channel is avoided; 

g. To the maximum extent practical, utility corridors are located so that: 

i. The width is minimized; 

ii. The removal of trees shall be minimized to the extent feasible and is in accordance with Chapter 18.45 CMC; and 

iii. An additional, contiguous and undisturbed critical area buffer, equal in area to the disturbed critical area buffer area including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the critical area; 

h. To the maximum extent practical, access for maintenance is at limited access points into the critical area buffer rather than by a parallel maintenance road. If a parallel maintenance road is necessary the following standards are met: 

i. To the maximum extent practical the width of the maintenance road is minimized and in no event greater than 15 feet; and

ii. The location of the maintenance road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side of the utility corridor farthest from the critical area; 

i. The utility corridor or utility facility will not change or diminish the overall critical area hydrology or flood storage capacity; 

j. The construction occurs during approved periods for in-stream work; 

k. The utility corridor serves multiple purposes and properties to the maximum extent practical; 

l. Bridges or other construction techniques that do not disturb the critical areas are used to the maximum extent practical; 

m. Bored crossing meets the following criteria: 

i. Are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood; and 

ii. The channel is crossed close to perpendicular and never more than 30 degrees from perpendicular; 

n. Open trenching is only used during low flow periods and only within streams when they are dry. The Department may approve open trenching of Type S or F streams only if there is not a feasible alternative and equivalent or greater environmental protection can be achieved; and 

o. Minor communication facilities may collocate on existing utility facilities if: no new transmission support structure is required; and equipment cabinets are located on the transmission support structure. 

20. Allowed for private individual utility service connections on site or to public utilities or utilities regulated by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission if the disturbed area is not expanded and no hazardous substances, pesticides or fertilizers are applied. 

21. Allowed if the disturbed area is not expanded, clearing is limited to the maximum extent practical and no hazardous substances, pesticides or fertilizers are applied. 

22. New surface water discharges in the form of dispersion trenches, outfalls and bioretention cells are allowed within the outer 25 percent of a wetland buffer; provided, that the discharge meets the requirements of the surface water management regulations in Chapter 13.25 CMC, if no other location is feasible and it will not degrade the functions or values of the wetland or stream. Where differences exist between these regulations and Chapter 13.25 CMC, these regulations will take precedence. 

23. Applies to lawfully established existing structures if: 

a. Maintained by a public agency; 

b. The height of the facility is not increased; 

c. The linear length of the affected edge of the facility is not increased; 

d. The footprint of the facility is not expanded waterward; 

e. Consistent with King County’s Guidelines for Bank Stabilization Projects (King County Surface Water Management) and bioengineering techniques are used to the maximum extent practical; and 

f. The site is restored with appropriate native vegetation. 

24. Allowed in Type S, F, Np and Ns streams if:

a. Work is completed in the least impactful way during the least impactful time of year; 

b. In conformance with applicable best management practices;

c. All affected in-stream and buffer features are restored; 

d. Proposed in-stream work will restore or improve habitat; and 

e. Work is compliant with other applicable State and Federal agencies and permitting requirements. 

25. Nonmotorized publicly accessible trails are allowed with an approved critical area report. Trail planning, design, construction, and maintenance shall adhere to the following criteria:

a. The trail shall be located and designed using best management practices in accordance with an approved critical area report and the following standards: 

i. Trail location and design shall result in the least impacts on the critical area or required buffers. Critical areas buffers shall be expanded, where possible, equal to the width of the trail corridor including disturbed areas;

ii. Trails should be generally located within the outer 25 percent of the standard critical area buffer when applicable;

iii. Trails located within a stream or wetland critical area shall be designed to limit minor crossings and having no adverse impact on water quality. The trail should be generally parallel to the perimeter of the wetland or stream. Trails should not be constructed of impervious surfaces that will contribute to surface water runoff, unless the construction is necessary for soil stabilization or soil erosion prevention or unless the trail system is specifically designed and intended to be accessible to handicapped persons. Except that publicly accessible nonmotorized trails connecting to the City’s trail network may use impervious materials if they meet all other City requirements;

iv. Raised boardwalks utilizing nontreated pilings may be acceptable;

v. Trails shall be the minimum width necessary to accommodate the intended function or objective; however, in no event shall the trail be more than eight feet in width, except that publicly accessible nonmotorized trails may be made wider and use impervious materials if they meet all other requirements including water quality, as identified in Chapter 13.25 CMC, or the construction using impervious materials is necessary for soil stabilization or soil erosion prevention; and 

vi. Trails shall avoid the removal of mature trees and limit disturbance of native understory vegetation;

b. Trails shall be designed and maintained using best management practices to complement and enhance the environmental, educational, and social functions and values of the critical area with trail design and construction focused on managing and controlling public access and limiting uncontrolled access;

c. When salmonids are present, the construction of the trail shall be in compliance with applicable State and Federal agencies and permitting requirements; and

d. The trail surface shall meet all other City standards and requirements, including water quality standards set forth in Chapter 13.25 CMC. 

26.  Only if the maintenance: 

a. Does not involve the use of herbicides or other hazardous substances except for the removal of noxious weeds or invasive vegetation;

b. When salmonids are present, the maintenance of the trail shall be in compliance with applicable State and Federal agencies and permitting requirements; and

c. Does not involve any expansion of the roadway, lawn, landscaping, ditch, culvert, engineered slope or other improved area being maintained. 

27. Limited to: 

a. Projects sponsored by a public agency that has natural resource management as a primary function or by a Federally recognized tribe; or 

b. Restoration and enhancement plans prepared by a qualified biologist or a landscape architect in conformance with Chapter 18.96 RCW and subject to City review and approval. 

28. Allowed in accordance with a scientific sampling permit issued by Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife or an incidental take permit issued under Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act. 

29. Limited to the transmission pipelines, cables, wires and support structures of utility facilities within utility corridors if:

a. There is not another feasible location with less adverse impact on the critical area and its buffer, consistent with CMC 18.65.120;

b. New utility corridors meet all of the following to the maximum extent practical:

i. Are not located over habitat used for salmonid rearing or spawning or by a species listed as endangered or threatened by the State or Federal government unless the Department determines that there is no other feasible crossing site;

ii. The mean annual flow rate is less than 20 cubic feet per second; and

iii. Paralleling the channel or following a down-valley route near the channel is avoided;

c. To the maximum extent practical, utility corridors are located so that:

i. The width is minimized;

ii. The removal of trees shall be minimized and in accordance with Chapter 18.45 CMC; 

iii. An additional, contiguous and undisturbed critical area buffer, equal in area to the disturbed critical area buffer area including any allowed maintenance roads, is provided to protect the critical area; and

iv. Mitigation and monitoring shall be in accordance with CMC 18.65.130;

d. To the maximum extent practical, access for maintenance is at limited access points into the critical area buffer rather than by a parallel maintenance road. If a parallel maintenance road is necessary the following standards are met:

i. To the maximum extent practical the width of the maintenance road is minimized and in no event greater than 15 feet; and

ii. The location of the maintenance road is contiguous to the utility corridor on the side of the utility corridor farthest from the critical area;

e. The utility corridor or utility facility will not change or diminish the overall critical area hydrology or flood storage capacity;

f. The construction occurs during approved periods for in-stream work;

g. The utility corridor serves multiple purposes and properties to the maximum extent practical;

h. Bridges or other construction techniques that do not disturb the critical areas are used to the maximum extent practical;

i. Bored crossings meet the following criteria:

i. Are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood; and

ii. The channel is crossed close to perpendicular and never more than 30 degrees from perpendicular;

j. Bridge piers or abutments for bridge crossings are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water line;

k. Open trenching is only used during low flow periods and only within aquatic areas when they are dry. The Department may approve open trenching of Type S or F aquatic areas only if there is not a feasible alternative and equivalent or greater environmental protection can be achieved; and

l. Minor communication facilities may collocate on existing utility facilities if: no new transmission support structure is required; and equipment cabinets are located on the transmission support structure.

30. Permitted if:

a. There is not another feasible location with less adverse impact on the critical area and its buffer, consistent with CMC 18.65.120; and

b. Consistent with public utility connection requirements in CMC Titles 13 and 17. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.060 Agricultural and keeping of livestock activities development standards. 

(1) Agricultural activities are allowed to continue within identified critical areas if the agricultural activity and the alteration are in compliance with an approved farm conservation plan in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 18.80 CMC. 

(2) This section does not waive the requirement that the property owner obtain permits for activities covered by an approved farm conservation plan. 

(3) A farm conservation plan prepared and approved by the King Conservation District shall be submitted to the City for any livestock facilities, structures housing fowl, confinement areas, grazing areas, and construction of any access drive to service the keeping of livestock or agriculture activities located on properties with critical areas and critical area buffers. The farm conservation plan shall include the following information, but not limited to: 

(a) A site inventory identifying critical areas, structures, cleared and forested areas, and other significant features on the site; 

(b) Site-specific performance standards and best management practices to protect and enhance critical areas and their buffers and maintain and enhance native vegetation on the site including the best management practices for the installation and maintenance of farm field access drives and agricultural drainages; 

(c) A plan for future changes to any existing structures or for any changes to the landscape that involve clearing or grading; 

(d) A plan for implementation of performance standards and best management practices; 

(e) A plan for monitoring the effectiveness of measures taken to protect critical areas and their buffers and to modify the farm conservation plan if adverse impacts occur; and 

(f) Documentation of compliance with flood compensatory storage and flood conveyance in accordance with Chapter 16.15 CMC.

(4) The farm conservation plan shall address the following goals, which are listed in order of priority: 

(a) To maintain the productive agricultural land base and economic viability of agriculture on the site;

(b) To restore and enhance critical areas to the maximum extent practical in accordance with the site-specific goals of the landowner; 

(c) To the maximum extent practical in accordance with the site-specific goals of the landowner, maintain and enhance natural hydrologic systems on the site; 

(d) To use Federal, State and local best management practices and best available science to achieve the goals of the farm conservation plan; and 

(e) To monitor the effectiveness of best management practices and implement additional practices through adaptive management to achieve the goals of the farm conservation plan.

(5) Any in-water or wetland impacts will need to be reviewed and approved by State and Federal agencies. 

(6) Prior to approving a farm conservation plan, the City shall conduct a site inspection, to verify that the conditions identified in the plan are in place and that the plan is reasonably likely to accomplish the goals outlined in this section. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.062 Shoreline variance required.

Any alteration of critical areas, critical area setbacks, critical area buffers, or other specific bulk, dimensional, or performance standards located within the shoreline jurisdiction as set forth in this chapter, other than those allowed explicitly in Chapter 16.05 CMC, shall require a shoreline variance based on the variance criteria listed in CMC 16.05.090 and WAC 173-27-170. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.070 Public agency/utility exceptions.

This section applies only to critical areas outside of the shoreline jurisdiction and is not applicable to critical areas within a shoreline jurisdiction. The City’s approved SMP governs the permitted alterations within a shoreline jurisdiction. 

Unless otherwise specified as an alteration in CMC 18.65.050, the public agency/utility exception is a mechanism by which the City may approve limited use and disturbance of a critical area and critical area buffer when no other use of the property constitutes a reasonable alternative. 

(1) If the application of this chapter prohibits a development proposal by a public agency or public utility, the agency or utility may apply for an exception pursuant to this subsection along with the required fees as set forth in CMC 18.65.046. An exception shall not be granted for properties wholly or partially located within a shoreline of the State as regulated in Chapter 16.05 CMC or floodplain as regulated in Chapter 16.15 CMC.

(a) The agency or utility shall apply to the Department and provide related project documents such as permit approvals from other agencies, special studies, and SEPA documents. The Department shall prepare a recommendation to the Director for review and approval subject to the following criteria:

(i) There is no other practical alternative to the proposed development with less impact on the critical area; 

(ii) The proposal minimizes the impact on critical areas and buffers, including modifying the noncritical area setbacks to the maximum extent allowed in this chapter;

(iii) Associated development, including access driveways, and utility infrastructure, shall be located outside of the critical area or critical area buffer to the maximum extent technically feasible;

(iv) Areas of disturbance for associated development, including access and utility infrastructure, shall be consolidated to the maximum extent technically feasible;

(v) All areas of temporary disturbance associated with utility installation, construction staging, and other development shall be determined by the Director and delineated in the field prior to construction and temporary disturbance shall be restored consistent with a restoration plan approved by the City; 

(vi) Areas of permanent disturbance shall be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible on site pursuant to a mitigation plan meeting the requirements of this chapter; and

(vii) Fencing, signage, and/or additional buffer planting should be incorporated into the site development in order to prevent long-term disturbance within the critical area or buffer. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.075 Reasonable use exception.

(1) If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for an exception pursuant to this section upon payment of the fee as set forth in CMC 18.65.046. The exception shall not be granted for properties wholly or partially located within a shoreline of the State as regulated in Covington’s SMP as regulated in Chapter 16.05 CMC or floodplain as regulated in Chapter 16.15 CMC.

(2) Reasonable use exceptions do not apply in the City’s shoreline jurisdictions. Exceptions within the City’s shoreline jurisdictions are processed as a shoreline permit or variance pursuant to CMC 16.05.090.

(3) A reasonable use exception is a Type 3 permit process. The Director shall prepare a staff report to the Hearing Examiner for a decision.

(4) A reasonable use exception request shall be on a form as determined by the City and shall include a critical area report in accordance with CMC 18.65.110. The critical area report shall address the following additional criteria:

(a) An analysis of whether any other reasonable use with less impact on the critical area and critical area buffer is possible;

(b) Site design and construction staging of the proposal shall have the least impact to the critical area and critical area buffer;

(c) The footprint of all proposed structures and improvements including;

(i) Buildings;

(ii) Garages and parking areas;

(iii) Driveways;

(iv) Paved surfaces, such as walking paths;

(v) Patios, decks, and similar structures;

(vi) Location of utility and storm water improvements and easements;

(vii) Yard landscaping; and

(viii) Retaining walls and rockeries;

(d) A description of protective measures that will be undertaken to avoid interference with wildlife and fisheries rearing, nesting, or spawning activities;

(e) An analysis of the impact that the proposed development would have on the critical area and the critical area buffer;

(f) How the proposal mitigates for impacts to the critical areas and buffers;

(g) How the proposal minimizes to the greatest extent possible net loss of critical area functions;

(h) Whether the improvement is located away from the critical area and the critical area buffer to the greatest extent possible; and

(i) City may request additional information or studies necessary to make a recommendation. 

(5) The Hearing Examiner shall review the application and staff report and hold a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 2.25 CMC and CMC Title 14. The Hearing Examiner shall base the decision on the following criteria:

(a) The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property; and

(b) There is no other feasible or reasonable use or on-site alternatives with less impact on the critical area, such as changes to site layout and/or reduction of impervious improvements; and 

(c) It is solely the implementation of this chapter, and not other factors, that precludes all reasonable use of the subject property; and 

(d) The applicant has in no way created or exacerbated the condition that forms the limitation on the use of the subject property, nor in any way contributed to such limitation; and 

(e) The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety or welfare on or off the development proposal site and is consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the public interest; and

(f) Any alterations permitted to the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and

(g) The granting of the exception will not grant the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, buildings, or structures under similar circumstances. 

(6) If the City grants a request under this section, it shall grant the minimum necessary to provide the applicant with some reasonable use of the subject property, considering the factors described in subsections (5)(a) through (g) of this section. Any approval or waiver of requirements shall result in the minimum possible impacts to the function and values and/or risks associated with proposed improvements on affected critical areas. The City may impose limitations, mitigation under an approved mitigation plan, conditions and/or restrictions it considers appropriate to reduce or eliminate any undesirable effects or adverse impacts of granting a request under this section.

(7) The reasonable use exception approval expires and is void if the applicant fails to file a complete building permit application within five years of the final decision granting or approving the exception. 

(8) The City may approve a subsequent modification to a specific use and site plan that has been approved through the reasonable use exception, provided the change meets the standards of this chapter. Otherwise, the applicant is required to apply for and obtain approval through a Type 2 land use process pursuant to Chapter 14.35 CMC for a new reasonable use exception. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.090 Disclosure by applicant.

If a development proposal site contains or is within a critical area, the applicant shall submit an affidavit that declares whether the applicant has knowledge of any illegal alteration to any or all critical areas on the development proposal site and whether the applicant previously has been found in violation of this chapter, pursuant to Chapter 1.30 CMC. If the applicant previously has been found in violation, the applicant shall declare whether the violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the City of Covington. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.100 Critical area review. 

(1) The applicant shall submit a critical area report consistent with CMC 18.65.110. The Department shall review for any development proposal application, permit or other request to alter a site which includes a critical area or is within a critical area buffer. The applicant shall pay a critical area review fee as set forth in CMC 18.65.046. 

(2) As part of the critical area review, the City shall determine whether:

(a) A critical area exists on the property and confirm the nature and type, and applicable buffer;

(b) An alteration will occur to a critical area or a critical area buffer;

(c) A critical area report is required, and if so, evaluate the critical area report to ensure: 

(i) The development proposal is consistent with this chapter;

(ii) The sequence outlined in CMC 18.65.120 has been followed to avoid impacts to critical areas and critical area buffers; and

(iii) Mitigation to compensate for adverse impacts to critical areas is required, enhancements to degraded critical areas (including buffers) and whether the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the general public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.110 Critical area report requirement. 

(1) Unless waived or modified by the Director, an applicant proposing activities which include impacts or alteration of a critical area or its associated buffer shall submit a critical areas report that adequately evaluates the proposal and probable impacts, and proposed mitigation.

(2) The critical area report shall be prepared by a qualified professional, incorporate best available science, and include, at the minimum, the following items:

(a) The name and contact information of the applicant, the name and a description of the proposal;

(b) Vicinity map;

(c) The dates, names, and qualifications of the persons preparing the report;

(d) A scaled site plan depicting critical areas, buffers, setbacks, and proposed improvements;

(e) Photographs of the site and critical areas;

(f) Identification and classification of all critical areas and critical area buffers on the site;

(g) Identification and characterization of all critical areas on those properties immediately adjacent to the proposed improvements;

(h) Identification of each regulation or standard of this chapter proposed to be modified;

(i) A habitat assessment consistent with the requirements of CMC 18.65.350;

(j) A comparison of the level of protection of critical area functions and values provided by the regulations or standards of this chapter, compared with the level of protection provided by the proposal. The analysis shall include: 

(i) A discussion of the functions and values currently provided by the critical area and critical area buffer on the site and their relative importance to the ecosystem in which they exist;

(ii) A discussion of the functions and values likely to be provided by the critical area and critical area buffer on the site as a result of the proposal over the anticipated life of the proposed development;

(k) A description of the proposed impacts to critical areas and/or their associated buffers;

(l) A description of efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to CMC 18.65.120 to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas;

(m) A discussion of the mitigation requirements applicable to the proposal pursuant to this chapter and a recommendation for additional or modified mitigation or enhancement, if any;

(n) Additional information required for the individual critical area; 

(o) Any additional information determined by the Director to adequately review the proposed activity; and

(p) A detailed mitigation plan, including required elements in CMC 18.65.130, may be requested by the Director.

(3) Critical area reports may be reviewed by the City’s third-party consultant at the applicant’s expense, at the City’s discretion. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.120 Sequential steps for mitigation, including avoiding impacts.

(1) An applicant for a development proposal or alteration shall sequentially adhere to the following measures, which appear in order of priority, to avoid and provide compensation for impacts to critical areas and critical area buffers:

(a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

(b) Minimizing the impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts; 

(c) Rectifying the impact to critical areas by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected critical area and/or its buffer;

(d) Minimizing or eliminating a hazard by restoring or stabilizing the critical area through engineered or other methods;

(e) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and/or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal;

(f) Compensating for the adverse impact by enhancing critical areas and their buffers or creating replacement critical areas and their buffers; and

(g) Monitoring the hazard and/or success of required mitigation and taking remedial action as necessary.

(2) The specific mitigation requirements of this chapter for each critical area apply when compensation for adverse impacts is required by the sequence in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.130 Mitigation and monitoring.

(1) If mitigation is allowed under this chapter to compensate for adverse impact and alterations to the critical area and associated buffer, unless otherwise provided, an applicant shall:

(a) Mitigate adverse impacts to critical areas and their buffers;

(b) Provide enhancements to degraded critical areas and their buffers; 

(c) Monitor the performance of any required mitigation and enhancements; and 

(d) Take remedial action, as necessary. 

(2) The Department shall not approve a development proposal until mitigation and monitoring plans have been reviewed and approved to mitigate for alterations to critical areas and buffers.

(3) Whenever mitigation is required, an applicant shall submit a mitigation plan that includes: 

(a) Existing Conditions and Proposed Impacts. A description of existing critical areas and/or buffer conditions, functions and values and a description of the anticipated impacts;

(b) Proposed Mitigation. A description of the proposed mitigation for each impacted critical area including at a minimum type, site selection criteria, method of construction, conceptual design, and landscape plans;

(c) Environmental Goals and Objectives. A description of the goals and objectives of proposed mitigation. The goals and objectives shall be related to the function and values of the impacted critical area and provide an analysis of the likelihood of success of the compensation project;

(d) Best Available Science. A review of the best available science supporting the proposed mitigation and a description of the report author’s experience to date in restoring or creating the type of critical area proposed;

(e) Performance Standards. A description of specific measurable criteria for evaluating whether the goals and objectives of the mitigation project have been successfully attained and whether the requirements of this chapter have been met;

(f) Timing. Mitigation shall be completed concurrently with project construction, unless a phased schedule that assures completion has been approved by the Director;

(g) Detailed Construction Plans. Detailed site diagrams, scaled cross-sectional drawings, topographic maps with slope percentage and final grade elevations, and any other drawing appropriate to show construction techniques or anticipated final outcome. The plans shall include specifications and descriptions of the following:

(i) Proposed construction sequence, timing, and duration;

(ii) Grading and excavation details;

(iii) Erosion and sediment control features;

(iv) Planting plan specifying plant species, quantities, locations, size, spacing, and density; and

(v) Measures to protect and maintain plants until established;

(h) Monitoring Plan. A monitoring plan that includes:

(i) A demonstration of compliance with this chapter; and

(ii) Monitoring Program. The mitigation plan shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project and for assessing a completed project. A record drawing of the completed mitigation will be submitted to the City upon completion. A protocol shall also be included outlining the schedule for annual site monitoring and how the monitoring data will be evaluated to determine if the performance standards are being met. A monitoring report shall be submitted annually to document milestones, success, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. The monitoring period shall be not less than five years;

(i) Contingency Plan. A contingency plan in the event of a failure of mitigation or of unforeseen impacts if:

(i) The Department determines that failure of the mitigation would result in a significant impact on the critical area or buffer; or

(ii) The mitigation involves the creation of a wetland; and

(iii) A monitoring schedule that may extend throughout the impact of the activity or for hazard areas, for as long as the hazard exists;

(j) Financial Guarantees. The mitigation plan shall include financial guarantees, if necessary, to ensure that the mitigation plan is fully implemented, in accordance with CMC 18.65.140.

(4) Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the City approves the mitigation and monitoring plan. The applicant shall notify the City when mitigation is installed and monitoring is commenced and shall provide City with reasonable access to the mitigation for the purpose of inspection during any monitoring period.

(5) If monitoring reveals a significant deviation from predicted impact or a failure of mitigation, the applicant shall implement an approved contingency plan. The contingency plan constitutes new mitigation and is subject to all mitigation requirements including a monitoring plan and financial guarantee requirements. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.135 Off-site mitigation.

(1) To the maximum extent practical, an applicant shall mitigate adverse impacts to a wetland, stream, wildlife habitat conservation area or wildlife habitat network on or contiguous to the development site. The Director may approve mitigation that is off the development site, at the Director’s sole discretion, if an applicant demonstrates that:

(a) It is not practical to mitigate on or contiguous to the development proposal site; and

(b) The off-site mitigation will achieve equivalent or greater hydrological, water quality and wetland or stream habitat functions.

(2) When off-site mitigation is authorized, the Director shall give priority to locations identified through a watershed assessment, preferably within the same drainage sub-basin as the development proposal site, that meet the following:

(a) Certified mitigation banks whose service areas include the City of Covington;

(b) King County mitigation reserves in-lieu fee program mitigation sites; or

(c) Other public or nonprofit mitigation sites approved by the Interagency Review Team (IRT) as part of an in-lieu fee program that have been ranked in a process that has been supported by ecological assessments, including wetland and streams established as priorities for mitigation in City of Covington sub-basin plans or other WRIA No. 9 watershed plans.

(3) The Director may require documentation that the mitigation site has been permanently preserved from future development or alteration that would be inconsistent with the function of the mitigation. The documentation may include, but need not be limited to, a conservation easement or other agreement between the applicant and owner of the mitigation site. The City of Covington may enter into agreements or become a party to any easement or other agreement necessary to ensure that the site continues to exist in its mitigated condition. 

(4) The City of Covington may develop a program to allow the payment of a fee in lieu of providing mitigation on a development site. Once approved by the IRT, the program should address: 

(a) When the payment of a fee is allowed considering the availability of a site in geographic proximity with comparable hydrologic and biological functions and potential for future habitat fragmentation and degradation; and 

(b) The use of the fees for mitigation on public or private sites that have been ranked according to ecological criteria. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.140 Financial guarantees. 

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of Chapter 14.105 CMC and this chapter.

(1) Financial guarantees for mitigation required pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed no later than the time established by the City.

(2) Financial guarantees shall also be required for restoration of a critical area or buffer not performed as part of a mitigation or maintenance plan except that no financial guarantee shall be required for minor stream restoration.

(3) If the development proposal is subject to mitigation, maintenance, or monitoring plans, the applicant shall post a financial guarantee in the amount deemed acceptable by the City. The financial guarantee shall be sufficient to guarantee satisfactory workmanship on, materials in and performance of or related to structures and improvements allowed or required by this chapter for a period of five years. The duration of maintenance/monitoring obligations shall be established by the City, based upon the nature of the proposed mitigation, maintenance, or monitoring and the likelihood and expense of correcting mitigation or maintenance failures.

(4) When mitigation is required pursuant to a development proposal and is not completed prior to the City finally approving the proposal, the City may delay final approval until mitigation is completed or may require the applicant to post a financial guarantee in an amount deemed acceptable to the City. The financial guarantee shall be sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed no later than the time established by the City in accordance with this chapter. 

(5) For financial guarantees associated with mitigation, corrective work, restoration, or enhancement, the financial guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost to guarantee satisfactory workmanship, materials and performance of structures and improvements required by this chapter and any monitoring of those structures and improvements required by approved plans and conditions. 

(6) Depletion, failure or collection of the financial guarantee shall not relieve an applicant or violator from completing the required mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration as required under this chapter.

(7) Public development proposals shall be relieved from having to comply with the provisions of this section if public funds have previously been committed for mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.160 Critical area markers, signs, fencing and installation. 

(1) Markers. Development proposals shall include permanent survey stakes delineating the boundary between adjoining property and critical area tracts, using markers capable of being magnetically located and as established by current survey standards. 

(2) Signs. The applicant shall identify the boundary between a critical area tract and contiguous land with permanent signs. Permanent signs shall be City-approved type designed for high durability. 

(a) Signs must be posted at an interval of one per lot or every 100 feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner or homeowners’ association in perpetuity. 

(b) City of Covington may require signs and fences to delineate and protect critical areas and critical area buffers that are not in critical area tracts. 

(c) The applicant is responsible for obtaining the signs at their sole expense. 

(d) The wording, number and placement of the signs may be modified by the Director based on specific site conditions. 

(3) Fencing. Permanent fencing shall be required at the outer edge of the critical area buffer under the following circumstances:

(a) As part of any development proposal for:

(i) Plats;

(ii) Short plats;

(iii) Parks;

(iv) Other development proposals, including but not limited to multifamily, mixed use, and commercial development where the Director determines that such fencing is necessary to protect the functions of the critical area;

(b) When buffer reductions are employed as part of a development proposal;

(c) When buffer averaging is employed as part of a development proposal; and

(d) At the Director’s discretion to protect the values and functions of a critical area. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.170 Recording notice on title of critical areas. 

(1) The owner of any property containing critical areas or buffers on which a development proposal is submitted or any property on which mitigation is established as a result of a development proposal, except a public right-of-way or the site of a permanent public facility, shall file a notice approved by the Director with the King County Division of Records and Elections. The property owner receiving approval of a use or development with critical areas pursuant to this chapter shall record a site plan or other instrument clearly delineating the critical area, critical area buffer, and critical area structure setback with the King County Division of Records and Elections. The site plans must include a statement that the provisions of this chapter as now, or hereafter amended, control the use and development of the subject property. 

The notice shall inform the public of the presence of critical areas or buffers or mitigation sites on the property, the application of this chapter to the property and the possible existence of limitations on actions in or affecting the critical areas or buffers or the fact that mitigation sites may exist. 

(2) The applicant shall submit proof that the notice on title has been filed for public record before City of Covington approves any development proposal for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions, commercial site development and binding site plans, at or before recording of the subdivision, short subdivision, commercial site development or binding site plan. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.180 Critical area tracts and designations on site plans. 

(1) The applicant shall use critical area tracts to delineate and protect those critical areas and buffers listed below in development proposals and shall record on all documents of title of record for all affected lots:

(a) All landslide hazard areas and buffers;

(b) All steep slope hazard areas and buffers;

(c) All wetlands and buffers; and

(d) All fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and buffers.

(2) Critical area tracts shall be designated on the plat. A plat note shall include the following restriction: 

Critical area tracts shall be preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including but not limited to controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering, and protecting plants, fish, and animal habitat. Removal or disturbance of vegetation and landscaping within the tract is prohibited, except as necessary for maintenance or replacement with approval by the City of Covington.

(3) The City may require that any required critical area tract be dedicated to the City, be held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development with this ownership interest passing with the ownership of the lot, or be held by an incorporated homeowners’ association or other legal entity that ensures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract.

(4) Site plans submitted as part of building permits, clearing and grading permits, or other development permits shall include all critical areas, buffers, and building setbacks and delineate all flood hazard areas as determined by the City in accordance with CMC 18.65.230, landslide and steep slope hazard areas in accordance with CMC 18.65.250 through 18.65.300, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas in accordance with CMC 18.65.350 through 18.65.440, and wetlands in accordance with CMC 18.65.318 through 18.65.340. If only a part of the development site has been mapped pursuant to CMC 18.65.110, the part of the site that has not been mapped shall be clearly identified and labeled on the site plans. Site plans shall be attached to the notice on title required by CMC 18.65.170. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.200 Building setbacks from critical area buffer. 

Buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of 15 feet from the edges of all critical area buffers or from the edges of all critical areas, if no buffers are required. Except the following is allowed in this building setback:

(1) Landscaping;

(2) Uncovered decks lower than 30 inches in height above existing grade;

(3) Building overhangs if the overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the setback area;

(4) Impervious surface areas, such as driveways and patios; but these improvements are required to meet any special drainage provisions specified in public rules adopted for the various critical areas; and 

(5) Utility service connections as long as the excavation for installation avoids impacts to the buffer. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))

Article II. Frequently Flooded Areas


18.65.230 Frequently flooded areas. 

Frequently flooded areas are defined as a critical area under RCW 36.70A.030. Criteria for identification and classification of frequently flooded areas and for protection standards for frequently flooded areas are included under Chapter 16.15 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))

Article III. Geologically Hazardous Areas


18.65.250 Applicability and designation – Geologically hazardous areas.

(1) This article regulates development activities on or within 50 feet of a geologically hazardous area.

(2) Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to erosion, landsliding, seismic, or other geological events. The following areas are designated as geologically hazardous areas:

(a) Erosion hazard areas, defined as those areas underlain by soils that are subject to severe erosion when disturbed, including areas likely to become unstable, such as bluffs, steep slopes, and areas with unconsolidated soils. The soils subject to severe erosion include, but are not limited to, those classified as having a severe to very severe erosion hazard according to the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, the 1973 King County Soils Survey, or any subsequent revisions or addition by or to these sources, such as any occurrence of river wash (“Rh”) and any of the following when the soils occur on slopes inclined at 15 percent or more:

(i) The Alderwood gravelly sandy loam (“AgD”);

(ii) The Alderwood and Kitsap soils (“AkF”);

(iii) The Beausite gravelly sandy loam (“BeD” and “BeF”);

(iv) The Kitsap silt loam (“KpD”);

(v) The Ovall gravelly loam (“OvD” and “OvF”);

(vi) The Ragnar fine sandy loam (“RaD”); and

(vii) The Ragnar-Indianola association (“RdE”);

(b) Landslide hazard areas, defined as those areas subject to severe risk of landslide, based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include any areas susceptible to landslide because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure hydrology, or other factors, and include, at a minimum, the following:

(i) An area with a combination of:

(A) Slopes steeper than 15 percent of inclination;

(B) Impermeable soils, such as silt and clay, interbedded with granular soils, such as sand and gravel; and

(C) Springs or seasonal ground water seepage;

(ii) Areas of historic failures such as:

(A) An area that has shown movement during the Holocene epoch, which is from 10,000 years ago to the present, or that is underlain by mass wastage debris from that epoch;

(B) Those areas delineated by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a significant limitation for building site development;

(C) Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the United States Geological Survey or Washington Department of Natural Resources;

(iii) An area potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion or undercutting by wave action including stream channel migration zones;

(iv) An area that shows evidence of or is at risk from snow avalanches;

(v) An area located in a canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows, or catastrophic flooding, or deposition of stream-transported sediments;

(vi) Any area with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of bedrock;

(vii) Slopes having gradients steeper than 80 percent subject to rockfall during seismic shaking; and

(viii) Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials;

(c) Steep slope hazard areas, defined as those areas on a slope of 40 percent inclination or more within a vertical elevation change of at least 20 feet. For the purpose of this definition, a slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top, as defined in CMC 18.20.1230, and is measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief; and

(d) Seismic hazard areas, defined as those areas in the City of Covington subject to severe risk of earthquake damage as a result of ground movement, ground displacement, or soil liquefaction in areas underlain by cohesionless soils of low density and usually in association with a shallow ground water table or other seismically induced settlement.

(3) Alterations within geological hazard areas are allowed pursuant to CMC 18.65.050. 

(4) The critical area report shall include a geotechnical evaluation prepared by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist licensed in the State of Washington.

(5) The Director may approve a permit for development activities within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet, of a steep slope area or a landslide hazard area, based on the findings of critical area report that the development will not be at risk of damage due to the geologic hazard and will not lead to nor create any increased slide, seismic or erosion hazard.

(6) Allowed alteration within a steep slope, erosion, or landslide hazard area shall minimize alterations to the natural contour of the slope and foundations shall be tiered where possible to conform to existing topography in accordance with Chapter 14.60 CMC. Freestanding retaining devices are only permitted when they cannot be designed as structural elements of the building foundation. Structures and improvement shall be located to preserve the most critical portions of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.260 Erosion hazard areas – Development standards and permitted alterations.

Development proposals and other alterations to sites containing erosion hazard areas shall be allowed, pursuant to applicable permits and approvals, only if they or any other alteration complies with applicable requirements as set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to mitigation requirements and the following standards:

(1) Clearing on an erosion hazard area is allowed only from April 1st to September 1st, unless otherwise determined by the Director and based on an approved erosion and sediment control plan. Timber harvesting may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice permit issued by the Washington Department of Natural Resources or pursuant to an approved tree removal permit as required by Chapter 18.45 CMC. 

(2) All development proposals, including but not limited to subdivisions, short subdivisions, or commercial site development or binding site plans, shall retain existing vegetation on all lots, in accordance with Chapter 14.60 CMC, until the City has approved engineering plans and issued the development proposal construction permits. 

(3) Limited clearing of vegetation on lots may only be allowed for the installation of erosion and sediment control in accordance with a submitted grading permit or engineering plans. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.270 Erosion and seismic hazard areas – Protection measures and specific mitigation.

(1) All proposed improvements within an erosion hazard area or seismic hazard area shall follow the recommendations within the critical area report, and supplemental geotechnical evaluation required in CMC 18.65.250(4), to ensure the improvements will not adversely affect geologic hazards and the improvements are at minimal risk by the geologic hazard as designed under anticipated conditions. 

(2) For any development proposal on a site containing an erosion hazard or seismic hazard area, an erosion and sediment control plan shall be required and included as part of the mitigation plan. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared in compliance with the adopted City standards and stormwater manual. 

(3) Proposed improvements within an erosion hazard area shall also demonstrate all the following via the critical area report: 

(a) The improvement will not increase surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties and/or stormwater systems beyond predevelopment conditions;

(b) The improvement will not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties; and

(c) The improvement will not adversely impact other critical areas.

(4) If vegetation is removed beyond the scope of the approved clearing and grading permit and erosion and sediment control plan associated with the construction of development infrastructure, the City may stop work and the applicant shall be required to submit a restoration plan to the City for review and approval prior to further construction activity allowed on site. Following approval, the applicant shall be required to implement the plan. The City may require a financial guarantee to ensure implementation of the restoration plan. 

(5) Where the City determines that erosion from a development site poses a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters, based either on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving water or the sensitivity of the receiving water, the applicant shall be required to provide continuous monitoring of surface water discharge, turbidity, and suspended sediment concentrations from the site. If the project does not meet water quality standards established by law or administrative rules, the City may suspend further development work on the site until such standards can be met.

(6) Unless otherwise provided in CMC 18.65.050 or part of an allowed exemption, the use of hazardous substances, pesticides and fertilizers in erosion hazard areas may be prohibited by the City. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.280 Landslide hazard areas – Development standards and alterations.

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites containing landslide hazard areas:

(1) Only the alterations identified in CMC 18.65.050 are allowed within a landslide hazard area with a slope of 40 percent or greater;

(2) The critical area report shall include an engineer’s evaluation prepared by an engineer or geologist licensed in the State of Washington;

(3) A buffer is required from all edges of the landslide hazard area. The width of the buffer is based upon a critical area report that shall reflect the sensitivity of the landslide hazard area in question and the types and density of uses proposed on or adjacent to the geologic hazard. The Director may allow buffers to be reduced, no less than 15 feet, if the supplemental engineer evaluation identifies that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed and surrounding development from the critical landslide hazard. To eliminate or minimize the risk of property damage or injury resulting from landslides caused in whole or part by the development, the Director shall determine the size of the buffer based upon the findings and recommendations of a critical area report and supplemental engineer evaluation required in subsection (2) of this section. If a critical area report is not submitted to the City, the minimum buffer shall be 50 feet. If the landslide hazard area has a vertical rise of more than 200 feet, the Department may increase the minimum buffer to 100 feet;

(4) Unless otherwise provided in CMC 18.65.050 or part of an allowed exemption, removal of any vegetation from a landslide hazard area or buffer is prohibited. The buffer shall be extended beyond these limits if they are deemed necessary to mitigate steep slope and erosion hazards, or as otherwise necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety;

(5) All alterations shall minimize disturbance to the landslide hazard area, slope, and vegetation unless necessary for slope stabilization; and

(6) Alterations in a landslide hazard area located on a slope less than 40 percent are allowed if:

(a) The proposed alteration will not decrease slope stability on contiguous properties; and

(b) The risk of property damage or injury resulting from landsliding is eliminated or minimized, based on criteria including altering of drainage patterns and subsurface flow, and the development proposal on that site is certified as safe by a licensed engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.290 Steep slope hazard areas – Development standards and alterations. 

Steep slope hazard areas and associated buffers shall not be altered except as expressly authorized below. The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites containing steep slope hazard areas:

(1) Only the alterations identified in CMC 18.65.050 are allowed within a steep slope hazard area;

(2) A buffer or setback of 50 feet is required from all edges of the steep slope hazard area. To eliminate or minimize the risk of property damage or injury resulting from slope instability, landsliding, or erosion caused in whole or part by the development, the City shall determine the size of the buffer or setback, which may increase or decrease the buffer, based upon a critical area report prepared by a geotechnical engineer or geologist. If a critical area report is not submitted to the City, the minimum buffer is 50 feet. In no case shall the buffer be less than 15 feet, and the buffer may only be reduced pursuant to the findings of the critical area report that demonstrates that the reduction will not reduce the level of protection to the proposed development and the critical area as provided by the 50-foot buffer. An occupied building shall not be closer than 25 feet (including buffer from the top or the toe of a steep slope (or altered steep slope); and

(3) Unless otherwise provided in CMC 18.65.050 or part of an allowed exemption, removal of any vegetation from a steep slope hazard area or buffer is prohibited. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.300 Additional critical area report requirements – Geologically hazardous areas.

(1) Before approving any alteration or development under this article, the City may require the applicant to submit the following information in addition to or as part of the critical areas report:

(a) A geotechnical report prepared by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist licensed in the State of Washington that describes how the proposed development will impact or be impacted by each of the following on the subject property and nearby properties:

(i) Slope stability, landslide hazard, and sloughing;

(ii) Erosion hazards;

(iii) Seismic hazards;

(iv) Ground water;

(v) Seeps, springs, streams and other surface waters; 

(vi) Existing vegetation, including size and type of significant trees;

(vii) Identification of existing fill areas;

(viii) Soil description in accordance with Unified Soil Classification System; and 

(ix) Depth to ground water and estimates of potential seasonal fluctuations;

(b) A topographic survey, in two-foot contours, that identifies the type and extent of geologically hazardous areas on site and off site that are likely to impact or be impacted by the proposal;

(c) Delineation of areas containing slopes 15 percent or greater and 40 percent or greater;

(d) The location of storm drainage facilities on the subject property;

(e) Recommended foundation and retaining wall design criteria and optimal location for buildings, roadways and other improvements. Including bearing layer(s), allowable capacities, minimum width, minimum depth, estimated settlements (total and differential, lateral loads, and other pertinent recommendations);

(f) Grading and earthwork, including compaction and fill material requirements, use of site solids as fill or backfill, imported fill or backfill requirements, height and inclination of both cut and fill slopes and erosion control and wet weather construction considerations and/or limitations; 

(g) Surface and subsurface drainage requirements and drainage material requirements;

(h) Recommended methods for mitigating identified impacts and a description of how these mitigating measures may impact adjacent properties;

(i) Assessment of seismic ground motion amplification and liquefaction potential; and 

(j) Any other information the City determines is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposal.

(2) A decision by the Director to reduce the buffer shall be based on a critical area report that includes the following assessment criteria:

(a) Steep slope and landslide hazard development areas shall be subject to site-specific geotechnical studies;

(b) Steep slope and landslide hazard development areas shall be subject to engineering design considerations that ensure the stability of steep slope areas. Engineering design considerations shall include but are not limited to the following:

(i) Soil cuts require slope stability analysis to evaluate the change in relative stability. Based on the results of the stability analysis, retaining structures will be required to replace any lateral soil support lost. In no case shall the factor of safety be less than one and one-half;

(ii) Soil fills require slope stability analysis and engineering design measures, including keying the fill, compaction, drainage measures, reinforced earth, and structural retaining walls;

(iii) Foundations must be extended to firm, undisturbed native soil, and embedded deep enough to resist lateral loads caused by soil creep (surficial slope movement inherent to all steep slope areas) and other lateral loads which the foundation may be subject to (i.e., seismic and deep seated slope failures);

(iv) Provide subgrade (i.e., reinforced compacted subgrade) or retaining wall design that replaces the support of cuts; designed with a factor of safety of at least one and one-half. Compacted subgrade without reinforcement or retaining structures will not be considered for the support of cuts;

(v) Provide effective, positive drainage for all underground elements of structures or facilities; and 

(vi) All utility connections within steep slope and landslide hazards shall have sufficient flexible connections to avoid utility failure;

(c) The City may employ an outside geotechnical engineer at the applicant’s expense for third-party review of any geotechnical analyses. 

(3) The decision by the Director to reduce the buffer shall include the following conditions:

(a) The applicant shall establish a mechanism that is acceptable to the Director that notifies all future buyers of the lot that the steep slope buffer was reduced and that development has occurred within 50 feet of the steep slope or the steep slope has been eliminated (e.g., notice on title); and

(b) The applicant shall execute an agreement on a form approved by the City Attorney, which indemnifies and holds the City harmless for development within 50 feet of the steep slope.

Both conditions shall be met prior to the issuance of a building permit. The Director may attach additional conditions as necessary to achieve the purpose and intent of this section.

(4) If the City approves any development under this section, it may, among other appropriate conditions, impose the following conditions of approval:

(a) The recommendations of the geotechnical report are followed;

(b) A geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist shall be present on site during all development activities. As an alternative, the City may require minimum site visits by the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist, as required by the City engineer, to establish proper methods, techniques and adherence to plan drawings;

(c) Trees, shrubs and groundcover are retained except where necessary for approved development activities on the subject property;

(d) Additional vegetation is planted in disturbed areas; and

(e) Submit a letter by the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist stating that they have reviewed the project plan drawings and in their opinion the plans and specifications meet the intent of the geotechnical report. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))

Article IV. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas


18.65.311 Critical aquifer recharge areas –Designation.

(1) Critical aquifer recharge areas include those areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water where an aquifer that is a source of drinking water is vulnerable or susceptible to contamination that would affect the potability of water. Susceptibility to ground water contamination occurs where there is a combination of permeable soils, permeable subsurface geology, and decreasing hydraulic head with depth. See the Natural Resources Element of the Covington Comprehensive Plan for a map of potential aquifer recharge areas within the City of Covington.

(2) Critical aquifer recharge areas are categorized as Category I, II, or III as follows:

(a) Category I critical aquifer recharge areas are mapped areas that Covington determined are highly susceptible to ground water contamination and that are located within a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area.

(b) Category II critical aquifer recharge areas are mapped areas that Covington determined to have medium susceptibility to ground water contamination and that are located within a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area.

(c) Category III critical aquifer recharge areas are mapped areas that Covington has determined have low susceptibility to ground water contamination.

(3) The Director may, upon consultation with affected jurisdictions and the affected local water purveyor, determine the location of aquifer recharge areas based on additional information about areas with susceptibility to ground water contamination or on changes to sole source aquifers or wellhead protection areas as identified in wellhead protection programs. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 09-18 § 5; Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.312 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Reclassification or declassification.

Upon application supported by a critical areas report that includes a hydrogeologic site evaluation, the Director may upon consultation with the affected local water purveyor determine that an area that is classified as a critical aquifer recharge area on the map adopted and amended by public rule as follows: 

(1) Does not meet the criteria for a critical aquifer recharge area and declassify that area; or 

(2) Has the wrong critical aquifer recharge area classification and determine the correct classification. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.313 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Categories.

Repealed by Ord. 09-19. (Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.314 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Protection. 

To protect critical aquifer recharge areas, in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW, in addition to the terms of this chapter the following code provisions are established to further protect critical aquifer recharge areas: Chapters 13.25, 13.30, 14.60 and 16.15 CMC.

(1) Development that will not cause contaminants to enter the aquifer may be permitted in critical aquifer recharge areas. 

(2) The City shall impose development conditions to prevent degradation of critical aquifer recharge areas. Development conditions shall be based on all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment (“AKART”).

(3) The proposed activity must comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Ecology, State Department of Health, and Public Health – Seattle and King County.

(4) The proposed activity must be designed and constructed in accordance with the City’s stormwater manuals adopted in Chapter 13.25 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.315 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Development regulations. 

(1) Any proposed development located in critical aquifer recharge areas shall submit a hazardous materials inventory statement with a permit, land use, or business license application. Ongoing operation and maintenance activities of public wells by public water providers are exempt from these requirements.

(2) The City will review the hazardous materials inventory statement along with the permit, land use, or business license application to determine whether hazardous materials will be used, stored, transported or disposed of in connection with the proposed activity. The City shall make the following determinations and apply the appropriate capture zone protection measures:

(a) No hazardous materials are involved;

(b) Hazardous materials are involved; however, existing laws or regulations adequately mitigate any potential impact, and documentation is provided to demonstrate compliance; or

(c) Hazardous materials are involved and the proposal has the potential to significantly impact critical aquifer recharge areas. The City may require a hydrogeologic assessment with a critical areas report to be prepared by a qualified professional in order to determine the potential impacts of contamination on the aquifer. The report shall include the following site and proposal-related information:

(i) Information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site, including the surface location of the capture zone in which it is located and the type of infiltration of the site;

(ii) Ground water depth, flow direction, and gradient;

(iii) Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 200 feet of the site;

(iv) Best management practices and integrated pest management proposed to be used, including:

(A) Predictive evaluation of ground water withdrawal effects on nearby wells and surface water features;

(B) Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to ground water; and

(C) Predictive evaluation of changes in the infiltration/recharge rate.

(3) A spill containment and response plan may be required to identify equipment and/or structures that could fail, and shall include provisions for inspection as required by the applicable State regulations.

(4) A ground water monitoring plan may be required to monitor quality and quantity of ground water, surface water runoff, and/or site soils. The City may require the owner of a facility to install one or more ground water monitoring wells to accommodate the required ground water monitoring. Criteria used to determine the need for site monitoring shall include, but not be limited to, the proximity of the facility to production or monitoring wells, the type and quantity of hazardous materials on site, and whether or not the hazardous materials are stored in underground vessels.

(5) The City may employ an outside consultant at the applicant’s expense for third-party review of the critical areas report, hydrogeologic assessment, the spill containment and response plan, and the ground water monitoring plan.

(6) The following new development proposals and alterations are not allowed on a site if any portion of the site is located in a Category I critical aquifer recharge area: 

(a) Transmission pipelines carrying petroleum or petroleum products; 

(b) Sand and gravel, and hard rock mining on land that is not zoned for mining; 

(c) Mining of any type below the upper surface of the saturated ground water that could be used for potable water supply; 

(d) Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive wastes, as defined in Chapter 43.200 RCW; 

(e) Hydrocarbon extraction; 

(f) Commercial wood treatment facilities on permeable surfaces; 

(g) Underground storage tanks with hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW; 

(h) Above-ground storage tanks for hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW, unless protected with primary and secondary containment areas and a spill protection plan; 

(i) Golf courses; 

(j) Cemeteries; 

(k) Wrecking yards; 

(l) Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste; and 

(m) On lots smaller than one acre, on-site septic systems that are not approved by the Washington State Department of Health and either: 

(i) Do not use an up-flow media filter system or a proprietary packed-bed filter system; or 

(ii) Are not designed to achieve approximately 80 percent total nitrogen removal for typical domestic wastewater. 

(7) The following new development proposals and alterations are not allowed on a site if any portion of the site is located in a Category II critical aquifer recharge area: 

(a) Mining of any type below the upper surface of the saturated ground water that could be used for potable water supply; 

(b) Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive wastes, as defined in Chapter 43.200 RCW; 

(c) Hydrocarbon extraction; 

(d) Commercial wood treatment facilities located on permeable surfaces; 

(e) Underground storage tanks with hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW, that do not meet the requirements of Chapter 173-360 WAC and the International Fire Code; 

(f) Above-ground storage tanks for hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW, unless protected with primary and secondary containment areas and a spill protection plan; 

(g) Wrecking yards; 

(h) Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste; and 

(i) On lots smaller than one acre, on-site septic systems that are not approved by the Washington State Department of Health and either: 

(i) Do not use an up-flow media filter system or a proprietary packed-bed filter system; or 

(ii) Are not designed to achieve approximately 80 percent total nitrogen removal for typical domestic wastewater. 

(8) The following new development proposals and alterations are not allowed on a site if any portion of the site is located in a Category III critical aquifer recharge area: 

(a) Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive wastes, as defined in Chapter 43.200 RCW; 

(b) Hydrocarbon extraction; 

(c) Commercial wood treatment facilities located on permeable surfaces; 

(d) Underground storage tanks with hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW, that do not meet the requirements of Chapter 173-360 WAC and the International Fire Code; 

(e) Above-ground storage tanks for hazardous substances, as defined in Chapter 70.105 RCW, unless protected with primary and secondary containment areas and a spill protection plan; 

(f) Wrecking yards; and 

(g) Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste.

(9) The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations that are substantial improvements on a site if any portion of the site is located in a critical aquifer recharge area: 

(a) The owner of an underground storage tank in a Category I critical aquifer recharge area shall properly decommission or remove the tank; and 

(b) The owner of an underground storage tank in a Category II or III critical aquifer recharge area shall meet the requirements of Chapter 173-360 WAC and the International Fire Code or shall properly decommission or remove the tank. 

(10) In any critical aquifer recharge area, the property owner shall properly decommission an abandoned well. 

(11) On sites located in a critical aquifer recharge area, development proposals and alterations for new development, including, but not limited to, a subdivision, short subdivision, commercial site development, binding site plan, or dwelling unit, shall incorporate best management practices pursuant to the stormwater manuals adopted in Chapter 13.25 CMC into the site design in order to manage stormwater runoff. 

(12) The City may approve a development proposal otherwise prohibited by subsection (6), (7) or (8) of this section if the applicant demonstrates through a critical areas report that the development proposal is located outside of the critical aquifer recharge area and that the development proposal will not cause an unmitigated significant adverse environmental impact to the critical aquifer recharge area. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.316 Critical aquifer recharge areas – Evaluation and implementation. 

The City may evaluate and implement, as appropriate, ground water management plans and wellhead protection programs to further protect ground water resources as the critical aquifer protection program. In order to protect ground water quality, the City may require a ground water monitoring plan and/or a hydrogeologic critical area assessment report for new development projects. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))

Article V. Wetlands


18.65.318 Wetland – Identification and evaluation.

(1) Generally. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987) and the Regional Supplement to the Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual: Western Mountains, Valleys, and Coast Region (Version 2.0) (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 2010), or as amended. All areas within the City meeting the wetland criteria are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Wetland delineations are valid for five years; after such date the City shall determine whether a revision or additional assessment is necessary.

(2) Evaluation. The developer shall determine if a wetland exists on or within 225 feet of the subject property, and shall submit a wetland report prepared by a qualified professional. The City will verify the findings in the report based on current studies and field verification. The wetland report and the accompanying plan sheets shall contain the following information:

(a) Critical area report information identified in CMC 18.65.110;

(b) Identification of all local, State, and/or Federal wetland related permit(s) required for the proposal;

(c) Documentation of fieldwork, including field data sheets, rating forms, and baseline hydrologic data;

(d) Description of the methodologies used to conduct the wetland delineations, rating forms, or impact analyses, including references;

(e) Identification and characterization of all wetlands and buffers on and within 225 feet of the subject property. For off-site areas with limited or no access, estimate conditions using best available information;

(f) Provide the following for each wetland identified on and/or within 225 feet of the subject property. Acreage estimates, classifications, and ratings shall be based on entire wetland complexes, not only the portion present on the subject property:

(i) Wetland rating and score for each function;

(ii) Required buffers;

(iii) Hydrogeomorphic classification;

(iv) Wetland acreage;

(v) U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cowardin) classification of vegetation communities;

(vi) Habitat elements;

(vii) Soil conditions based on site assessment and/or soil survey information; and

(viii) Hydrologic information such as location and condition of inlets/outlets, estimated water depths within the wetland, and estimated hydroperiod patterns based on visual cues (e.g., algal mats, drift lines, and flood debris);

(g) An evaluation of the functions of the wetland and adjacent buffer. Include reference for the method used and supporting documentation.

(3) No development or improvements may be located within a wetland except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.319 Wetlands – Classes and categories.

(1) Different types of wetlands are separated from one another on the basis of wetland class and wetland category. Wetland class is determined by using a scientific system based upon dominant plant communities, substrate conditions, hydrologic regime, and location in the watershed. Wetland category is determined by using a rating system based on specific attributes such as rarity, sensitivity to disturbance, and the functions they provide. 

(2) Wetland Class. Two classification systems are commonly used to describe wetlands. The first is a science-based classification system used by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as described in Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States, Second Edition (Federal Geographic Data Committee. 2013. FGDC-STD-004-2013).

The second is the hydrogeomorphic method (HGM) classification (Brinson 1993), a system WDOE incorporated for use in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (WDOE Publication No. 14-06-029, or as hereafter amended). 

(3) Wetland Category. Wetland category is used to regulate activities in a wetland and in determining the standard width of the required wetland buffer. The wetland category is determined after a wetland has been identified and delineated in accordance with the approved wetland delineation manual. 

WDOE Publication No. 14-06-029, or as amended, contains the definitions and scoring methods used for determining wetlands functions and rating. The wetland category of an individual wetland is determined by the total score for the functions which is recorded on the first page of the wetland rating form included in WDOE Publication No. 14-06-029, or as amended. Wetlands are also rated for “special characteristics,” when applicable, the value of which is included in the final category rating. 

(a) Category I. Category I wetlands are: (i) wetlands of high conservation value as identified by scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage Program/DNR; (ii) bogs; (iii) mature and old-growth forested wetlands larger than one acre; (iv) wetlands that perform functions at high levels (scoring 23 points or more). These wetlands: (i) represent unique or rare wetland types; (ii) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; (iii) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (iv) provide a high level of functions.

(b) Category II. Category II wetlands are wetlands that perform functions well (scoring between 20 and 22 points).

(c) Category III. Category III wetlands are: (i) wetlands with a moderate level of functions (scoring between 16 and 19 points); and (ii) can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project. Wetlands scoring between 16 and 19 points generally have been disturbed in some ways and are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands.

(d) Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions (scores less than 16 points) and are often heavily disturbed. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.320 Wetlands – Buffers. 

(1) Wetland – Buffers. Except as otherwise provided in this section, buffers shall be provided from the wetland edge in accordance with the following standards:

(a) The standard buffer widths of the following table shall apply if impact minimization measures are included in accordance with subsection (2), (3), or (4) of this section:

	WETLAND CATEGORY AND CHARACTERISTICS	BUFFER

	Category I	 

	Bog	225 feet

	Habitat score from 8 to 9 points	225 feet

	Habitat score from 6 to 7 points	110 feet

	Category I wetlands not meeting any of the criteria above	75 feet

	Category II	 

	Habitat score from 8 to 9 points	225 feet

	Habitat score from 6 to 7 points	110 feet

	Category II wetlands not meeting any of the criteria above	75 feet

	Category III	 

	Habitat score from 8 to 9 points	225 feet

	Habitat score from 6 to 7 points	110 feet

	Category III wetlands not meeting any of the criteria above	60 feet

	Category IV	40 feet

(2) Buffer Impact Minimization Measures. The following measures shall be implemented in order to utilize the standard buffer widths as noted in subsection (1) of this section.

(a) The following measures shall be used by an applicant to obtain a standard buffer width under subsection (1) of this section:

	Disturbance	Required Measures to Minimize Impacts

	Lights	•	Direct lights away from wetland

	Noise	•	Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland

	•	If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source

	•	For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially disruptive noise, such as heavy industry, establish an additional 10-foot heavily vegetated buffer strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer 

	Toxic runoff	•	Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered

	•	Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within 150 feet of wetland

	•	Apply integrated pest management

	Change in water regime	•	Infiltrate or treat, detain and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns

	Pets and human disturbance	•	Use privacy fencing or plant dense vegetation to delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance of wildlife by humans and pets using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion 

	•	Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect with a conservation easement 

	Dust	•	Use best management practices to control dust

	Degraded buffer condition	•	Nonnative plants to be removed and replaced with native vegetation per an approved landscaping plan to be bonded and monitored for not less than a five-year period after completion to assure at least 80% survival of plantings

	Stormwater runoff	•	Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads and existing adjacent development

	•	Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters the buffer

	•	Use low intensity development techniques 

	Disruption of corridors or potential or existing wildlife habitat connections	•	Maintain connections to off-site areas that are undisturbed

	•	Restore corridors or connections to off-site habitats by replanting

(3) If a Category I or II wetland with habitat score seven points or greater is located within 300 feet of a priority habitat area as defined by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, the buffer established by subsection (1) of this section shall be increased by 50 feet unless:

(a) The applicant provides a relatively undisturbed vegetated corridor at least 100 feet wide between the wetland and all priority habitat areas located within 300 feet of the wetland. The corridor shall be protected for the entire distance between the wetland and the priority habitat through dedication to the City of a conservation easement, native or the equivalent; and 

(b) The applicable mitigation measures in subsection (2)(a) of this section shall be applied.

(4) Buffer Averaging. The Director may approve a modification of the standard buffer widths required on a case-by-case basis by averaging buffer widths, based on review of a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional describing the current functions of the wetland and its buffer and the measures that will be taken to ensure that there is no loss of wetland function due to buffer averaging, if: 

 (a) The Director determines that the ecological structure and function of the buffer after averaging are equivalent to or greater than the structure and function before averaging; 

(b) The resulting buffer meets the following standards: 

(i) The total area of the buffer after averaging is equivalent to or greater than the area of the buffer before averaging; 

(ii) The additional buffer is contiguous with the standard buffer; and

(iii) Averaging does not occur into the buffer of another wetland or stream except as otherwise allowed. 

(c) In no case shall a standard averaged buffer width be reduced to less than 75 percent of the standard buffer at any location;

(d) Averaging does not result in any impact to other critical areas; and

(e) Averaging does not result in a significant adverse impact to habitat associated with species of local importance.

(5) Where a legally established street transects a wetland buffer, the Director may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer width to the edge of the roadway if part of the buffer is on the other side of the roadway: 

(a) Does not provide additional protection of the proposed development or the wetland; 

(b) Does not perform any biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the undisturbed portions of the wetland buffer; 

(c) The alterations allowed in CMC 18.65.050 are not allowed in buffers established in accordance with this subsection; and 

(d) The buffer widths established in accordance with this subsection are not further modified as provided for in subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 

(6) The City may establish minimum buffer widths for wetlands that are created as a result of enhancement or restoration projects that are not mitigation for a development proposal or alteration. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.340 Wetlands – Specific mitigation requirements. 

In addition to the requirements in CMC 18.65.130 and 18.65.135, the following applies to mitigation to compensate for the adverse impacts associated with an alteration to a wetland:

(1) Mitigation measures must achieve equivalent or greater wetland functions, including, but not limited to:

(a) Habitat complexity, connectivity and other biological functions; and

(b) Seasonal hydrological dynamics, water storage capacity and water quality;

(2) The following ratios of area of mitigation to area of alteration apply to determine mitigation area required for permanent alterations:

	Category	Creation or Re-establishment	Rehabilitation	Creation (C) and Rehabilitation (R) or Enhancement (E)	Enhancement Only

	IV	1.5:1	3:1	1:1 C and 1:1 R or 2:1 E	6:1

	III	2:1	4:1	1:1 C and 2:1 R or 4:1 E	8:1

	II	3:1	6:1	1:1 C and 4:1 R or 8:1 E	12:1

	I – forested	6:1	12:1	1:1 C and 10:1 R or 20:1 E	 24:1

	I – based on score for functions	4:1	8:1	1:1 C and 6:1 R or 12:1 E	16:1

	I – bog	Not allowed	Case-by-case	Not possible 	Case-by-case

(3) As an alternative to mitigation ratios provided in the table in subsection (2) of this section, the City of Covington may approve mitigation using the WDOE Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington (Publication No. 10-06-011) (Hruby 2012) or as revised. This tool can be used to determine mitigation needs by estimating the functions and values lost when a wetland is altered, and estimating the gain in functions and values that result from the mitigation. This method must be applied by individuals trained and approved by Ecology in the use of this method;

(4) The City may consider two or more contiguous sites under common ownership as one site for the purpose of mitigation ratios when:

(a) All applicable sites are in the same drainage sub-basin; 

(b) Equivalent or greater wetland functions will be achieved; and

(c) A notice on title, identifying the location, interconnectivity, and requirement for mitigation are recorded against each site pursuant to CMC 18.65.170; 

(5) For temporary alterations to a wetland or its buffer that are predominantly woody vegetation, the City may require mitigation in addition to restoration of the altered wetland or buffer;

(6) For rectifying an illegal alteration to any category wetland or its buffer, the ratio of area of mitigation to area of alteration for repair, rehabilitation or restoration is one and one-half to one and the mitigation measures shall replicate the natural pre-alteration wetland configuration at its natural pre-alteration location to the maximum extent practical, including:

(a) The wetland edge and buffer configuration;

(b) The depth, width, length and gradient;

(c) The soil type, conditions and physical features;

(d) Similar species diversity and density; and 

(e) The hydrologic, water quality, and biologic functions;

(7) Mitigation for an alteration to a buffer of a wetland that occurs along an aquatic area lake shoreline in accordance with an alteration identified in CMC 18.65.050 shall include, but not be limited to, on-site revegetation, maintenance and other restoration of the buffer or setback area to the maximum extent practical and shall be evaluated against the requirements of the City’s SMP (Chapter 16.05 CMC) if applicable; and

(8) The City may allow off-site mitigation for adverse impacts to buffers on the development proposal site at a ratio higher than that required for mitigation on site if the applicant demonstrates that it is not feasible to mitigate on the development proposal site, in the same wetland or wetland complex, pursuant to off-site mitigation requirements in CMC 18.65.135. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))

Article VI. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas


18.65.350 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Applicability.

(1) This article regulates development in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (“FWHCA”) and their associated buffers. FWHCAs in the City include subsections (2) through (6) of this section. All areas within the City meeting one or more of these criteria, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be managed consistent with best available science, such as the current edition of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Management Recommendations for Priority Habitats and Species.

(2) Streams and Shorelines. Streams and shoreline water bodies shall be classified in accordance with the Washington Department of Natural Resources permanent water typing system (WAC 222-16-030), or as amended, which is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference and summarized as follows:

(a) Type S: streams and water bodies inventoried as “shorelines of the State” under Chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW;

(b) Type F: streams that contain fish habitat;

(c) Type Np: perennial nonfish habitat streams; and

(d) Type Ns: seasonal nonfish habitat streams.

(3) Naturally Occurring Ponds. Those ponds that are less than 20 acres in size and not regulated as “shorelines of the State.” Naturally occurring ponds are those ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat, including those artificial ponds intentionally created from dry areas in order to mitigate impacts to ponds. Naturally occurring ponds do not include ponds deliberately designed and created from dry sites, such as canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, temporary construction ponds, and landscape amenities, unless such artificial ponds were intentionally created for mitigation.

(4) Areas with State or Federally Designated Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive Species Having a Primary Association. 

(a) Federally designated endangered and threatened species are those fish and wildlife species identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and NOAA Fisheries that are in danger of extinction or threatened to become endangered. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service should be consulted for current listing status.

(b) State-designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species are those fish and wildlife species native to the State of Washington identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife that are in danger of extinction, threatened to become endangered, vulnerable, or declining and are likely to become endangered or threatened in a significant portion of their range within the State without cooperative management or removal of threats. State-designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species are periodically recorded in WAC 232-12-014 (State endangered species) and WAC 232-12-011 (State threatened and sensitive species). The State Department of Fish and Wildlife maintains the most current listing and should be consulted for current listing status.

(5) State Priority Habitats and Areas Associated with State Priority Species. Priority habitats and species are considered to be priorities for conservation and management. Priority species require protective measures for their perpetuation due to their population status, sensitivity to habitat alteration, and/or recreational, commercial, or tribal importance. Priority habitats are those habitat types or elements with unique or significant value to a diverse assemblage of species. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type or dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element. Priority habitats and species are identified by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife.

(6) Habitats and Species of Local Importance. Habitats and species of local importance are those identified by the City of Covington, including but not limited to those habitats and species that, due to the population status or sensitivity to habitat manipulation, warrant protection. Habitats may include a seasonal range or habitat element where a species has a primary association, and if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. The City of Covington has determined habitats and species in subsection (5) of this section are habitats and species of local importance. Additional habitats and species of local importance are those identified by the City including:

(a) Land essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and critical areas, such as wildlife habitat networks or corridors; and 

(b) Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.355 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Designation and purpose. 

(1) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas include nesting and breeding grounds for State and Federal threatened, endangered, sensitive or priority species listed by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, including corridors or networks which connect priority habitat, and those areas which provide habitat for species of local importance which have been or may be identified by the City of Covington. 

(2) The purpose of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be to provide opportunities for food, cover, nesting, breeding and movement for fish and wildlife within the City; maintain and promote diversity of species and habitat within the City; coordinate habitat protection with elements of the City’s established or planned wildlife corridors wherever possible; help to maintain air and water quality; control erosion; provide areas for recreation, education and scientific study and aesthetic appreciation; and contribute to the established character of the City. 

(3) The City of Covington has given special consideration to the identification and regulation of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas that support anadromous fisheries in order to preserve and enhance species which are or may be listed as endangered, threatened or priority species by State and Federal agencies. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.358 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Classification.

(1) Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are those areas designated by the City based on review of the best available science; input from Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Washington Department of Ecology, and other agencies; and any of the following criteria: 

(a) The presence of species proposed or listed by the Federal government or the State of Washington as endangered, threatened, sensitive, or priority; or 

(b) Streams and wetlands and their associated buffers that provide significant habitat for fish and wildlife. 

(2) The City designates the following fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas that meet the above criteria, and this designation does not preclude designation of additional areas as provided in subsection (1) of this section:

(a) All regulated shorelines, streams, and wetlands and their associated buffers as determined by a qualified specialist, and as approved by the Director;

(b) Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat; and 

(c) Habitat associated with species of local importance as provided in CMC 18.65.350. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.360 Streams and shorelines – Standard buffers. 

(1) Streams and Shorelines – Buffers. No development may take place within a stream or shoreline water body or within the following standard buffer areas except as allowed within this chapter or the SMP (Chapter 16.05 CMC). Buffer widths shall be measured outward on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water line or top of bank if ordinary high water line cannot be identified:

(a) If the stream or shoreline buffer does not include a steep slope hazard area or landslide hazard area:

(i) A Type S water body (shoreline) buffer is as defined in the shoreline master program (SMP) (Table 16.05.280-2 CMC);

(ii) A Type F stream buffer is 115 feet;

(iii) A Type Np stream buffer is 60 feet; and

(iv) A Type Ns stream buffer is 30 feet;

(b) If the stream or shoreline buffer does include a steep slope hazard area or landslide hazard area, the buffer width is the greater of either the buffer in this section, or the SMP, or 25 feet beyond the top of the hazard area; and

(c) The stream or shoreline buffer includes the entire mapped severe channel migration hazard area plus the appropriate stream buffer required by this section measured from the outer edge of the severe channel migration hazard area.

(2) Buffer Averaging. The Director may approve a modification of the minimum required standard buffer widths, on a case-by-case basis, by averaging buffer widths, based on review of a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional describing the current function of the stream and the stream buffer and the measures that will be taken to ensure that there is no loss of stream function due to buffer averaging if: 

(a) The Director determines that the ecological structure and function of the buffer after averaging is equivalent to or greater than the structure and function before averaging; 

(b) The resulting buffer meets the following standards: 

(i) The total area of the buffer after averaging is equivalent to or greater than the area of the buffer before averaging; 

(ii) The additional buffer is contiguous with the standard buffer; 

(iii) Averaging does not occur waterward of the top of the associated steep slopes or into a channel migration zone; and 

(iv) Averaging does not occur into the buffer of a wetland except as otherwise allowed; 

(c) In no case shall a standard average stream buffer be reduced to less than 60 percent of the standard buffer in any location; 

(d) Averaging does not result in any impact to another critical area; 

(e) Averaging does not result in a significant adverse impact to habitat associated with species of local importance; and 

(f) Buffer averaging within a shoreline jurisdiction shall also be subject to the City’s SMP regulations as set forth in CMC 16.05.280(2)(c).

(3) Buffer Reduction. The Director may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer width for a development proposal if the applicant demonstrates that the buffer cannot provide certain functions because of soils, geology or topography subject to the following: 

(a) The Director shall establish the buffer width based on the ecological functions that the buffer can provide based on soils, geology and topography; 

(b) The buffer widths established in accordance with this subsection are not further modified as provided for in subsection (2) of this section; and 

(c) Within shoreline jurisdiction, stream and Pipe Lake shoreline buffer reductions and mitigation are implemented pursuant to CMC 16.05.230(3) and 16.05.280(2)(c).

(4) Where a legally established street transects a stream buffer, the Director may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer width to the edge of the roadway if the part of the buffer on the other side of the roadway: 

(a) Does not provide additional protection of the proposed development or the stream; 

(b) Does not perform any biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the undisturbed portions of the stream buffer; 

(c) The alterations allowed in CMC 18.65.050 are not allowed in buffers established in accordance with this subsection; and 

(d) The buffer widths established in accordance with this subsection are not further modified as provided for in subsections (2) and (3) of this section. 

(5) The Director may establish minimum buffer widths for streams that are created as a result of enhancement or restoration projects that are not mitigation for a development proposal or alteration. 

(6) The buffer areas established by this section do not apply to any segment of a stream that is presently within a culvert, unless that stream will be taken out of the culvert as part of development of the subject property.

(7) Permanently Altered Buffer. The Director may provide written approval for a buffer reduction when existing conditions are such that portions of the required buffer exist in a permanently altered state (e.g., roadways, paved parking lots, and permanent structures) and do not provide any buffer function, based on review of a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional. The buffer may be reduced up to the area where the altered conditions exist.

(8) Increased Buffer Widths. The Director may require increased buffer widths that are necessary to protect habitat, health, safety, and welfare on site-specific areas as follows:

(a) When the Director determines that the buffer width is insufficient to prevent habitat degradation;

(b) When a channel migration zone is present. The stream buffer width shall be measured from the outer edge of the channel migration zone; or

(c) When the stream buffer area is within an erosion or landslide hazard area. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.365 Streams and shoreline associated buffers – Development standards and alterations. 

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites containing stream and shoreline buffers:

(1) Only the alterations identified in CMC 18.65.050 are allowed in non-shoreline streams and stream buffers. Activities and alterations to shoreline buffers shall be subject to the provisions of the SMP, Chapter 16.05 CMC.

(2) Grading for allowed alterations in stream buffers is only allowed from May 1st to October 1st;

(3) The soil duff layer should not be disturbed to the maximum extent practical. The disturbed duff layer should be redistributed to other areas of the project site where feasible;

(4) The moisture-holding capacity of the topsoil layer should be maintained by minimizing soil compacting or re-establishing natural soil structure and the capacity to infiltrate on all areas of the site that impervious surfaces do not cover; 

(5) To the maximum extent practical, vegetation outside the stream buffer is spatially connected to the vegetation in the buffer to prevent creation of windthrow hazards in the buffer;

(6) New structures within a stream buffer, permitted in accordance with this chapter, shall be sited to avoid the creation of future hazard trees and to minimize the impact on ground water movement from the structure;

(7) To the maximum extent practical, hazard trees are retained in stream buffers and are topped to reduce the hazard or pushed over toward the stream; and

(8) Alterations may only be permitted if also approved by State and/or Federal permits, if applicable. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.370 Streams – Permitted alterations. 

Alterations to shoreline streams, water bodies and buffers are allowed pursuant to the SMP, Chapter 16.05 CMC. Alterations to non-shoreline streams and their buffers may be allowed pursuant to CMC 18.65.050 and as follows:

(1) Alterations may only be permitted if based upon a critical area report prepared in accordance with CMC 18.65.110;

(2) Upon application for critical area review or associated development proposal, the City will notify affected agencies and native tribes of the proposed alterations prior to any alteration if a stream is in a frequently flooded area. The applicant will be required to provide a response or additional documentation based on requests by affected agencies and native tribes; 

(3) There shall be no introduction of any plant or wildlife which is not indigenous to the City into any stream or buffer unless authorized by a State or Federal permit or approval;

(4) Surface water discharge to a stream buffer from a stormwater management facility may be allowed if there are no significant adverse impacts to the stream or required buffer and the discharge is in compliance with the stormwater manuals adopted in Chapter 13.25 CMC and in accordance with CMC 18.65.050;

(5) New Stream Crossings. New stream crossings will be reviewed and decided upon using the Type 2 decision process in CMC Title 14. Responses to decisional critical and design requirements in this section shall be included in the critical areas report. Stream crossings may be allowed and may encroach on the otherwise required stream buffer if:

(a) Any new crossing over a stream shall be generally perpendicular to the critical area and shall be accomplished by bridging or other technique designed to minimize critical area disturbance. It shall also be the minimum width necessary to accommodate the intended function or objective; 

(b) Culverts and bridges are designed and installed consistent with an approved permit from the applicable State and Federal agencies with review authority;

(c) All crossings are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to salmonids;

(d) Crossings do not occur over salmonid spawning areas unless City determines that no other possible crossing site exists;

(e) Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the FEMA floodway or the ordinary high water line;

(f) Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

(g) Utility lines and facilities may be permitted to cross streams if they are laterally drilled and located at a depth beneath the scour depth for the water body predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington, or as directed by State or Federal permitting agencies. Temporary bore pits to perform such crossings may be permitted within the stream buffer established in CMC 18.65.360;

(h) Crossings are minimized and serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible;

(i) Disturbances to the stream buffer are adequately compensated by a stream buffer enhancement plan; and 

(j) No reasonable alternative exists to access the subject property; 

(6) Stream Relocations. Stream relocations may be allowed only for:

(a) As part of a public road project for which a public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to CMC 18.65.070; and

(b) The purpose of enhancing and restoring resources in the stream if:

(i) Appropriate floodplain protection measures are used; and

(ii) The relocation occurs on the site, except that relocation off the site may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that any on-site relocation is impracticable, the applicant provides all necessary easements and waivers from affected property owners and the off-site location is in the same drainage sub-basin as the original stream;

(c) As part of any request under this section, the applicant must submit a stream relocation plan that has been reviewed and approved by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife with the critical areas report that shows the following:

(i) The creation of a natural meander pattern;

(ii) The formation of gentle side slopes, at least two feet horizontally to one foot vertically, and the installation of erosion control features for stream side slopes;

(iii) The creation of a narrow sub-channel, where feasible, against the south or west bank;

(iv) The utilization of natural materials, wherever possible;

(v) The use of vegetation normally associated with streams, including primarily native riparian vegetation;

(vi) The creation of spawning and nesting areas, wherever appropriate;

(vii) The re-establishment of the fish population, wherever feasible;

(viii) The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat areas, wherever feasible;

(ix) The filling and revegetation of the prior channel; and

(x) A proposed phasing plan specifying time of year for all project phases;

(d) For any relocation allowed by this section, the applicant shall demonstrate, based on information provided by a civil engineer and a qualified biologist, and included in the critical area report that:

(i) The equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained;

(ii) There will be no adverse impact to local ground water;

(iii) There will be no increase in velocity;

(iv) There will be no interbasin transfer of water;

(v) There will be no increase in sediment load;

(vi) Requirements set out in the mitigation plan are met;

(vii) The relocation conforms to other applicable laws; and 

(viii) All work will be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist;

(e) The City will allow a stream to be relocated only if water quality, habitat and stormwater retention capability of the streams will be the equivalent or improved by the relocation. Convenience to the applicant in order to facilitate general site design shall not be considered;

(f) Prior to diverting water into the new channel, a qualified professional shall inspect the new channel following its completion and issue a written report to the Director stating that the channel complies with the requirements of this section;

(7) A stream channel may be stabilized if:

(a) Movement of the stream channel threatens existing residential or commercial structures, public facilities or improvements, unique natural resources or the only existing access to property; and

(b) The stabilization is done in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 16.15 CMC and administrative rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter;

(8) Stream enhancement not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if accomplished according to a plan for its design, implementation, maintenance and monitoring prepared by a civil engineer, a landscape architect or a qualified biologist and carried out under the direction of a qualified biologist or landscape architect;

(9) A minor stream restoration project for fish habitat enhancement may be allowed if:

(a) The restoration is sponsored by a public agency with a mandate to do such work;

(b) The restoration is unassociated with mitigation of a specific development proposal;

(c) The restoration is limited to placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel and other specific salmonid habitat improvements;

(d) The restoration only involves the use of hand labor and light equipment; or the use of helicopters and cranes which deliver supplies to the project site; provided, that they have no contact with sensitive areas or their buffers; and

(e) The restoration is performed under the direction of a qualified biologist or landscape architect; and

(10) Roadside drainage ditches which carry streams with salmonids may be maintained through the use of best management practices developed in consultation with relevant City, County, State and Federal agencies. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.375 Streams – Removal from culverts and pipes.

If development of the subject property requires City approval, the City may require the stream to be taken out of the culvert and pipes, and restored to a natural-like configuration as part of the City’s approval of development of the subject property. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.380 Streams – Specific mitigation requirements.

In addition to the requirements in CMC 18.65.130, the following applies to mitigation to compensate for the adverse impacts associated with an alteration to a stream or stream buffer:

(1) Mitigation measures shall be addressed in the critical area report and must achieve equivalent or greater stream functions including, but not limited to:

(a) Habitat complexity, connectivity and other biological functions;

(b) Seasonal hydrological dynamics, water storage capacity and water quality; and

(c) Geomorphic and habitat processes and functions;

(2) To the maximum extent practical, permanent alterations that require restoration or enhancement of the altered stream, stream buffer or another stream or stream buffer must consider the following design factors, as applicable to the function being mitigated:

(a) The natural channel or shoreline reach dimensions including its depth, width, length and gradient;

(b) The horizontal alignment and sinuosity;

(c) The channel bed or lake bottom with identical or similar substrate and similar erosion and sediment transport dynamics;

(d) Bank and buffer configuration and erosion and sedimentation rates; 

(e) Similar vegetation species, diversity, size and densities in the channel or lake bottom and on the riparian bank or buffer; and

(f) Include all conditions in State and Federal permits or approvals;

(3) Mitigation to compensate for adverse impacts shall meet the following standards:

(a) Not upstream of a barrier to fish passage;

(b) Is equal or greater in biological function; and

(c) To the maximum extent practical is located on the site of the alteration or within one-half mile of the site and in the same stream reach at a 1:1 ratio for the length of mitigation to area of alteration; or

(d) Is located in the same stream drainage sub-basin and attains the following ratios of area of functional mitigation to area of alteration:

(i) A 3:1 ratio for a Type S stream;

(ii) A 3:1 ratio for a Type F stream; and

(iii) A 2:1 ratio for a Type Np or Ns stream;

(4) For purposes of subsection (3) of this section, a mitigation measure is in the same stream reach if the length of stream bank meets the following criteria:

(a) Similar geomorphic conditions including slope, soil, aspect and substrate;

(b) Similar processes including erosion and transport of sediment and woody debris;

(c) Equivalent or better biological conditions including invertebrates, fish, wildlife and vegetation; and 

(d) Equivalent or better biological functions including mating, reproduction, rearing, migration and refuge; or

(e) For tributary streams, a distance of no more than one-half mile;

(5) The City may reduce the mitigation ratios in subsection (3) of this section to 2:1 for Type S or F streams and 1.5:1 for Type Np or Ns streams if the applicant provides a scientifically rigorous mitigation monitoring program that includes the following elements:

(a) Monitoring methods that ensure the mitigation meets the approved performance standards identified by the Director;

(b) Financial guarantees for the duration of the monitoring program; and

(c) Experienced, qualified staff to perform the monitoring; 

(6) For rectifying an illegal alteration to any type of stream or its buffer, mitigation measures must meet the following standards:

(a) Located on the site of the illegal alteration at a 1:1 ratio of area of mitigation to area of alteration; and

(b) To the maximum extent practical, replicates the natural pre-alteration configuration at its natural pre-alteration location including the factors in subsection (2) of this section;

(7) The City may modify the requirements in this section if the applicant demonstrates that, with respect to each stream function, greater functions can be obtained in the affected hydrologic unit that the Director may determine to be the drainage sub-basin through alternative mitigation measures. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.385 Naturally occurring ponds, less than 20 acres in area, and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat. 

(1) No development may take place within naturally occurring ponds or within buffer areas from the naturally occurring ponds except as allowed in this chapter.

(2) Naturally occurring ponds may also be considered wetlands based on CMC 18.65.319. If the naturally occurring pond is deemed a wetland then the applicable wetland buffer, based on the wetland category, shall apply. A determination by the City does not preclude the applicant from meeting State and Federal agency determinations and permitting requirements. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.390 Other fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Development standards. 

The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites containing fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, in accordance with the wildlife management plan developed by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife for such species. Where the habitat does not include any other critical area or critical area buffer, compliance with the wildlife management plan shall constitute compliance with this chapter. 

The Director shall require protection of an active breeding site of any species with habitat that is identified as requiring protection; provided, that the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife has adopted management recommendations. The City shall follow those adopted management recommendations that are published in Priority Habitats and Species Program Management Recommendations for Region IV, current edition. If management recommendations have not been adopted, the City shall base protection administrative rules and any decisions on best available science as presented in a qualified professional’s report prepared by applicant, at applicant expense. 

(1) General Requirements. Habitat conservation areas are subject to the following provisions:

(a) The Department shall require the establishment of buffer areas for development activities in, or adjacent to, habitat conservation areas when needed to protect habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation, or areas identified for restoration, established to protect the integrity and functions of the habitat. Required buffer widths shall consider the management recommendations identified in this section and reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions may apply. Development activities may be further restricted and buffers may be increased during the specified season;

(b) Where applicable, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be established as required in CMC 18.65.350;

(c) A habitat conservation area may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not reduce the quantitative and qualitative functions and values of the habitat, except in accordance with this chapter;

(d) Removal of any native vegetation or woody debris from the habitat conservation area may be allowed only as part of an approved habitat management plan, critical areas report, and/or alteration plan;

(e) Low impact uses and development activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat conservation area and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the conservation area depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and development activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, stormwater management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses and development activities; provided, that any impacts to the habitat resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated;

(f) Whenever development activities are proposed in or adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which State or Federally endangered or threatened species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional with guidance provided by the appropriate State and/or Federal agencies;

(g) Plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest shall not be introduced into habitat conservation areas unless authorized by this chapter and by any required State or Federal permit or approval;

(h) Mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved critical areas report to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas, so long as mitigation of aquatic habitat is located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed;

(i) The Director shall condition approvals of development activities allowed within or adjacent to a habitat conservation area or its buffers, as necessary, to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse impacts. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Establishment of buffer zones;

(ii) Preservation of critically important vegetation;

(iii) Limitation of public access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;

(iv) Seasonal restriction of development activities;

(v) Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of mitigation activities; and

(vi) Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and success of proposed mitigation; and

(j) Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions, and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts from the proposed development as appropriate. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per-function basis. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.395 Fish and wildlife habitat corridors and networks.

On development proposal sites that contain Type F or Np streams and/or wetlands with a high habitat score greater than or equal to seven, that are also located within 200 feet of an on-site or off-site Type F or Np stream and/or wetland with a high habitat score greater than or equal to seven, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be set aside and protected as follows:

(1) New development proposals, subdivisions, short subdivisions, commercial site plans, and binding site plans shall place the corridor in a contiguous permanent critical area tract with all developable lots sited on the remaining portion of the project site.

(2) The fish and wildlife habitat corridor shall be sited on the development in order to meet the following conditions, where feasible:

(a) Forms one contiguous tract that connects on-site high value habitat areas to other on-site or off-site high value habitat areas;

(b) New development proposals shall provide a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet or a corridor width that is consistent with an approved habitat management plan. The corridor width should not be less than 150 feet wide at any point;

(c) New development proposals on sites constrained by a fish and wildlife habitat corridor and where development already exists shall maintain a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 300 feet unless, through an approved habitat management plan, it can be shown that a lesser habitat corridor width supports and maintains the corridor’s function and value;

(d) Be contiguous with and include and/or connect critical areas, buffers, wildlife habitat corridors, native growth protection easements, and open space tracts or wooded areas on site or on adjacent properties, if present; and

(e) The Director may modify corridor widths based on supporting documentation from an approved habitat management plan.

(3) Fish and wildlife habitat corridors do not parallel Type Np streams, except as required to provide a connection between two features as described above.

(4) A management plan for the wildlife corridor contained within a tract or tracts shall be prepared that specifies the permissible extent of recreation, forestry or other uses compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value of the tract or tracts. The management plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Department. The approved management plan for a development proposal shall be contained within and recorded on title or with the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs). If the wildlife corridor is contained in a conservation easement, a management plan is not required, but may be submitted to the Department for review and approval and recorded with the conservation easement.

(5) Clearing within the wildlife corridor contained in a tract or tracts shall be limited to that allowed by the management plan or as otherwise allowed by this chapter. No clearing, including the removal of woody debris, shall be allowed within a wildlife corridor contained within a conservation easement on individual lots, unless the property owner has an approved management plan.

(6) Where feasible, a homeowners’ association or other entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation shall be established to monitor and assure compliance with the management plan. The association shall provide homeowners with information on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program.

(7) Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat corridor and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the corridor depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include trails that are pervious, viewing platforms, stormwater management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses, or activities otherwise described and approved by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife; provided, that any impacts to the corridor resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

(8) At the discretion of the Director, these standards may be waived or reduced for public facilities such as public schools, fire stations, public parks, and public road projects.

(9) The wildlife corridor tract or easement shall be permanently marked and fenced consistent with the methods contained in CMC 18.65.160 and the City’s design and construction standards in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.400 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Modification. 

Upon request of the applicant and based upon a site-specific critical areas report that includes, but is not limited to, an evaluation of the tolerance of the animals occupying the nest or rookery to the existing level of development in the vicinity of the nest or rookery, the Director may approve a reduction of the wildlife habitat conservation area or corridor for any species listed on the current version of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitat and Species List for Region IV, as amended. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.405 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Mitigation standards.

(1) Relevant standards for other critical areas (such as wetlands and streams) that may be located within the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, as determined by the City, shall be incorporated into mitigation plans. 

(2) The following additional mitigation measures shall be reflected in fish and wildlife habitat conservation area mitigation planning: 

(a) The maintenance and protection of habitat values shall be considered a priority in site planning and design; 

(b) Buildings and structures shall be located in a manner that preserves and minimizes adverse impacts to important habitat areas. This may include clustering buildings and locating fences outside of habitat areas; 

(c) Retained habitat shall be integrated into open space and landscaping;

(d) Where possible, habitat and vegetated open space shall be consolidated in contiguous blocks; 

(e) Habitat shall be located contiguous to other habitat areas, open space or landscaped areas both on and off site to contribute to a continuous system or corridor that provides connections to adjacent habitat areas; 

(f) Native species shall be used in any landscaping of disturbed or undeveloped areas and in any enhancement of habitat or buffers; 

(g) The heterogeneity and structural diversity of vegetation shall be emphasized in landscaping; and 

(h) Significant trees, preferably in groups, shall be preserved, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 18.45 CMC. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.410 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Additional provisions for critical areas report.

In addition to the general critical areas report requirements of CMC 18.65.110, proposals to modify the performance standards for habitat for species of local importance must meet the requirements of this section.

(1) Habitat Assessment. A habitat assessment is an investigation of the site to evaluate the potential presence or absence of designated species of local importance or habitat for the species of local importance. A critical area report for habitat for species of local importance shall contain an assessment of habitats including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum: 

(a) Identification of any species of local importance including but not limited to endangered, threatened, sensitive or candidate species that has a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and an assessment of potential project impacts to the species;

(b) Detailed description of vegetation on and adjacent to the site;

(c) A discussion of any Federal, State, or local special management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the site;

(d) A detailed discussion of the direct and indirect potential impacts on habitat by the project, including potential impacts to water quality; 

(e) A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing habitats and coordination and efforts to restore any habitat that was degraded prior to the current proposed use or activity and to be conducted in accordance with the mitigation sequence set forth in CMC 18.65.120; 

(f) A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the site has been developed, including proposed monitoring, maintenance and adaptive management programs;

(g) When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the site conditions, the Director may also require the habitat management plan to include an evaluation by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, local Native American Indian Tribe, or other qualified professional regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate; and

(h) When appropriate, information from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program shall be included. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.420 Process to identify additional species and habitat of local importance.

(1) Designation Process. Any person may nominate for designation, or propose de-designation, of a species or habitat of local importance in accordance with a Type 4 permit process pursuant to CMC Title 14. Additional species and habitat of local importance may be designated pursuant to this section.

(2) Decision Criteria. A species may be designated a species of local importance only if it demonstrates the following characteristics: 

(a) Local populations of native species are in danger of extirpation based on existing trends:

(i) Local populations of native species that are likely to become endangered; or 

(ii) Local populations of native species that are vulnerable or declining;

(b) The species or habitat has recreational, commercial, cultural, tribal, or other special value;

(c) Long-term persistence of a species is dependent on the protection of the species or habitat through the provisions of this chapter;

(d) Protection by other County, State, or Federal policies, laws, regulations, or nonregulatory tools is not adequate to prevent degradation of the species or habitat in the City; and 

(e) Without protection, there is a likelihood that the species or habitat will be diminished over the long term. 

(3) Nominations for habitats or species of local importance shall include the following:

(a) Identification of the habitat or species being nominated. Identification shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

(i) A legible map or maps of species and/or habitat location(s);

(ii) Specific features to be protected (for example, nest sites, breeding areas, nurseries, vegetation communities) or, if a habitat is being nominated in its entirety, a description of the habitat, its structure, function, species, and geographic boundaries of the habitat(s) encompassed, and any other relevant attributes; and

(iii) An analysis of the habitat and hydrological functions and location of the area relative to already designated critical areas and the nearest similar habitat if known;

(iv) The Director has the authority to alter these requirements if he/she determines that alternative methods of identification or characterization are more accurate or reliable;

(b) Proposed management strategies for the species or habitats. Management strategies must be supported by best available science;

(c) Identification of effects on property ownership and use; and

(d) The Director may, on a case-by-case basis, require additional information needed to evaluate the resource being nominated.

(4) Effect of Designation. Designation of a species and habitat of local importance under this section shall not impact projects or proposals with a vested application or approved permit. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.430 Fish protection measures.

(1) All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, the following standards:

(a) Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife;

(b) The activity is designed so that it will not degrade the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas; and

(c) Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved critical area report.

(2) Structures that prevent the migration of fish shall not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow the upstream migration of adult fish and shall prevent fry and juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped or harmed. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


18.65.440 Endangered, threatened, and sensitive species protection measures.

(1) No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or buffer where State or Federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except that which is provided for by a management plan established by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or applicable State or Federal agency.

(2) Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a habitat conservation area where State or Federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the City. Approval for alteration of land adjacent to the habitat conservation area or its buffer shall not occur prior to consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and other appropriate Federal or State agencies. (Ord. 09-19 § 9 (Exh. D); Ord. 06-17 § 4 (Exh. B))


Chapter 18.70 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

18.70.010    Purpose.

18.70.020    Exemptions.

18.70.030    Applicability, review, and permits required.

18.70.040    Types of permits – Priority – Preferences – Restrictions.

18.70.050    General requirements.

18.70.060    Landscaping/screening.

18.70.070    Electrical transmission structure collocation – Specific development standards.

18.70.080    Adding antennas to an existing wireless communication facility tower – Specific development standards.

18.70.090    Utility pole collocation – Specific development standards.

18.70.095    Eligible facilities request.

18.70.100    Building-mounted concealed facility – Specific development standards.

18.70.110    Request to use nonconcealed facilities attached to a building in lieu of a concealed building attachment.

18.70.120    Nonconcealed building-mounted specific development standards.

18.70.130    Requests for new towers.

18.70.140    Tower-specific development standards.

18.70.150    Height modification.

18.70.160    Setback modification.

18.70.170    Expiration.

18.70.180    Removal of abandoned wireless communication facilities.


18.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of wireless communication facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public while not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City of Covington. The purpose of this chapter will be achieved through adherence to the following objectives:

(1) Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities in nonresidential areas;

(2) Allow wireless communications facilities in residential areas when necessary to meet the functional requirements of the telecommunications industry;

(3) Minimize the total number of wireless communication facilities throughout the community;

(4) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts that wireless communication facilities might create, including, but not limited to, impacts on aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas, historic resources, flight corridors, and health and safety of persons and property;

(5) Require cooperation between competitors and, as a primary option, encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless communication facility sites and structures to the greatest extent possible in order to reduce cumulative negative impact upon the City;

(6) Allow wireless communication companies to use City property for the placement of wireless facilities, where consistent with other public needs, as a means to generate revenue for the City;

(7) Encourage providers of wireless communication facilities to locate these facilities in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;

(8) Ensure wireless communication facilities are configured in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the wireless communication facilities, as viewed from different vantage points, through careful design, landscape screening, minimal impact siting options and camouflaging techniques, and through assessment of technology, current location options, siting, future available locations, innovative siting techniques, and siting possibilities beyond the jurisdictional boundaries of the City;

(9) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;

(10) Provide for the removal of wireless communication facilities that are abandoned or no longer inspected for safety concerns and building code compliance, and provide a mechanism for the City to cause these abandoned wireless communication facilities to be removed to protect citizens from imminent harm and danger;

(11) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering, careful siting, and maintenance of wireless communication facilities;

(12) Provide a means for public input on major wireless communication facility placement, construction, and modification; and

(13) Establish clear and nondiscriminatory local regulations concerning wireless telecommunications providers and services that are consistent with Federal and State laws and regulations pertaining to telecommunications providers. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.020 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(1) Antennas and related equipment that are being stored, shipped, or displayed for sale.

(2) Radar systems for military and civilian communication and navigation.

(3) Any wireless internet facility that is owned and operated by a Federal, State, or local government.

(4) Antennas for the receiving and sending of licensed amateur (ham) radio stations and citizen band stations; provided, that the antennas do not exceed the base height requirements of the applicable zoning district and are owned and operated by a Federally licensed amateur radio station operator or are used exclusively for receive-only antennas. In order to reasonably accommodate licensed amateur radio operators as required by Federal Code of Regulations 47 CFR Part 97, as amended, and Order and Opinion (PRB-1) of the Federal Communications Commission of September 1985 and RCW 35A.21.260, a licensed amateur radio operator may locate a tower not to exceed the base height requirements of the applicable zoning district, provided the following requirements are met for such towers located in a single-family residentially zoned district:

(a) The tower and any antennas located thereon shall not have any lights of any kind on them and shall not be illuminated either directly or indirectly by any artificial means;

(b) The color of the tower and any antennas located thereon shall all be the same and such that they blend into the sky to the extent allowed under the requirements set forth by the Federal Aviation Administration;

(c) No signs shall be used in conjunction with the tower, except for one sign no larger than eight and one-half inches high and 11 inches wide, or as required by Federal regulations;

(d) No advertising logo, trademark, figurine, or other similar marking or lettering shall be placed on the tower or any wireless communication facilities mounted or otherwise attached thereto or any building used in conjunction therewith;

(e) A telescoping tower and any antennas may exceed the base height of the underlying zoning district when fully extended, up to a maximum 75 feet in height, if the tower and any antennas attached do not exceed the base height of the zoning district when it is retracted; when the antenna is not in use it must be fully retracted (nested);

(f) The tower shall be located a distance equal to or greater than its height, at full extension, from any existing residential structure located on adjacent parcels of property, including any attached accessory structures;

(g) A tower shall be located a distance at least three-quarters of its height, at full extension, from any property line on the parcel of property on which it is located, unless a licensed engineer certifies that the tower will not collapse or that it is designed in such a way that, in the event of collapse, it falls within itself, and, in that event, it shall be located at least one-third of its height, at full extension, from any property line;

(h) Towers shall not be leased or rented to commercial users and shall not otherwise be used for commercial purposes; and

(i) All towers shall meet all applicable State and Federal statutes, rules, and regulations, including obtaining a building permit from the City, if necessary.

(5) An antenna that is designed to receive or send direct broadcast satellite service and/or broadband signals, or other means for providing internet service including direct-to-home satellite services, and that is 3.28 feet (one meter) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement, and the antenna is attached to the residence or business that is utilizing the service.

(6) An antenna that is designed to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, and that is 3.28 feet (one meter) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement.

(7) An antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals.

(8) Routine maintenance or repair of wireless communication facilities, excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings; provided, that the wireless communication facility received approval from the City of Covington or King County for the original placement, construction, or subsequent modification. Changing of antennas or radio units on wireless communication facilities is permitted, provided the new antennas have the same area or less of those removed; and provided, that with regard to the modification of radio units the equipment enclosure for such radio units is not expanded. The total number of antennas must remain the same. Additional ground equipment shall be placed within an approved equipment enclosure, provided the height of the equipment does not extend above the screen fence.

(9) Emergency communications equipment during a declared public emergency when the equipment is owned and operated by an appropriate public agency. In the event a building permit is required for any emergency maintenance, reconstruction, repair, or replacement, filing of the building permit application shall occur within 30 days after the commencement of such emergency activities. Scheduled replacement or repair work does not constitute an emergency. In the event a building permit is required for nonemergency maintenance, reconstruction, repair, or replacement, filing of the building permit application shall be required prior to the commencement of such nonemergency activities.

(10) Antennas and related equipment used by electric utility providers for the noncommercial communication, operation, and monitoring of their utility system may be collocated on their transmission structures or utility poles, provided the color of the antennas and equipment shall be the same as the pole or structure they are located on or a color that blends into the sky.

(11) Small wireless facilities subject to Chapter 18.70A CMC. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.030 Applicability, review, and permits required.

The standards and process requirements of this chapter shall apply to the placement, construction, or modification of all wireless communication facilities, except as specifically exempted in CMC 18.70.020.

(1) No person may place, construct, or modify a wireless communication facility subject to this chapter without first obtaining the required permit(s), issued in accordance with this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, the requirements of this chapter are in addition to the applicable requirements of this title.

(2) Any land use or other permit application submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed and evaluated by the Director for all wireless communication facility projects located on public or private property.

(3) The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary local, State, and Federal permits and approvals for the project, and is responsible for complying with any conditions of approval placed on the application by local or other State or Federal permits or approvals.

(4) No provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to allow the installation of a wireless communication facility to reduce the minimum parking or landscaping requirements on a site.

(5) Wireless communication facilities that are governed under this chapter shall not be eligible for variances under CMC 18.125.030, development conditions under CMC 18.30.030(B)(4), or exceptions to height limits under CMC 18.30.210. Any request to deviate from this chapter shall be based on the modifications set forth in this chapter.

(6) The City may, at its discretion, contract with an independent engineering and technical review consultant to review the land use or other permit application. The applicant shall be responsible for actual and reasonable costs charged by the consultant, in addition to any base fees and application fees set forth in the City’s fee resolution. Based on the results of the independent technical review, the City may require changes or request additional information to complete the application review. The technical review shall address the following:

(a) The accuracy and completeness of the application;

(b) The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;

(c) The validity of conclusions reached;

(d) The viability of other sites in the City for the use intended by the applicant; and

(e) Any specific engineering or technical issues designated by the City.

(7) No alterations or changes shall be made to an approved wireless communications land use permit. Modifications which exceed the conditions of approval will require a new wireless communications land use permit and shall be reviewed based on the laws and rules in effect at the time of application. The Director has sole discretion to approve or deny any request for modifications to the land use approval. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.040 Types of permits – Priority – Preferences – Restrictions.

(1) Applications will be reviewed based on the type of wireless communication facility requested to be permitted. Each wireless communication facility requires a specific type of project review as provided for in the table in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Table.

Type of Permit Required Based on Type of Wireless Communication (WC) Facility(3) 

	 	Zoning

	Type of WC Facility(3)	Residential	Commercial	Resource/Industrial

	R-4, R-6, R-8, R-18	CC, GC, NC, TC, MC, MHO	M, I

	Transmission tower collocation	Type 1	Type 1	Type 1

	Adding antennas to an existing tower	Type 1 (1)	Type 1 (1)	Type 1 (1)

	Utility pole collocation	Type 2	Type 2	Type 2

	Concealed building attached	Type 2 (2)	Type 2 (2)	Type 1

	Nonconcealed building attached	Type 2	Type 2	Type 1

	New tower or height modification request	Type 3 	Type 3	Type 3

 Notes:

(1) Provided, that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request. If the application is not an eligible facilities request, it shall be a Type 2 review.

(2) An applicant may request to install a nonconcealed building-attached facility under CMC 18.70.110.

(3) In the event of uncertainty on the type of wireless facility, the Director shall have the authority to determine how a proposed facility is incorporated into Table 18.70.040(2) and the type of permit required.

(3) Priorities. The priorities for the type of wireless communication facility shall be based upon their placement in the table in subsection (2) of this section; the most desirable facilities are located toward the top of the table and the least desirable facilities toward the bottom. An application for a wireless communication facility shall follow the hierarchy provided in the table in subsection (2) of this section. For example, an applicant shall demonstrate, by engineering evidence, that collocation on an electrical transmission structure is not feasible before moving to a utility pole collocation, and so forth, with the last possible siting option being a new wireless communication facility tower or height modification request.

(4) Preferences. The City’s preferences for locating new wireless communications facilities are as follows:

(a) Place antennas on existing structures, such as buildings, wireless communication facility towers, water towers, utility poles, or electrical transmission structures.

(b) Place wireless communication facilities in nonresidentially zoned districts and on nonresidential property.

(c) Place wireless communication facilities on public property and on appropriate rights-of-way; provided, that no obligation is created herein for the City to allow the use of City property or public right-of-way for this purpose. The placement of personal wireless communication facilities on City-owned property and public right-of-way will be subject to other applicable sections of the Covington Municipal Code and review by other City departments. A wireless communication facility mounted to any City-owned property, utility pole, or other structure shall be removed if the City deems removal is necessary for the undergrounding of utilities, the sale, development, or redevelopment of City-owned property, or the demolition or alteration of a City-owned building or other structure. The wireless communication facility shall be removed at no expense to the City.

(5) Restrictions on Light Poles and Standards. Light poles located within the public rights-of-way are prohibited from use as a wireless communication facility or for the attachment of an antenna. This restriction does not apply to wooden utility poles that have a light standard attached.

(6) Application Procedure. The applicant shall submit a completed application in a form established by the Director along with the initial application fee as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution. The application shall contain such information as the Director may deem necessary or useful, and shall include:

(a) Type 1 Permit Requirements.

(i) A written description outlining the proposed project and an evaluation of how the proposal meets the City’s code requirements;

(ii) Applicants who are not the property owner of record of the land and/or structure on which a wireless communication facility is to be located are required to have the application co-signed by the property owner(s) and provide a signed statement by the property owner(s) and/or building or structure owner(s) (if different) authorizing the submittal of the application by the applicant;

(iii) Plan sets prepared by a design professional that include a vicinity map, site map, architectural elevations, method of attachment, proposed screening, location of proposed antennas, and all other information which accurately depicts the proposed project and existing conditions or as otherwise determined necessary by the Director;

(iv) Written statement from a radio frequency engineer that demonstrates that the facility meets Federal Communications Commission requirements for allowed radio frequency emissions;

(v) A vicinity map depicting the proposed extent of the service area;

(vi) Critical areas study and proposed mitigation (if required);

(vii) If an outdoor generator is proposed, a report prepared by an acoustical engineer demonstrating compliance with Chapter 8.20 CMC, Noise Control; and

(viii) SEPA application (if required).

(b) Type 2. The applicant shall submit all of the information required for a Type 1 application, plus the following:

(i) Photo simulations that depict the existing and proposed view of the proposed facility;

(ii) Data sheet depicting the materials, textures, and colors proposed for use;

(iii) Landscaping plan prepared by a Washington State-licensed landscape architect (if required);

(iv) Service coverage area map (radio frequency (RF) modeling);

(v) If the facility is located within a residential zone, a report from a radio frequency engineer explaining the need for the proposed wireless communication facility. Additionally, the applicant shall provide detailed discussions on why the wireless communication facility cannot be located within a commercial or industrial/resource zone; and

(vi) Mailing labels for all property owners and tenants/residents within 500 feet of the subject property.

(c) Type 3. The applicant shall submit all of the information required for Type 1 and Type 2 applications, plus the following:

(i) All information required for new towers under CMC 18.70.130 and 18.70.140;

(ii) All information required for a height modification or setback modification request under CMC 18.70.150 and 18.70.160 respectively (if applicable);

(iii) The radio frequency engineer report shall include a discussion of the information required under CMC 18.70.050(16). The report shall also explain why a tower must be used instead of any of the other location options outlined in the table in subsection (2) of this section;

(iv) Engineering plans for the proposed tower, including a letter of certification by a licensed engineer that the proposed height and equipment comply with the requirements of this chapter;

(v) Evidence that the tower has been designed to meet the minimum structural standards for wireless communication facilities for a minimum of three providers of voice, video, or data transmission services, including the applicant, and including a description of the number and types of antennas the tower can accommodate;

(vi) A graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower and ancillary structures and ancillary facilities from five points within the impacted vicinity. Such points are to be mutually agreed upon by the Director and applicant. All plans and photo simulations shall include the maximum build-out of the proposed facility; and

(vii) Evidence of compliance with Federal Aviation Administration standards for height and lighting and certificates of compliance from all affected agencies. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.050 General requirements.

The following shall apply to all wireless communication facilities regardless of the type of facility:

(1) Noise. Any facility that requires a generator or other device that will create noise must demonstrate compliance with Chapter 8.20 CMC, Noise Control. A noise report prepared by an acoustical engineer shall be submitted with any application to construct and operate a wireless communication facility that will have a generator or similar device. The City may require that the report be reviewed by an independent technical expert at the sole expense of the applicant.

(2) Business License Requirement. Any person, corporation, or entity that operates a wireless communication facility within the City shall obtain and maintain a valid Covington business license, issued annually by the City. Any person, corporation, or other business entity that owns a tower is also required to obtain and maintain a valid Covington business license.

(3) Signage. Only safety signs or those mandated by other public agencies may be located on wireless communication facilities. No other types of signs are permitted on wireless communication facilities.

(4) Parking. Any application must demonstrate that there is sufficient space for temporary parking for regular maintenance of the proposed facility.

(5) Finish. A tower shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to the applicable standards of the FAA or FCC, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce its visual obtrusiveness.

(6) Design. Wireless communication facilities shall be screened or camouflaged by employing the best available technology. The design of all antennas, towers, support structures, buildings, and ancillary structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities with the natural setting and built environment.

(7) Color. All antennas and ancillary wireless communication facilities located on buildings or structures other than towers shall be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and ancillary facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible.

(8) Lighting. Wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other applicable government authority. If lighting is required, the reviewing authority shall review the lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding areas. No strobe lighting of any type is permitted on any tower.

(9) Advertising. No advertising is permitted at wireless communication facility sites or on any ancillary structures or facilities equipment compound.

(10) Ancillary Wireless Communication Facilities. All ancillary wireless communication facilities shall meet the underlying zoning district’s setback requirements unless a zoning setback modification is granted pursuant to CMC 18.70.160.

(11) Equipment Enclosures. If feasible, equipment enclosures shall be located within existing buildings or located underground. If some other placement is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it is not feasible to locate the equipment below ground. All equipment and cabinets that will be visible to the traveling public, workers, or residents shall be as small and unobtrusive as is practicable and designed to blend in with existing surrounds. The applicant shall size any equipment enclosure and other facilities to minimize visual clutter. Each applicant shall be limited to an equipment enclosure of 360 square feet at each site. However, this size restriction shall not apply to enclosures located within an existing commercial, industrial, residential, or institutional building.

(12) Owner Approval. At the time of application the applicant must submit proof that they have contacted and received approval for the placement of the antenna at the specified location from the support structure owner (e.g., building, water tower, utility pole, electrical transmission structure, monopole) and, if different, the land owner upon which the structure is located.

(13) Building Standards. Wireless communication support structures shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision Standard entitled: “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures” (or equivalent), and as it may be updated or amended. Utility poles and transmission structures that are owned and/or maintained by the serving electric utility shall be designed to meet the National Electric Safety Code. Prior to issuance of a building permit the Building Official shall be provided with an engineer’s certification that the support structure’s design meets or exceeds the preceding applicable standards.

(14) Maintenance. Wireless communication carriers shall maintain their wireless communication facility in a good and safe condition. They shall preserve its original appearance and concealment, disguise, or camouflage elements incorporated into the design at the time of approval and in a manner which complies with all applicable Federal, State, and local requirements. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, such items as painting, repair of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping.

(15) Critical Areas. Wireless communication facilities shall not be allowed in designated critical areas (except aquifer recharge areas) unless they are collocated on existing facilities.

(16) Radio Frequency Emissions. The applicant shall demonstrate that the wireless communication facility will comply with the radio frequency emission standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

(17) State or Federal Requirements. All wireless communication facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.060 Landscaping/screening.

(1) The visual impacts of wireless communication facilities shall be mitigated and softened through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower, equipment compounds, equipment enclosures, and ancillary structures, with the exception of wireless communication facilities located on electrical transmission structures, or if the antenna is mounted flush on an existing building or camouflaged as part of the building and ancillary equipment is housed inside an existing structure. The use of appropriate native plant species is encouraged. The Director or Hearing Examiner, as appropriate, may reduce or waive the standards for those sides of the wireless communication facility that are not in public view and when a combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features achieves the same degree of screening as the required landscaping; or in locations where large wooded lots and natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.

(2) Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences associated with wireless communication facility equipment compounds and around equipment enclosures located at ground level. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or as a supplement to landscaping or screening requirements. The following requirements apply:

(a) Screening landscaping shall be placed around the perimeter of the equipment compound, except that a maximum 10-foot portion of the fence may remain without landscaping in order to provide access to the enclosure.

(b) The landscaping area shall be Type 1 landscaping as described in CMC 18.40.040(1) and a minimum of eight feet in depth around the perimeter of the enclosure in all zoning districts; except that Type II landscaping as defined in CMC 18.40.040(2) may be used in residential zoning districts and shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth.

(c) The applicant shall utilize evergreens that shall be a minimum of six feet tall at the time of planting, unless located in a transmission or utility corridor where clearance requirements apply; then landscaping that will be appropriate in size at maturity so as not to grow into the clear zone shall be planted.

(3) The applicant shall replace any unhealthy or dead plant materials in conformance with the approved landscaping development proposal plan and shall maintain all landscaping materials in a healthy growing condition for the life of the facility. Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.070 Electrical transmission structure collocation – Specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to collocation of antennas on an existing electrical transmission structure (as defined in CMC 18.20.1256):

(1) Height. The height requirements for antennas that are collocated on electrical transmission structures are limited to 12 feet above the existing tower or pole height. If a replacement electrical transmission structure is proposed, the maximum height shall be no greater than 12 feet above the original electrical transmission structure’s height.

(2) Antenna Aesthetics. There are no restrictions on the type of antenna(s) that may be collocated on the electrical transmission structure. The antenna(s) must be painted to match the color of the electrical transmission tower/pole.

(3) Antenna Intensity. There is no limit on the number of antennas that may be collocated on an electrical transmission structure.

(4) Feed Lines and Coaxial Cables. Feed lines and coaxial cables shall be attached to the existing pole or to one of the legs of the electrical transmission tower. The feed lines and cables must be painted to match the color of the electrical transmission structure. If a replacement structure is proposed, the feed lines and coaxial cables shall be located within the structure or in a covered raceway of similar color and material to the tower or pole.

(5) Equipment Enclosures. Cabinet equipment shall be located directly under the electrical transmission tower where the antennas are located, or in a concealed location.

(6) Setbacks. Setback requirements shall not apply to wireless communication facilities collocated on an existing electrical transmission structure. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.080 Adding antennas to an existing wireless communication facility tower – Specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to adding antennas to existing wireless communication facility tower(s) (as defined in CMC 18.20.1284):

(1) Height. The height of the new or replacement antenna(s) may not constitute a “substantial change” as that term is defined in CMC 18.70.095. If the proposed antenna(s) height constitutes a “substantial change,” a Type 2 decision is required.

(2) Antenna Aesthetics. Antenna(s) shall be painted to match the color scheme of the tower. Antenna mounts shall be flush-mounted onto the existing tower; unless it is demonstrated through radio frequency (RF) propagation analysis that flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network coverage objective.

(3) Antenna Intensity. There is no limit on the number of antennas that may be located on an existing tower.

(4) Feed Lines and Coaxial Cables. Feed lines and coaxial cables shall be located within the tower. Any exposed feed lines or coaxial cables (such as when extended out of the tower to connect to the antennas) must be painted to match the tower.

(5) Equipment Enclosures. Any new cabinet or equipment shall be located within the equipment enclosure that was approved as part of the original application. If the applicant wishes to expand the equipment enclosure or compound from what was approved by the City or County under a previous application, the application shall either apply for an eligible facilities request under CMC 18.70.095 or shall submit a wireless communication facility (Type 2) application for only the equipment enclosure increase.

(6) Setbacks. Setback requirements shall not apply when an applicant installs new antennas on an existing tower and uses an existing equipment enclosure. If the equipment enclosure is increased it must meet the setback requirements for the underlying zoning district and may not exceed the total area restrictions for equipment enclosures as set forth in CMC 18.70.050. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.090 Utility pole collocation – Specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to all wireless communication facilities collocated on a utility pole (as defined in CMC 18.20.1351):

(1) Height. The antenna height of a utility pole collocation is limited to 12 feet above the existing utility pole.

(2) Antenna Aesthetics. The first preference for any collocation is to utilize flush-mounted antennas. If the utility pole collocation includes an antenna array, the array shall be painted to match the support structure and shall be flush-mounted within six inches of the support structure. If it is demonstrated through RF propagation analysis that six-inch flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network coverage objective, then the distance may be increased up to 12 inches or may be contained in a canister that is a continuation of the diameter of the support structure.

(3) Replacement Pole. An existing utility pole may be removed and replaced with a new utility pole so long as the replacement pole is of similar color and material as the existing, and adjacent, pole(s) and is located within 10 feet of the existing pole (measured from the center point of the existing pole to the center point of the replacement pole). The replaced utility pole must be used by the owner of the utility pole to support its utility lines. A replacement utility pole shall be designed such that coaxial cables and feed lines can be located within the pole or in a covered raceway of similar color and material as the pole. If the replacement utility pole has a light standard then a photometric analysis shall be provided with the application. Such application shall only be approved if the replaced pole can maintain the appropriate lighting in the right-of-way.

(4) Coaxial Cables and Feed Lines. Coaxial cables limited to one-half-inch diameter may be attached directly to an existing utility pole. Coaxial cables greater than one-half inch must be placed within the utility pole or within a covered raceway of similar color and material as the existing pole. The size of the cables is the total size of all coaxial cables being utilized on the utility pole.

(5) Pedestrian Impact. The proposed wireless communications facility collocation shall not result in a significant change in the pedestrian environment or preclude the City from making pedestrian improvements. If a utility pole is being replaced, consideration must be made to improve the pedestrian environment, if necessary.

(6) Equipment Enclosures. Unless approved by the Director of Public Works, all equipment enclosures must be placed outside of the City right-of-way. Equipment enclosures shall be located underground consistent with CMC 18.70.050(11).

(7) Setbacks. Any portion of the wireless communication facilities located within City right-of-way is not required to meet setback requirements if it is located underground. The City will evaluate setback modifications on private property under the setback requirements set forth in CMC 18.70.160.

(8) Small Wireless Facilities. Any proposed wireless communication facility that qualifies as a small wireless facility pursuant to Chapter 18.70A CMC shall apply for a small wireless facility permit under Chapter 18.70A CMC. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.095 Eligible facilities request.

(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to eligible facilities requests only as described in this section.

(a) “Base station” means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein nor any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation:

(i) Equipment associated with wireless communications services as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(ii) Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems (“DAS”) and small wireless networks).

(iii) Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed (with jurisdiction) under this section, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (1)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

(iv) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the eligible facilities request application is filed with the City, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (1)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section.

(b) “Collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes.

(c) “Eligible facilities request” means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:

(i) Collocation of new transmission equipment;

(ii) Removal of transmission equipment; or

(iii) Replacement of transmission equipment.

(d) “Eligible support structure” means any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City.

(e) Existing. A constructed tower or base station is “existing” if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

(f) Substantial Change. A modification “substantially changes” the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:

(i) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;

(A) Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act as part of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012;

(ii) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

(iii) For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

(iv) It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

(v) It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

(vi) It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified above.

(g) “Tower” means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

(h) “Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(2) Application. The City shall prepare and make publicly available an application form used to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification.

(3) Qualification as an Eligible Facilities Request. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request, the Director shall review such application to determine whether the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request.

(4) Time Frame for Review. Applications for an eligible facilities request are subject to a Type 1 decision and shall be approved within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an eligible facilities request application, unless the Director determines that the application is not covered by this section.

(5) Tolling of the Time Frame for Review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the City and the applicant or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete. The time frame for review of an eligible facilities request is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.

(a) To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the City shall provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

(b) The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City’s notice of incompleteness.

(c) Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this subsection. Second or subsequent notice of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(6) Determination That Application Is Not an Eligible Facilities Request. If the City determines that the applicant’s request does not qualify as an eligible facilities request, the City shall deny the application.

(7) Failure to Act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a request for an eligible facilities request within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B))


18.70.100 Building-mounted concealed facility – Specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to wireless communication facilities that are attached to an existing building and concealed from view (as defined in CMC 18.20.1428):

(1) Height. The proposed concealed wireless communication facility must meet the height requirement of the underlying zoning district. Antennas may be located in existing church spires, clock towers, chimneys, water towers, elevator towers, mechanical equipment rooms, or other similar rooftop appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy or the provision of additional floor area. Stand-alone antennas or towers shall not qualify as rooftop appurtenances.

(2) Antennas Aesthetics. Antennas must be concealed from view by blending with the architectural style of the building. This could include, but not be limited to, steeple-like structures and parapet walls. The screening must be made out of the same material and be the same color as the building. Antennas shall be painted to match the color scheme of the building(s).

(3) Feed Lines and Coaxial Cables. Feed lines and coaxial cables shall be located below the parapet of the rooftop.

(4) Cabinet Enclosure. If a cabinet enclosure cannot be located within the building where the wireless communication facilities will be located, then the City’s first preference is for the wireless telecommunication carrier to locate the equipment on the roof of the building. If the equipment can be screened by placing the equipment below the parapet walls, no additional screening is required. If screening is required, the proposed screening must be consistent with the existing building in terms of color, design, architectural style, and material. If the cabinet equipment cannot be located on the roof or within the building then it shall be located underground consistent with CMC 18.70.050.

(5) Setbacks. The proposed wireless communication facilities must meet the setback requirements of the applicable zoning category where the facility is to be located. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.110 Request to use nonconcealed facilities attached to a building in lieu of a concealed building attachment.

The use of concealed building facilities shall have first priority in all residential and commercial zones. However, an applicant may request to construct a nonconcealed building-attached wireless communication facility in lieu of a concealed wireless communication facility. The Director will use the following criteria to determine whether to allow this request:

(1) Due to the size of the building and the proposed location of the antennas, the visual impact of the exposed antennas will be minimal in relation to the building.

(2) Cables are concealed from view and any visible cables are reduced in visibility by sheathing or painting to match the building where they are located.

(3) Equipment enclosure is adequately screened from view.

(4) Due to the style or design of the building the use of a concealed facility would reduce the visual appearance of the building.

(5) The proposal meets the development standards of CMC 18.70.120. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.120 Nonconcealed building-mounted specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to wireless communication facilities that are attached to an existing building and not concealed from view (as defined in CMC 18.20.1427):

(1) Height. The proposed facility must meet the height requirement of the underlying zoning category. If the building where the facility is located is at or above the maximum height requirements, the nonconcealed antennas are permitted to extend a maximum of three feet above the existing roof line.

(2) Antenna Aesthetics. The first preference for any proposed facility is to utilize flush-mounted antennas. Nonflush-mounted antennas may be used when their visual impact will be negated by the scale of the antennas to the building. Shrouds, canisters or other visually opaque, radio frequency transparent materials which hide the wireless antennas from public view are not required unless they provide a better visual appearance than exposed antennas. Antennas shall be painted to match the color scheme of the building(s).

(3) Feed Lines and Coaxial Cables. Feed lines and coaxial cables should be located below the parapet of the rooftop. If the feed lines and cables must be visible they must be painted to match the color scheme of the building(s).

(4) Equipment Enclosures. If cabinet equipment cannot be located within the building where the wireless communication facilities will be located, then the City’s first preference is to locate the equipment on the roof of the building. If the equipment can be screened by placing the equipment below the parapet walls, no additional screening is required. If screening is required, the proposed screening must be consistent with the existing building in terms of color, design, architectural style, and material. If the equipment enclosure cannot be located within the building or on the roof and is located on the ground, the enclosure shall be fenced with a six-foot-tall fence. The fence shall include slats, wood panels, or other materials to screen the equipment from view. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.130 Requests for new towers.

(1) New towers are not permitted within the City unless the Hearing Examiner finds that the applicant has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that:

(a) Failure to permit a new tower will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

(b) The proposed new wireless communication facility is designed and located with consideration of the goals, policies, objectives, standards and regulations set forth in this chapter, this title, and the comprehensive plan; and

(c) That the application complies with CMC 18.70.140.

(2) The Hearing Examiner is the reviewing body on the application to construct a new tower and shall determine whether or not each of the above requirements is met. Examples of evidence the applicant shall provide demonstrating the foregoing requirements include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) That the tower height is the minimum necessary in order to achieve the technical service objective;

(b) That no existing and available towers or structures or alternative sites are located within the geographic area available to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements or technical service objective (regardless of the geographical boundaries of the City);

(c) That the existing and available towers or structures are not of a sufficient height or could not feasibly be extended to a sufficient height to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements to meet its service objective;

(d) That the existing and available structures or towers do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna and ancillary facilities;

(e) That the applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna; and

(f) The applicant demonstrates other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures or other sites unsuitable.

(3) The Hearing Examiner, after holding a public hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, or remand the application back to staff for further investigation in a manner consistent with the Hearing Examiner’s order. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.140 Tower-specific development standards.

The following requirements shall apply to all wireless communication towers (as defined in CMC 18.20.1284):

(1) Height. Any proposed tower with antennas shall not exceed the minimum height needed to meet the coverage/capacity objectives and may not exceed more than 10 feet above the height standards of the zoning district where the tower will be located. A height modification may be applied for under CMC 18.70.150.

(2) Antenna and Tower Aesthetics. The applicant shall utilize a concealed facility as defined in CMC 18.20.1428. The choice of concealing the wireless communication facility must be consistent with the overall use of the site. For example, having a tower appear like a flagpole would not be consistent if there are no buildings on the site. If a flag or other wind device is attached to the pole, it must be appropriate in scale to the size and diameter of the tower.

(3) Setbacks. The proposed wireless communication facilities must meet the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. If a height modification is granted under CMC 18.70.150, the setback of the proposed wireless communication facility shall increase two feet for every foot in excess of the maximum permitted height in the zoning district.

(4) Color. The color of the tower shall be based on the surrounding land uses and type of concealment proposed.

(5) Feed Lines and Coaxial Cables. All feed lines and coaxial cables must be located within the tower. Feed lines and coaxial cables connecting the tower to the equipment enclosure, which are not located within the wireless communication facility equipment compound, must be located underground.

(6) Tower Design. Any new tower constructed shall be designed to meet the minimum structural standards for future collocation of wireless communication facilities by a minimum of three providers (including the applicant) of voice, video, or data transmission services. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.150 Height modification.

(1) Where the Hearing Examiner finds that extraordinary hardships, practical difficulties, or unnecessary and unreasonable expense would result from strict compliance with the height limitations of the underlying zoning district, or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a height modification to the zoning code height limit; provided the applicant demonstrates that the modification will meet the goals, policies, objectives, standards, and requirements of this chapter, this title, and the comprehensive plan, and demonstrates the following:

(a) The granting of the height modification will not be detrimental to public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property, and will promote the public’s interest; and

(b) A particular and identifiable hardship exists or a specific circumstance warrants the granting of a modification. Factors to be considered in determining the existence of a hardship shall include, but not be limited to:

(i) Topography and other site features;

(ii) Availability of alternative site locations;

(iii) Geographic location of property; and

(iv) Size/magnitude of the project being evaluated and availability of collocation.

(2) In approving the height modification request, the Hearing Examiner may impose such conditions as he deems appropriate to substantially secure the goals, policies, objectives, standards, and requirements of this chapter, this title, and the comprehensive plan.

(3) A request for any such modification shall be submitted in writing by the applicant with the application for Hearing Examiner review. The applicant shall state fully the grounds for the modification and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.160 Setback modification.

(1) Wireless communication facilities must meet the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.

(2) The Director or Hearing Examiner, depending on the type of application, may permit modifications to be made to setback requirements when:

(a) An applicant for a wireless communication facility can demonstrate that placing the facility on certain portions of a property within the required setback will provide better screening and aesthetic considerations than provided under the existing setback requirements; or

(b) The modification will aid in retaining open space and trees on the site; or

(c) The proposed location allows for the wireless communication facility to be located at a greater distance from residentially zoned properties.

(3) Zoning setback modifications shall not be used to reduce any setback required under the State Building Code or Fire Code. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.170 Expiration.

Any application to install or operate a wireless communication facility shall expire exactly one year from the date of issuance of the Director’s or Hearing Examiner’s decision, unless significant progress has been made to construct the facility. The City may extend the expiration period by up to one additional year due to circumstances outside of the control of the applicant. However, the City shall not issue an extension if any revisions have occurred to the City’s Municipal Code that would affect the wireless communication facility approved. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.70.180 Removal of abandoned wireless communication facilities.

Any antenna or tower that, after the initial operation of the facility, is not used for the purpose for which it was intended at the time of filing the application for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The wireless telecommunication carrier of such abandoned antenna or tower and ancillary wireless communication facilities shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of a notice from the City notifying the owner or operator of such abandonment. Whenever a facility is abandoned or ceases operation, the entire facility shall be removed, including, but not limited to, all antennas, antenna supports, feeder lines, base stations, electronic equipment, and the concrete pad upon which the structure is located. Failure to remove such an abandoned facility shall result in declaring the antenna and/or tower a public nuisance. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this section shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (Ord. 03-19 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 09-12 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.70A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES

Sections:

18.70A.010    Purpose.

18.70A.020    Definitions.

18.70A.030    General provisions.

18.70A.040    Application requirements for small wireless facilities.

18.70A.050    Review process.

18.70A.060    Permit requirements.

18.70A.070    Modifications to small wireless facilities.

18.70A.080    Consolidated permit.

18.70A.090    Design zones and pedestrian poles.

18.70A.100    Design and concealment standards for small wireless facilities.

18.70A.110    New poles for small wireless facilities and installations in a design zone or on pedestrian poles.

18.70A.120    Appeals.

18.70A.130    Removal of abandoned small wireless facilities.


18.70A.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to set forth regulations for the permitting, management, placement, development, and removal of small wireless facilities. Among the purposes included are to:

(1) Permit and manage reasonable access to the right-of-way of the City for communication purposes on a nondiscriminatory basis.

(2) Establish clear and nondiscriminatory local guidelines and standards which use Federal guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of right-of-way use.

(3) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the City.

(4) Ensure that all service providers maintaining facilities or providing services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City.

(5) Ensure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(6) Minimize potential adverse visual, aesthetic, and safety impacts of small wireless facilities.

(7) Encourage the design of such small wireless facilities to be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding built and natural environments where possible.

(8) Encourage the collocation or attachment of small wireless facilities on existing support structures to help minimize the total number and impact of such structures throughout the community. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein. Words not otherwise defined shall have their common and ordinary meaning:

(1) “Antenna” means an apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information services. For purposes of this definition, the term “antenna” does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under 47 CFR Part 15.

(2) “Applicant” means any person or corporation submitting an application for a small wireless facility permit.

(3) “City property” means any real property owned by City, whether in fee or other ownership estate of interest.

(4) “Collocation” means (a) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a preexisting structure, and/or (b) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure.

(5) “Director” means the Community Development Director or his/her designee.

(6) “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

(7) “Franchise” or “franchise agreement” is a contract by which a grantee is allowed to use City right-of-way for the purpose of carrying on the business in which it is generally engaged, including furnishing service to members of the public.

(8) “Grantee” means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as defined in this section, is granted by the Council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person, firm or corporation.

(9) “Light pole” means a pole used primarily for lighting streets, parking areas, parks or pedestrian paths.

(10) “Pedestrian pole” means a pole that is less than 19 feet in height as measured from the ground.

(11) “Public right-of-way” or “right-of-way” means land acquired or dedicated for public roads and streets but does not include:

(a) State highways;

(b) Land dedicated for roads, streets, and highways not opened and not improved for motor vehicle use by the public;

(c) Structures, including poles and conduits, located within the right-of-way;

(d) Federally granted trust lands or Forest Board trust lands;

(e) Lands owned or managed by the State Parks and Recreation Commission; or

(f) Federally granted railroad rights-of-way acquired under 43 U.S.C. 912 and related provisions of Federal law that are not open for motor vehicle use.

(12) “Service provider” is defined consistently with RCW 35.99.010(6). Service provider shall include those infrastructure companies that provide telecommunications services or equipment to enable the deployment of telecommunication services.

(13) “Small wireless” and “small wireless facility” shall have the same meaning as a “small wireless facility” as set forth in 47 CFR 1.6002.

(14) “Structure” means a pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of telecommunications service (whether on its own or commingled with other types of services).

(15) “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics, and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer wireline or wireless telecommunications service.

(16) “Telecommunications service” means the transmission of information by wire, radio, optical cable, electromagnetic, or other similar means for hire, sale, or resale to the general public. For the purpose of this subsection, “information” means knowledge or intelligence represented by any form of writing, signs, signals, pictures, sounds, or any other symbols. For the purpose of this chapter, telecommunications service excludes the over-the-air transmission of broadcast television or broadcast radio signals.

(17) “Traffic signal poles” means a pole that supports equipment used for controlling traffic, including but not limited to traffic lights, rapid flashing beacons, speed radar, and school zone flashers.

(18) “Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(19) “Unified enclosure” means a small wireless facility providing concealment of antennas and equipment within a single enclosure.

(20) “Utility pole” means a structure designed and used primarily for the support of electrical wires, telephone wires, television cable, traffic signals, or lighting for streets, parking areas, or pedestrian paths.

(21) “Wireline” means services provided using a physically tangible means of transmission, including without limitation wire or cable, and the apparatus used for such transmission. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.030 General provisions.

(1) Small wireless facilities shall not be considered nor regulated as essential public facilities.

(2) Small wireless facilities located outside of the public rights-of-way may be either a primary or a secondary use. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a small wireless facility.

(3) No person may place, construct, or modify a wireless communication facility subject to this chapter without first obtaining the required permit(s), issued in accordance with this chapter.

(4) Small wireless communication facilities that are governed under this chapter shall not be eligible for variances under CMC 18.125.030, development conditions under CMC 18.30.030(B)(4), or exceptions to height limits under CMC 18.30.210. Any request to deviate from this chapter shall be based on the modifications set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.040 Application requirements for small wireless facilities.

(1) Any application for a small wireless facility both inside and outside of the right-of-way shall comply with the following application requirements for a small wireless facility permit described in this chapter. For small wireless facilities inside the right-of-way, the applicant must also comply with the requirements pursuant to Chapter 12.65 CMC.

(2) Consistent with CMC 18.70A.080, all permits, leases, and right-of-way use authorizations necessary for the deployment of small wireless facilities, and if applicable an application for franchise, shall be consolidated for review and a decision rendered to the full extent feasible consistent with the time frames established within Federal and State law.

(3) In order to manage its rights-of-way in a thoughtful manner which balances the need to accommodate new and evolving technologies with the preservation of the natural and aesthetic environment of the City, the City of Covington has adopted this administrative process for the deployment of small wireless facilities. The City and applicant for a franchise and other permits associated with the deployment of small wireless facilities face challenges in coordinating applicable legislative and administrative processes under the Federal Communications Commission regulations. A franchise for the use of the City’s right-of-way is a contract which requires approval by the City Council. The small wireless permits and any other land use or other permit application submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed and issued by the Director. Applicants are encouraged and expected to provide all related applications in one submittal, unless they have already obtained a franchise.

(4) The Director is authorized to establish franchise and other application forms to gather the information required by this chapter from applicants and to determine the completeness of the application process as provided herein.

(a) Franchise. The process typically begins with and depends upon approval of a franchise for the use of the public right-of-way to deploy small wireless facilities if any portion of the applicant’s facilities is to be located in the right-of-way. An applicant with a franchise for the deployment of small wireless facilities in the City may proceed to directly apply for a small wireless facility permit and related approvals. An applicant at its option may utilize phased development.

(b) Small Wireless Facility Permits. The application requires specification of the small wireless facility components and locations as further required in the small wireless permit application described in subsection (5) of this section. Prior to the issuance of a small wireless facility permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount as determined by the City Council and adopted by resolution, or the actual costs incurred by the City in reviewing such permit application.

(c) Associated Permit(s). The applicant shall attach all associated permits requirements such as applications or checklists required under the critical areas, shoreline or SEPA ordinances. Applications for deployment of small wireless facilities in City design zones or for new poles shall comply with the requirements in CMC 18.70A.110.

(d) Leases. An applicant who desires to attach a small wireless facility to any utility pole within the rights-of-way and owned by the City shall include an application for a lease as a component of its application. The City Council authorizes the Director to approve leases for small wireless facilities for City-owned light poles located in the right-of-way. Leases for the use of other public property, structures or facilities shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.

(5) The following information shall be provided by all applicants for a small wireless permit:

(a) The application shall provide specific locational information including GIS coordinates of all proposed small wireless facilities and specify where the small wireless facilities will utilize existing, replacement or new poles, towers, existing buildings and/or other structures. Ground-mounted equipment, conduit, junction boxes and fiber and electrical connections necessary for and intended for use in the deployment shall also be specified regardless of whether the additional facilities are to be constructed by the applicant or leased from a third party. Detailed schematics and visual renderings of the small wireless facilities, including engineering and design standards, shall be provided by the applicant. The application shall have sufficient detail to identify:

(i) The location of overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, adjacent lighting, sewer, drainage and other lines and equipment within 50 feet of the proposed project area (for which the project area shall include the location of the fiber source and power source). Further, the applicant shall include all existing and proposed improvements related to the proposed location, including but not limited to poles, driveways, ADA ramps, equipment cabinets, street trees and structures within 50 feet from the proposed project area.

(ii) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities, lines and equipment, and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate, and a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing, and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.

(iii) The construction drawings shall also include the applicant’s plan for electric and fiber utilities, all conduits, cables, wires, handholes, junctions, meters, disconnect switches and any other ancillary equipment or construction necessary to construct the small cell facility, to the extent that the applicant is responsible for installing such electric and fiber utilities, conduits, cables, and related improvements. Where another party is responsible for installing such electric and fiber utilities, conduits, cables, and related improvements, applicant’s construction drawings will include such utilities to the extent known at the time of application, but at a minimum applicant must indicate how it expects to obtain fiber and electric service to the small cell facility.

(iv) If the site location includes a replacement light pole that is located five feet or more from the existing light pole, then the applicant must submit a photometric analysis of the roadway and sidewalk within 150 feet of the existing light.

(v) Compliance with the aesthetic requirements of CMC 18.70A.100.

(b) The applicant must show written approval from the owner of any pole or structure for the installation of its small wireless facilities on such pole or structure. To extent that the pole or structure is not owned by the applicant, the applicant shall demonstrate in writing that they have authority from the pole owner to install the small wireless facility on the pole or structure. Such written approval shall include approval of the specific pole, engineering and design standards, as well as assurances that the specific pole can withstand wind and seismic loads, from the pole owner, unless the pole owner is the City. Submission of the lease agreement between the pole owner and the applicant is not required. If the proposed small wireless facility is not within the rights-of-way, the applicant must provide written approval from the property owner. For City-owned poles or structures, the applicant must obtain a lease from the City prior to or concurrent with the small wireless permit application and must submit as part of the application the information required in the lease for the City to evaluate the usage of a specific pole.

(c) The applicant can batch multiple small wireless facility sites in one application. The applicant is encouraged to batch the small wireless facility sites within an application in a contiguous service area.

(d) Any application for a small wireless permit which contains an element which is not exempt from SEPA review shall simultaneously apply under Chapter 43.21C RCW and Chapter 16.10 CMC. Further, any application proposing small wireless facilities in shoreline management zones (pursuant to Chapter 16.05 CMC) or in critical areas (pursuant to Chapter 18.65 CMC) must indicate that the application is exempt or comply with the review processes in such codes.

(e) The applicant shall submit a sworn affidavit signed by an RF engineer with knowledge of the proposed project affirming that the small wireless facilities will be compliant with all FCC and other governmental regulations in connection with human exposure to radio frequency emissions for every frequency at which the small wireless facility will operate. If facilities which generate RF radiation necessary to the small wireless facility are to be provided by a third party, then the small wireless permit shall be conditioned on an RF certification showing the cumulative impact of the RF emissions on the entire installation. The applicant may provide one emissions report for the entire small wireless deployment if the applicant is using the same small wireless facility configuration for all installations within that batch or may submit one emissions report for each subgroup installation identified in the batch.

(f) The applicant shall provide proof of FCC and other regulatory approvals required to provide the service(s) or utilize the technologies sought to be installed.

(g) A professional engineer licensed by the State of Washington shall certify in writing, over his or her seal, that both construction plans and final construction of the small cell facilities and the antenna support structure or pole and foundation are designed to reasonably withstand wind and seismic loads.

(h) Applicant materials required for a right-of-way construction permit.

(i) Proof of a valid Covington business license.

(j) Recognizing that small wireless facility technology is rapidly evolving, the Director is authorized to adopt and publish standards for the technological and structural safety of City-owned structures and to formulate and publish application questions for use when an applicant seeks to attach to City-owned structures.

(k) Such other information as the Director, in his/her discretion, shall deem appropriate to effectively evaluate the application based on technical, engineering, and aesthetic considerations. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.050 Review process.

(1) Review. The following provisions relate to review of applications for a small wireless facility permit:

(a) The City will review the permit application to determine compliance with this chapter.

(b) Vertical clearance shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure that the small wireless facilities will not pose a hazard to other users of the rights-of-way.

(c) Replacement poles and new poles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), City construction and sidewalk clearance standards, traffic warrants, City ordinances, and State and Federal statutes and regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the rights-of-way. Further, the location of any replacement pole or new pole must: be physically possible, cannot obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the clear zone, not interfere with utility or safety fixtures (e.g., fire hydrants, traffic control devices), and not adversely affect the public welfare, health, or safety.

(d) No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in violation of Chapter 8.20 CMC.

(e) Small wireless facilities may not encroach onto or over private property or property outside of the right-of-way without the property owner’s express written consent.

(2) Independent Third-Party Review. The City may, at its discretion, contract with an independent engineering and technical review consultant to review the land use or other permit application. The applicant shall be responsible for actual costs charged by the consultant, in addition to any actual costs incurred by the City’s review. Based on the results of the independent technical review, the City may require changes or request additional information to complete the application review. The technical review shall address the following:

(a) The accuracy and completeness of the application;

(b) The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;

(c) The validity of conclusions reached;

(d) The viability of other sites in the City for the use intended by the applicant; and

(e) Any specific engineering or technical issues designated by the City.

(3) Final Review. Small wireless facility permits on existing or replacement structures will be reviewed and approved or denied as a Type 1 decision. Small wireless facility permits for new structures in the rights-of-way or for structures in design zones are subject to review and approval as a Type 2 decision and consistent with the requirements in CMC 18.70A.110.

(4) Eligible Facilities Requests. The design approved in a small wireless facility permit shall be considered concealment elements and such facilities may only be expanded upon an eligible facilities request described in CMC 18.70.095 when the modification does not defeat the concealment elements of the small wireless facility.

(5) Review of Facilities. Review of the site locations proposed by the applicant shall be governed by the provisions of 47 U.S.C. 253 and 332 and other applicable statutes, regulations and case law. Applicants for franchises and the small wireless facility permits shall be treated in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner with other service providers, utilizing supporting infrastructure which is functionally equivalent, that is, service providers whose facilities are similarly situated in terms of structure, placement, or cumulative impacts. Small wireless facility permit review under this chapter shall neither prohibit nor have the effect of prohibiting the ability of an applicant to provide telecommunications services.

(6) Withdrawal. Any applicant may withdraw an application submitted pursuant to CMC 18.70A.040 at any time, provided the withdrawal is in writing and signed by all persons who signed the original application or their successors in interest. When a withdrawal is received, the application shall be deemed null and void. If such withdrawal occurs prior to the Director’s decision, then reimbursement of fees submitted in association with said application shall be prorated to withhold the amount of City costs incurred in processing the application prior to time of withdrawal. If such withdrawal is not accomplished prior to the Director’s decision, there shall be no refund of all or any portion of such fee.

(7) Supplemental Information. Failure of an applicant to provide supplemental application information as requested by the Director within 60 days of notice by the Director shall be deemed a denial of that application, unless an extension period has been approved by the Director. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.060 Permit requirements.

(1) Compliance. The grantee of any permit shall comply with all of the requirements within the small wireless permit.

(2) Post-Construction As-Builts. Within 30 days after construction of the small wireless facility, the grantee shall provide the City with as-builts of the small wireless facilities demonstrating compliance with the permit and site photographs.

(3) Permit Time Limit. Construction of the small wireless facility must be completed within six months after the approval date by the City. The grantee may request one extension to be limited to three months, if the applicant cannot construct the small wireless facility within the original six-month period.

(4) Site Safety and Maintenance. The grantee must maintain the small wireless facilities in safe and working condition. The grantee shall be responsible for the removal of any graffiti or other vandalism and shall keep the site neat and orderly, including but not limited to following any maintenance or modifications on the site.

(5) Operational Activity. The grantee shall commence operation of the small wireless facility no later than three months after installation, unless the City and applicant agree to extend this period, or delay is caused by the lack of commercial power, communications facilities or other events outside of the reasonable control of the wireless provider. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.070 Modifications to small wireless facilities.

(1) If a grantee desires to make a modification to an existing small wireless facility, including but not limited to expanding or changing the antenna type, increasing the equipment enclosure, placing additional pole-mounted or ground-mounted equipment, or modifying the concealment elements, then the applicant shall apply for a small wireless facility permit.

(2) A small wireless facility permit shall not be required for routine maintenance and repair of a small wireless facility, or the replacement of an antenna or equipment of similar size, weight, and height; provided, that such replacement does not defeat the concealment elements used in the original deployment of the small wireless facility, does not impact the structural integrity of the pole, and does not require pole replacement. Further, a small wireless facility permit shall not be required for replacing equipment within the equipment enclosure or reconfiguration of fiber or power to the small wireless facility. Right-of-way construction permits or a building permit may be required for such routine maintenance, repair or replacement consistent with Chapter 12.65 CMC. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.080 Consolidated permit.

(1) The issuance of a small wireless permit grants authority to construct small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way in a consolidated manner to allow the applicant, in most situations, to avoid the need to seek duplicative approval by both the Public Works and the Development Services Departments. If the applicant requires a new franchise to utilize the right-of-way, the franchise approval may be consolidated with the small wireless facility permit review if requested by the applicant. As an exercise of police powers pursuant to RCW 35.99.040(2), the small wireless facility permit is not a right-of-way use permit, but instead a consolidated public works and land use permit, and the issuance of a small wireless facility permit shall be governed by the time limits established by Federal law for small wireless facilities.

(2) General standards applicable to the use of the rights-of-way described in Chapter 12.65 CMC shall apply to all small wireless facility permits. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.090 Design zones and pedestrian poles.

(1) The following area is designated as a design zone for the purpose of siting small wireless facilities: any area inside the downtown boundary pursuant to Chapter 18.31 CMC.

(2) Any applicant who desires to place a small wireless facility in a design zone must first establish that the applicant cannot locate the small wireless facility outside of the design zone. Applications for small wireless facilities in a design zone may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that due to technical infeasibility the applicant cannot locate the proposed small wireless facility on an existing or replacement pole within 500 feet of the proposed site and outside of the design zone.

(3) Small wireless facilities within the design zone may not be placed on pedestrian poles.

(4) Applications for small wireless facilities within design zones must receive a Type 2 decision and must comply with a concealment element design described in CMC 18.70A.110.

(5) The City desires to discourage the use of pedestrian poles. Applications for small wireless facilities attached to a pedestrian pole must comply with CMC 18.70A.110. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.100 Design and concealment standards for small wireless facilities.

Small wireless facility deployments permitted inside or outside the right-of way shall conform to the following design standards:

(1) Small wireless facilities attached to existing or replacement non-wooden light poles and other non-wooden poles in the right-of-way or nonwooden poles outside of the right-of-way shall conform to the following design criteria:

(a) Upon adoption of a City standard small wireless facility pole design(s) within the Design and Construction Standards, an applicant is encouraged to first consider using or modifying the standard pole design to accommodate its small wireless facility without substantially changing the outward visual and aesthetic character of the design. The applicant, upon a showing that use or modification of the standard pole design is either technically or physically infeasible, or that the modified pole design will not comply with the City’s ADA, sidewalk clearance requirements and/or would violate electrical or other safety standards, may deviate from the adopted standard pole design and use the design standards as adopted in this subsection (1).

(b) The applicant shall minimize to the extent possible the antenna and equipment space and shall use the smallest amount of enclosure possible to fit the necessary equipment. The antennas and equipment shall be located using one of the following methods:

(i) Concealed completely within the pole or pole base. Antennas and the associated equipment enclosures (including disconnect switches and other appurtenant devices) shall be fully concealed within the pole, unless such concealment is otherwise technically infeasible, or is incompatible with the pole design. If within the pole base, the base shall meet the ADA requirements and not impact the pedestrian access route.

(ii) Located on a pole. If located on a pole, antennas and the associated equipment enclosures (including disconnect switches and other appurtenant devices) must be camouflaged to appear as an integral part of the pole or flush-mounted to the pole, meaning for antennas no more than 12 inches off of the pole and for associated equipment no more than six inches off the pole, and must be the minimum size necessary for the intended purpose, not to exceed the volumetric dimensions of small wireless facilities. The equipment enclosure and all other wireless equipment associated with the pole (including but not limited to conduit), including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the pole, may not exceed 28 cubic feet. If the equipment enclosure is permitted on the exterior of the pole, the applicant is required to place the equipment enclosure behind any banners or road signs that may be on the pole; provided, that such location does not interfere with the operation of the banners or signs. The applicant may propose a side-mounted canister antenna, so long as the inside edge of the antenna is no more than six inches from the surface of the pole. All cables shall be concealed either within the canister antenna or within a sleeve between the antenna and the pole.

(iii) Underground in a utility vault. If located underground, the access lid to the equipment enclosure shall be located outside the footprint of any pedestrian curb ramp and shall have a nonskid surface meeting ADA requirements if located within an existing pedestrian access route.

(iv) On private property. If located on private property, the applicant shall submit a copy of an executed easement or lease agreement with the private property owner prior to the small wireless facility permit issuance.

(c) The furthest point of any equipment enclosure may not extend more than 28 inches from the face of the pole. Any equipment or antenna enclosures must meet WSDOT height clearance requirements.

(d) All conduit, cables, wires and fiber must be routed internally in the non-wooden pole. Full concealment of all conduit, cables, wires and fiber is required within mounting brackets, shrouds, canisters or sleeves if attaching to exterior antennas or equipment.

(e) An antenna on top of an existing pole may not extend more than six feet above the height of the existing pole and the diameter may not exceed 16 inches, measured at the top of the pole, unless the applicant can demonstrate that more space is technically needed. The antennas shall be integrated into the pole design so that it appears as a continuation of the original pole, including colored or painted to match the pole, and shall be shrouded or screened to blend with the pole except for canister antennas which shall not require screening. All cabling and mounting hardware/brackets from the bottom of the antenna to the top of the pole shall be fully concealed and integrated with the pole.

(f) Any replacement pole shall substantially conform to the design of the pole it is replacing or the neighboring pole design standards utilized within the contiguous right-of-way. Any replacement pole shall be placed as close to the original pole as possible, but no more than five feet from the existing pole location.

(g) The height of any replacement pole may not extend more than six feet above the height of the existing pole or the minimum additional height technically necessary; provided, that the height of the replacement pole cannot be extended further by additional antenna height.

(h) The diameter of a replacement pole shall comply with the City’s setback and sidewalk clearance requirements and shall, to the extent technically feasible, not be more than 20 inches measured at the base of the pole, unless additional diameter is needed in order to conceal equipment within the base of the pole, and shall comply with the requirements in subsection (5)(d) of this section.

(i) The use of the pole for the siting of a small wireless facility shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the pole. If the primary function of a pole serving as the host site for a small wireless facility becomes unnecessary, the pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the small wireless facility and the small wireless facility and all associated equipment shall be removed.

(2) Wooden Pole Design Standards. Small wireless facilities located on wooden poles shall conform to the following design criteria:

(a) The wooden pole at the proposed location may be replaced with a taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a small wireless facility; provided, that the replacement pole shall not exceed a height that is a maximum of 10 feet taller than the existing pole, unless a further height increase is required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner, and that such height extension is the minimum extension possible to provide sufficient separation and/or clearance from electrical and wireline facilities.

(b) A pole extender may be used instead of replacing an existing pole but may not increase the height of the existing pole by more than 10 feet, unless a further height increase is required and confirmed in writing by the pole owner, and that such height increase is the minimum extension possible to provide sufficient separation and/or clearance from electrical and wireline facilities. A “pole extender” as used herein is an object affixed between the pole and the antenna for the purpose of increasing the height of the antenna above the pole. The pole extender shall be painted to approximately match the color of the pole and shall substantially match the diameter of the pole measured at the top of the pole.

(c) Replacement wooden poles must either match the approximate color and materials of the replaced pole or shall be the standard new wooden pole used by the pole owner in the City.

(d) Antennas, equipment enclosures, and all ancillary equipment, boxes and conduit shall be colored or painted to match the approximate color of the surface of the wooden pole on which they are attached.

(e) Antennas shall not be mounted more than 12 inches from the surface of the wooden pole.

(f) Antennas should be placed in an effort to minimize visual clutter and obtrusiveness. Multiple antennas are permitted on a wooden pole; provided, that each antenna enclosure shall not be more than three cubic feet in volume.

(g) A canister antenna may be mounted on top of an existing wooden pole, which may not exceed the height requirements described in subsection (2)(a) of this section. A canister antenna mounted on the top of a wooden pole shall not exceed 16 inches, measured at the top of the pole, and shall be colored or painted to match the pole. The canister antenna must be placed to look as if it is an extension of the pole. In the alternative, the applicant may propose a side-mounted canister antenna, so long as the inside edge of the antenna is no more than 12 inches from the surface of the wooden pole. All cables shall be concealed either within the canister antenna or within a sleeve between the antenna and the wooden pole.

(h) The furthest point of any antenna or equipment enclosure may not extend more than 24 inches from the face of the pole. Any equipment or antenna enclosures must meet WSDOT height clearance requirements.

(i) An omnidirectional antenna may be mounted on the top of an existing wooden pole, provided such antenna is no more than four feet in height and is mounted directly on the top of a pole or attached to a sleeve made to look like the exterior of the pole as close to the top of the pole as technically feasible. All cables shall be concealed within the sleeve between the bottom of the antenna and the mounting bracket.

(j) All related equipment, including but not limited to ancillary equipment, radios, cables, associated shrouding, microwaves, and conduit which are mounted on wooden poles, shall not be mounted more than six inches from the surface of the pole, unless a further distance is technically required, and is confirmed in writing by the pole owner.

(k) Equipment for small wireless facilities must be attached to the wooden pole, unless otherwise permitted to be ground-mounted pursuant to subsection (5)(a) of this section. The equipment must be placed in the smallest enclosure possible for the intended purpose. The equipment enclosure and all other wireless equipment associated with the utility pole, including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the pole, may not exceed 28 cubic feet. Multiple equipment enclosures may be acceptable if designed to more closely integrate with the pole design and do not cumulatively exceed 28 cubic feet. The applicant is encouraged to place the equipment enclosure behind any banners or road signs that may be on the pole; provided, that such location does not interfere with the operation of the banners or signs.

(l) An applicant who desires to enclose both its antennas and equipment within one unified enclosure may do so; provided, that such enclosure is the minimum size necessary for its intended purpose and the enclosure and all other wireless equipment associated with the pole, including wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the pole, do not exceed 28 cubic feet. The unified enclosure may not be placed more than 12 inches from the surface of the pole. To the extent possible, the unified enclosure shall be placed so as to appear as an integrated part of the pole or behind banners or signs; provided, that such location does not interfere with the operation of the banners or signs.

(m) The visual effect of the small wireless facility on all other aspects of the appearance of the wooden pole shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible.

(n) The use of the wooden pole for the siting of a small wireless facility shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the pole. If the primary function of a pole serving as the host site for a small wireless facility becomes unnecessary, the pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the small wireless facility and the small wireless facility and all associated equipment shall be removed.

(o) The diameter of a replacement pole shall comply with the City’s setback and sidewalk clearance requirements and shall not be more than a 25 percent increase of the existing utility pole measured at the base of the pole.

(p) All cables and wires shall be routed through conduit along the outside of the pole. The outside conduit shall be colored or painted to match the pole. The number of conduits shall be minimized to the number technically necessary to accommodate the small wireless facility.

(3) Small wireless facilities attached to existing buildings shall conform to the following design criteria:

(a) Small wireless facilities may be mounted to the sides of a building if the antennas do not interrupt the building’s architectural theme.

(b) The interruption of architectural lines or horizontal or vertical reveals is discouraged.

(c) New architectural features such as columns, pilasters, corbels, or other ornamentation that conceal antennas may be used if they complement the architecture of the existing building.

(d) Small wireless facilities shall utilize the smallest mounting brackets necessary in order to provide the smallest offset from the building.

(e) Skirts or shrouds shall be utilized on the sides and bottoms of antennas in order to conceal mounting hardware, create a cleaner appearance, and minimize the visual impact of the antennas. Exposed cabling/wiring is prohibited.

(f) Small wireless facilities shall be colored, painted and textured to match the adjacent building surfaces.

(g) Small wireless facilities must meet the height requirement of the underlying zoning district.

(h) Feed lines and coaxial cables shall be located below the parapet of the rooftop.

(i) If a cabinet enclosure cannot be located within the building where the wireless communication facilities will be located, then the City’s first preference is for the wireless telecommunication carrier to locate the equipment on the roof of the building. If the equipment can be screened by placing the equipment below the parapet walls, no additional screening is required. If screening is required, the proposed screening must be consistent with the existing building in terms of color, design, architectural style, and material. If the cabinet equipment cannot be located on the roof or within the building then it shall be located underground consistent with subsection (5)(a) of this section.

(4) Small wireless facilities mounted on cables strung between existing utility poles shall conform to the following standards:

(a) Each strand-mounted facility shall not exceed three cubic feet in volume;

(b) Only one strand-mounted facility is permitted between any two existing poles;

(c) The strand-mounted devices shall be placed as close as possible to the nearest utility pole, in no event more than five feet from the pole unless a greater distance is technically necessary or is required by the pole owner for safety clearance;

(d) No strand-mounted device shall be located in or above the portion of the roadway open to vehicular traffic;

(e) Ground-mounted equipment to accommodate a shared mounted facility is not permitted except when placed in preexisting equipment cabinets;

(f) Pole-mounted equipment shall comply with the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section;

(g) Such strand-mounted devices must be installed to cause the least visual impact and without excess exterior cabling or wires (other than the original strand); and

(h) Strand-mounted facilities are only permitted on poles that have existing overhead wirelines.

(5) General Requirements.

(a) Ground-mounted equipment in the rights-of-way is prohibited, unless such facilities are placed underground or the applicant can demonstrate that pole-mounted or undergrounded equipment is technically infeasible. If ground-mounted equipment is necessary, then the applicant shall submit a concealment element plan. Generators located in the rights-of-way are prohibited.

(b) No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in violation of Chapter 8.20 CMC.

(c) Small wireless facilities are not permitted on traffic signal poles unless denial of the siting could be a prohibition or effective prohibition of the applicant’s ability to provide telecommunications service in violation of 47 U.S.C. 253 and 332.

(d) Replacement poles and new poles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), City construction and sidewalk clearance standards, City ordinances, and State and Federal laws and regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the rights-of-way. Further, the location of any replacement or new pole must: be physically possible, comply with applicable traffic warrants, not interfere with utility or safety fixtures (e.g., fire hydrants, traffic control devices), and not adversely affect the public welfare, health or safety.

(e) Replacement poles shall be located as near as possible to the existing pole with the requirement to remove the abandoned pole.

(f) No signage, message or identification other than the manufacturer’s identification or identification required by governing law is allowed to be portrayed on any antenna or equipment enclosure. Any permitted signage shall be located on the equipment enclosures and be of the minimum amount possible to achieve the intended purpose (no larger than four by six inches); provided, that signs are permitted as concealment element techniques where appropriate.

(g) Antennas and related equipment shall not be illuminated except for security reasons, required by a Federal or State authority, or unless approved as part of a concealment element plan.

(h) Side arm mounts for antennas or equipment must be the minimum extension necessary and may not create a gap of more than 12 inches for wooden poles and no more than six inches for non-wooden poles between the pole and the antennas or equipment.

(i) The preferred location of a small wireless facility on a pole is the location with the least visible impact.

(j) Antennas, equipment enclosures, and ancillary equipment, conduit and cable shall not dominate the structure or pole upon which they are attached.

(k) Except for locations in the right-of-way, small wireless facilities are not permitted on any property containing a residential use in the residential zones.

(l) The City may consider the cumulative visual effects of small wireless facilities mounted on poles within the rights-of-way when assessing proposed siting locations so as to not adversely affect the visual character of the City. This provision shall not be applied to limit the number of permits issued when no alternative sites are reasonably available nor to impose a technological requirement on the applicant.

(m) These design standards are intended to be used solely for the purpose of concealment and siting. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied in a manner which dictates the use of a particular technology. When strict application of these requirements would unreasonably impair the function of the technology chosen by the applicant, alternative forms of concealment or deployment may be permitted which provide similar or greater protections from negative visual impacts to the streetscape. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.110 New poles for small wireless facilities and installations in a design zone or on pedestrian poles.

(1) New poles for small wireless facilities, installations of small wireless facilities in a design zone, or placement on a pedestrian pole in the rights-of-way in a nonresidential zone are only permitted if the applicant can establish that:

(a) The proposed small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing utility pole or light pole, electrical transmission tower or on a site outside of the public rights-of-way such as a public park, public property, building, transmission tower or in or on a nonresidential use in a residential zone whether by roof or panel-mount or separate structure;

(b) The proposed small wireless facility complies with the applicable requirements of CMC 18.70A.100(E);

(c) The proposed small wireless facility receives approval for a concealment element design, as described in subsection (3) of this section;

(d) The proposed small wireless facility also complies with Shoreline Management Act, and SEPA, if applicable; and

(e) No new poles shall be located in a critical area or associated buffer required by Chapter 18.65 CMC, except when determined to be exempt pursuant to Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(2) If the proposed small wireless facility is for placement on a pedestrian pole within the rights-of-way of a residential zone, the applicant must establish that placement of the small wireless facility on an existing or replacement pole located on an arterial or collector street is technically infeasible. Upon such demonstration by the applicant, the applicant is encouraged to place the small wireless facility at a corner and shall utilize a concealment element design as described in subsection (3) of this section.

(3) The concealment element design shall include the design of the screening, fencing or other concealment technology for a tower, pole, or equipment structure, and all related transmission equipment or facilities associated with the proposed small wireless facility, including but not limited to fiber and power connections.

(a) The concealment element design should seek to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of the small wireless facility. The proposed pole or structure should have similar designs to existing neighboring poles in the rights-of-way, including similar height to the extent technically feasible. If the proposed small wireless facility is placed on a replacement pole in a design zone, then the replacement pole shall be of the same general design as the pole it is replacing, unless the Development Services Department otherwise approves a variation due to aesthetic or safety concerns. Any concealment element design for a small wireless facility should attempt to mimic the design of such pole and integrate the small wireless facility into the design of the pole. Other concealment methods include, but are not limited to, integrating the installation with architectural features or building design components, utilization of coverings or concealment devices of similar material, color, and texture – or the appearance thereof – as the surface against which the installation will be seen or on which it will be installed, landscape design, or other camouflage strategies appropriate for the type of installation. Applicants are required to utilize designs in which all conduit and wirelines are installed internally in the structure. Further, applicant designs should, to the extent technically and physically possible, comply with the generally applicable design standards adopted pursuant to subsection (4) of this section.

(b) If the Director has already approved a concealment element design either for the applicant or another small wireless facility along the same public right-of-way or for the same pole type, then the applicant shall utilize a substantially similar concealment element design, unless it can show that such concealment element design is not physically or technologically feasible, or that such deployment would undermine the generally applicable design standards.

(4) Even if an alternative location is established pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section, the Director may determine that a new pole in the right-of-way is in fact a superior alternative based on the impact to the City, the concealment element design, the City’s comprehensive plan and the added benefits to the community.

(5) Prior to the issuance of a permit to construct a new pole or ground-mounted equipment in the right-of-way, the applicant must obtain a site-specific agreement from the City to locate such new pole or ground-mounted equipment. The requirement also applies to the placement of replacement poles when the replacement is necessary for the installation or attachment of the small wireless facility, the replacement structure is higher than the replaced structure, and the overall height of the replacement structure and the wireless facility is more than 60 feet.

(6) These design standards are intended to be used solely for the purpose of concealment and siting. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied in a manner which dictates the use of a particular technology. When strict application of these requirements would unreasonably impair the function of the technology chosen by the applicant, alternative forms of concealment or deployment may be permitted which provide similar or greater protections of the streetscape. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.120 Appeals.

Small wireless facilities permit decisions, including any Type 2 decisions, made by the Director are final decisions appealable to the King County Superior Court. The timely filing of an appeal of a small wireless facility permit decision shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is concluded or withdrawn. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


18.70A.130 Removal of abandoned small wireless facilities.

Any small wireless facility that, after the initial operation of the facility, is not used for the purpose for which it was intended at the time of filing the application for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The wireless telecommunication carrier of such abandoned small wireless facility shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of a notice from the City notifying the owner or operator of such abandonment. Whenever a facility is abandoned or ceases operation, the entire facility shall be removed, including, but not limited to, all antennas, antenna supports, feeder lines, base stations, electronic equipment, and the pole upon which the small wireless facility is located, unless the City determines that such pole shall remain. Failure to remove such an abandoned facility shall result in declaring the small wireless facility a public nuisance. If there are two or more users of a single pole, then this section shall not become effective until all users cease using the pole. (Ord. 03-19 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.75 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES

Sections:

18.75.010    Purpose.

18.75.020    General requirements.

18.75.030    Adequate sewage disposal.

18.75.040    Adequate water supply.

18.75.050    Surface water management.

18.75.060    Adequate streets.

18.75.070    Adequate vehicular access.

18.75.080    Adequate fire protection.

18.75.090    School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

18.75.100    Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

18.75.110    Submission of district capital facilities plan and data.

18.75.120    School concurrency standard.

18.75.130    Credit for improvements.


18.75.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are adequate or will be provided in a timely manner consistent with the public facilities and services planning goal of the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 by:

(1) Specifying the on-site and off-site facilities and services that must be in place or otherwise assured of timely provision prior to development;

(2) Allocating the cost of those facilities and services fairly; and

(3) Providing a general framework for relating development standards and other requirements of this code to:

(a) Adopted service level standards for public facilities and services;

(b) Procedural requirements for phasing development projects to ensure that services are provided as development occurs; and

(c) The review of development permit applications. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.010))


18.75.020 General requirements. 

(1) All new development proposals including any use, activity or structure allowed by Chapter 18.25 CMC that requires City of Covington approval shall be adequately served by the following facilities and services prior to the time of occupancy, recording or other land use approval, as further specified in this chapter:

(a) Sewage disposal;

(b) Water supply;

(c) Surface water management;

(d) Roads and access;

(e) Fire protection service; and 

(f) Schools.

(2) All new development proposals for building permits, plats, short plats, urban planned developments, fully contained communities and binding site plans, that will be served by a sewer or water district, shall include a certificate of water availability and a certificate of sewer availability to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and other provisions of the City of Covington Municipal Code, the City of Covington comprehensive plan and the Growth Management Act.

(3) Regardless of the number of sequential permits required, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied only once to any single development proposal. If changes and modifications result in impacts not considered when the proposal was first approved, the City shall consider the revised proposal as a new development proposal. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.020))


18.75.030 Adequate sewage disposal.

All new development proposals shall be served by an adequate sewage system, including both collection and treatment facilities, consistent with CMC Title 13, as follows:

(1) A public sewage system is adequate for a development proposal; provided, that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat or short plat approval or other land use approval, the site of the proposed development can be served by a sewage system consistent with CMC Title 13.

(b) For the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public sewage system as set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section is installed to serve each building or lot.

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan, the approved public sewage system set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot respectively.

(d) For a zone reclassification the timing of installation of required sewage improvements shall be contained in the approving ordinance. (Ord. 19-17 § 2; Ord. 01-09 § 19; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.030))


18.75.040 Adequate water supply. 

All new development proposals shall be served by a water supply system as follows:

(1) A public water system is adequate for a development proposal; provided, that:

(a) For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat or short plat approval or other land use approval, the site of the proposed development can be served by a water system consistent with CMC Title 13.

(b) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public water system and any system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each building or lot.

(c) For recording a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan, either the approved public water supply system or system improvements set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be installed to serve each lot.

(d) For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required water system improvements shall be included in the approving ordinance. (Ord. 19-17 § 3; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.040))


18.75.050 Surface water management.

All new development shall be served by an adequate surface water management system as follows:

(1) The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a surface water management system approved by the Department as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements of the adopted stormwater manuals and CMC Title 13;

(2) A design deviation or design variance request from the requirements of the stormwater manuals and CMC Title 13 shall be reviewed as set forth in CMC Title 13. (Ord. 26-16 § 32; Ord. 13-09 § 37; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.050))


18.75.060 Adequate streets. 

(1) All new development shall be served by adequate streets. Streets are adequate if the development’s traffic impacts on surrounding public streets are acceptable under the level-of-service standards and the compliance procedures established in CMC Title 12.

(2) The issuance of a new permit for existing uses constitutes a new development proposal if it will generate additional traffic above that currently generated by the use. Mitigation may be required under CMC Titles 12 and 19 to offset level-of-service impacts as a result of additional traffic.

(3) A design deviation or design variance request from the requirements of CMC Title 12 and the Design and Construction Standards shall be reviewed as set forth in Chapter 12.60 CMC. (Ord. 27-16 § 13; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.060))


18.75.070 Adequate vehicular access.

All new development shall be served by adequate vehicular access as follows:

(1) The property upon which the development proposed is to be located has direct access to:

(a) A public street that meets the City Design and Construction Standards as adopted in Chapter 12.60 CMC;

(b) The property has access to such a street over a private driveway approved by the City;

(2) The proposed circulation system for a development proposal shall intersect with existing and anticipated streets abutting the site at safe and convenient locations, as determined by the Department and the City Engineer, and in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards; and

(3) Every lot upon which one or more buildings are proposed to be erected or traffic-generating use is proposed to be established shall establish safe access as follows:

(a) Safe passage from the street right-of-way to building entrances for transit patrons and other pedestrians, in accordance with the City design and construction standards set forth in Chapter 18.31 CMC, as applicable, and Chapter 18.50 CMC;

(b) Direct access from the street right-of-way, fire lane or a parking space to any part of the property as needed to provide public services in accordance with adopted City Design and Construction Standards (e.g., fire protection, emergency medical service, mail delivery, trash collection, etc.); and

(c) Direct access from the street right-of-way, driveway, alley or other means of ingress/egress approved by the City of Covington to all required off-street parking spaces on the premises. (Ord. 27-16 § 14; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.120))


18.75.080 Adequate fire protection.

All new development shall be served by adequate fire protection as set forth below:

(1) The site of the development proposed is served by a water supply system that provides at least minimum fire flow and a road system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other fire protection requirements for buildings as required by CMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction;

(2) For a zone reclassification or urban planned development, the timing of installation of required fire protection improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance, secured with a bond or similar security, and deposited with the City of Covington; and

(3) A variance request from the requirements established by CMC Title 15, Fire Code, shall be reviewed as set forth in CMC Title 15, and/or in Article 2 of the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in Chapters 18.30 through 18.80 CMC. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 17; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.130))


18.75.090 School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

(1) The school concurrency standard set out in CMC 18.75.120 shall apply to applications for preliminary plat or urban planned development (UPD) approval, mobile home parks, requests for multifamily zoning, and building permits for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously evaluated for compliance with the concurrency standard.

(2) The City’s finding of concurrency shall be made at the time of preliminary plat or UPD approval, at the time that a request to actualize potential multifamily zoning is approved, at the time a mobile home park site plan is approved, or prior to building permit issuance for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously established for compliance with the concurrency standard. Once such a finding has been made, the development shall be considered as vested for purposes of the concurrency determination.

(3) Excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are:

(a) Building permits for individual single-family dwellings;

(b) Any form of housing exclusively for senior citizens, including nursing homes and retirement centers;

(c) Shelters for temporary placement, relocation facilities and transitional housing facilities;

(d) Replacement, reconstruction or remodeling of existing dwelling units;

(e) Short subdivisions;

(f) Building permits for residential units in recorded planned unit developments approved pursuant to this code that have not yet expired;

(g) Any residential building permit for any development proposal for which a concurrency determination has already been made pursuant to the terms of this title. 

(4) All of the development activities which are excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are subject to school impact fees imposed pursuant to CMC Title 19.

(5) The assessment and payment of impact fees are governed by and shall be subject to the provisions in CMC Title 19 addressing school impact fees.

(6) A certification of concurrency for a school district shall not preclude the City from collecting impact fees for the district. Impact fees may be assessed and collected as long as the fees are used to fund capital and system improvements needed to serve the new development, and as long as the use of such fees is consistent with the requirements of Chapter 82.02 RCW and this chapter. Pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, impact fees may also be used to recoup capital and system improvement costs previously incurred by a school district to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs. (Ord. 16-16 § 3; Ord. 20-07 § 129; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.140))


18.75.100 Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities. 

(1) In making a threshold determination pursuant to SEPA, the Director and/or the Hearing Examiner, in the course of reviewing proposals for residential development including applications for plats or UPDs, mobile home parks, or multifamily zoning, and multifamily building permits, shall consider the school district’s capital facilities plan as adopted by the Council.

(2) Documentation which the district is required to submit pursuant to CMC 18.75.110 or CMC Title 14, Division I, shall be incorporated into the record in every case without requiring the district to offer such plans and data into the record. The school district is also authorized to present testimony and documents demonstrating a lack of concurrency in the district and the inability of the district to accommodate the students to be generated by a specific development.

(3) Based upon a finding that the impacts generated by the plat, manufactured home park or the multifamily development were generally not anticipated at the time of the last Council review and approval of a school district capital plan and were not included in the district’s long-range forecast, the Director may require or recommend phasing or provision of the needed facilities and/or sites as appropriate to address the deficiency or deny or condition approval, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the State Subdivision Act, and the State Environmental Policy Act.

(4) Determinations of the Examiner or Director regarding concurrency can be appealed only pursuant to the provisions for appeal of the development permit process for which the determination has been made. Where no other administrative appeal process is available, an appeal may be taken to the Hearing Examiner using the appeal procedures for variances. Any errors in the formula identified as a result of an appeal should be referred to the Council for possible modifications.

(5) Where the Council has not adopted an impact fee ordinance for a particular school district, the language of this section shall not affect the authority or duties of the Examiner or the Director pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act or the State Subdivision Act. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.150))


18.75.110 Submission of district capital facilities plan and data. 

(1) On an annual basis, each school district shall submit the following materials to the City:

(a) The district’s capital facilities plan adopted by the school board, which is consistent with the Growth Management Act.

(b) The district’s enrollment projections over the next six years, its current enrollment and the district’s enrollment projections and actual enrollment from the previous year.

(c) The district’s standard of service.

(d) An inventory and evaluation of district facilities which address the district’s standard of service.

(e) The district’s overall capacity over the next six years, which shall be a function of the district’s standard of service as measured by the number of students which can be housed in district facilities.

(2) To the extent that the district’s standard of service reveals a deficiency in its current facilities, the district’s capital facilities plan must demonstrate a plan for achieving the standard of service, and must identify the sources of funding for building or acquiring the necessary facilities to meet the standard of service.

(3) Facilities to meet future demand shall be designed to meet the adopted standards of service. If sufficient funding is not projected to be available to fully fund a capital plan which meets the standard of service, the district’s capital plan should document the reason for the funding gap.

(4) If an impact fee ordinance has been adopted on behalf of a school district, the district shall also submit an annual report to the City showing the capital improvements which were financed in whole or in part by the impact fees. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.152))


18.75.120 School concurrency standard. 

(1) Schools shall be considered to have been provided concurrently with the development which will impact the schools if:

(a) The permanent and interim improvements necessary to serve the development are planned to be in place at the time the impacts of development are expected to occur; or

(b) The necessary financial commitments are in place to assure the completion of the needed improvements to meet the district’s standard of service within three years of the time that the impacts of development are expected to occur. Necessary improvements are those facilities identified by the district in its capital facilities plan as reviewed and adopted by the City of Covington.

(2) Any combination of the following shall constitute the “necessary financial commitments” for the purposes of subsection (1) of this section.

(a) The district has received voter approval of and/or has bonding authority;

(b) The district has received approval for Federal, State, or other funds;

(c) The district has received a secured commitment from a developer that the developer will construct the needed permanent school facility, and the school district has found such facility to be acceptable and consistent with its capital facilities plan; and/or

(d) The district has other assured funding, including but not limited to school impact fees which have been paid.

(3) Compliance with this concurrency requirement of this section shall be sufficient to satisfy the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 and 58.17.110. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.160))


18.75.130 Credit for improvements.

Whenever a development is granted approval subject to a condition that the development proponent actually provide a school facility acceptable to the district, the development proponent shall be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility, against the fee that would be chargeable under the formula provided by CMC Title 14, Division II. The cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented and the documentation confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact fee. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.28.180))


Chapter 18.80 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – ANIMALS, HOME OCCUPATION, HOME INDUSTRY

Sections:

18.80.010    Purpose.

18.80.015    General requirements.

18.80.017    Other requirements, nuisances and enforcement.

18.80.018    Amortization requirements.

18.80.020    –

18.80.090    Repealed.

18.80.100    Home occupation.

18.80.110    Home industry.

18.80.120    Protection of agricultural uses.


18.80.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and preserve the compatibility between neighboring properties by regulating the scope and intensity of accessory uses or activities. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.010))


18.80.015 General requirements.

The keeping of domestic animals, livestock, fowl, and bees is permitted outright as an accessory use to any primary use, in each case subject to all of the following requirements.

(1) Domestic animals which are kept indoors as household pets in aquariums, terrariums, cages or similar containers are permitted in all zoning districts and shall not be limited in number, except as provided in Chapter 6.05 CMC. Other domestic animals kept indoors or outdoors shall be limited to five, of which not more than three may be unaltered cats or dogs.

(2) Kennels and catteries within the City must comply with the following, in addition to the provisions adopted under Chapter 6.05 CMC and CMC 18.25.050 and 18.31.080.

(a) For kennels located on residential zoned sites:

(i) The minimum site area shall be five acres; and

(ii) Structures housing animals and outdoor animal runs shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines abutting residential zones; and

(iii) The maximum number of adult dogs shall be 10;

(b) For kennels located on nonresidential zoned sites, run areas shall be completely surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall or fence and are subject to the requirements in Section 11.04.060 King County Code and CMC 18.25.050 and 18.31.080; and

(c) Catteries shall be on sites of 35,000 square feet or more, and buildings used to house cats shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines abutting residential zones.

(3) Fowl are permitted in all zoning districts, except the town center district, with no required minimum lot size, subject to the following:

(a) Five fowl are allowed on lots less than 16,000 square feet. One additional fowl is allowed for every additional 4,000 square feet of lot size.

(b) Structures and confinement areas housing fowl shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines and 20 feet away from any dwelling unit on an adjacent lot.

(c) Roosters and peafowl are not permitted.

(4) Livestock is permitted in all zoning districts, except the town center district, subject to the following:

(a) The minimum lot size for keeping livestock is 20,000 square feet for the first animal, and 15,000 square feet for each additional animal unit;

(b) All livestock facilities and outdoor confinement areas shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines and a minimum of 30 feet from any dwelling unit on an adjacent property and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions:

(i) Grazing areas may project to property lines;

(ii) Swine shall not be kept within 50 feet of all property lines and dwelling units, with the exception of miniature potbelly pigs in accordance with subsection (8) of this section; and

(iii) Doorways and other openings to the livestock facilities and outdoor confinement shall be oriented away from neighboring properties unless no alternative location exists that does not create an impact to neighbors.

(5) All livestock facilities, structures housing fowl, confinement areas, and grazing areas shall be cleaned of manure or refuse on a regular basis. The director shall have the authority to require more frequent cleaning if the manure or refuse becomes a nuisance.

(6) No portion of a livestock facility, structure housing fowl, confinement area, and/or grazing area shall be located within a critical area and/or critical area buffer unless permitted pursuant to Chapter 18.65 CMC:

(a) A farm conservation plan prepared by the King Conservation District shall be submitted to the City for any livestock facilities, structures housing fowl, confinement areas, and/or grazing areas located on properties with critical areas and critical area buffers. The farm conservation plan shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 18.65 CMC, Section 21A.30.045(A), (B), (C), and (D) King County Code, and Section 21.30.060 King County Code.

(b) All existing livestock facilities, structures housing fowl, confinement areas, and grazing areas located within critical areas or critical area buffers shall provide a farm conservation plan to the City within two years of the adoption of this chapter.

(7) All livestock and fowl shall be kept within an enclosure or a fence of sufficient strength and construction to prevent the escape of or injury to the livestock and fowl.

(8) Miniature potbelly pigs, commonly known as Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbelly pigs (Sus scrofa bittatus), may be kept as domestic animals in accordance with subsection (1) of this section; provided, each potbelly pig is not greater than 22 inches in height at the shoulder or no more than 150 pounds in weight. Swine that exceed these limitations shall be considered livestock and shall meet setback requirements in subsection (4) of this section. The maximum number of potbelly pigs kept as domestic animals shall be two per household.

(9) Bees may be kept subject to the following regulations:

(a) Properties housing bees shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area.

(b) Two hives are permitted if the subject property is less than 20,000 square feet in area. One additional hive is allowed for each additional 10,000 square feet in lot size.

(c) Hives shall be a minimum of 25 feet from each property line, with the hive(s) entrance(s) facing away from the nearest property line.

(d) All hives shall be registered with the Washington State Department of Agriculture, pursuant to RCW 15.60.021, prior to April of each year in which they are kept.

(10) The keeping of domestic animals, livestock, fowl, and bees for any for-profit venture shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 5.10 CMC and CMC 18.80.100 and 18.80.110.

(11) The keeping of domestic animals, livestock, fowl, and bees is permitted on properties without a primary use if two or more lots are conjoined and owned by the same landowner, and one of the properties contains a primary use. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.80.017 Other requirements, nuisances, and enforcement.

(1) The raising and keeping of domestic animals, livestock, fowl or bees is also subject to Chapters 6.05, 8.20, and 8.30 CMC.

(2) The following domestic animal, livestock, fowl, or bee uses under this chapter shall also be considered nuisances:

(a) Causes damages to the property of anyone other than its owner;

(b) Is vicious in nature;

(c) Causes unreasonable and continuous odor at the adjacent property line;

(d) Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings; provided, however, that this subsection is not violated if the alleged nuisance occurs by the accumulation of expected amounts of manure, urine, or other animal waste products and the manure is not allowed to stockpile, but is either composted, tilled into the ground or hauled away from the premises;

(e) Barks, whines, howls or other disturbing noises are made in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion;

(f) Is determined by the King County Health Department to be a public nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil code violation subject to and enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.80.018 Amortization requirements.

Except for as provided in CMC 18.80.015(6), the following amortization requirements shall apply to prior legal nonconforming animal uses under this chapter:

(1) Any prior legal nonconforming animal uses must be discontinued or brought into conformance with CMC 18.80.015(1), (3), (7), (8), (9), and (10) within three months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2) Any prior legal nonconforming animal uses must be discontinued or brought into conformance with CMC 18.80.015(2), (4), and (6) within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(a) An extension or exemption from the amortization requirements in this subsection (2), only, may be applied for by the owner of the property on which the prior legal nonconforming animal use exists. An application for an amortization exemption or extension may be approved, or approved with modification, by the Director if it satisfies all of the following criteria:

(i) The use is compatible with the subject property;

(ii) The use substantially complies with the requirements of the code for the land use district in which it is located. Minor deviations from these code provisions may be approved by the Director if he or she concludes that the use is compatible with the character of the primary structures on the subject property and with the structures and uses on surrounding properties;

(iii) The enforcement of this code would result in a substantial hardship to the applicant due to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property and such hardship was not created by any action of the applicant;

(iv) The use is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan; and

(v) The use is consistent with and does not endanger the public health, safety and welfare.

The decision to issue an amortization extension or exemption under this subsection shall be made in the sole discretion of the Director, and such decision shall be final.

(3) Any prior legal nonconforming animal uses must comply with all other provisions of this chapter not enumerated above immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(4) Any and all new animal uses shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.80.020 Animal regulations – Small animals. 

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.020))


18.80.030 Animal regulations – Livestock – Purpose. 

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.030))


18.80.040 Animal regulations – Livestock – Densities.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.040))


18.80.050 Animal regulations – Livestock – Farm management plans.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.045))


18.80.060 Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.060))


18.80.070 Animal regulations – Livestock – Building requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 18; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.062))


18.80.080 Animal regulations – Livestock – Education and enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 10-07 § 13; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.066))


18.80.090 Existing livestock operations.

Repealed by Ord. 05-15. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.070))


18.80.100 Home occupation.

Residents of a dwelling unit may conduct one or more home occupations as accessory activities, provided: 

(1) The total area devoted to all home occupation(s) shall not exceed 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas with attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home occupation area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation; 

(2) In urban residential zones, all the activities of the home occupation(s) shall be conducted indoors, except for those related to growing or storing of plants used by the home occupation(s);

(3) One full-time or full-equivalent nonresident may be employed and work in the dwelling unit where the home occupation is located. A home occupation may have additional nonresident employees if the employees work off-site and do not visit the premises except as otherwise allowed in this section;

(4) The home occupation shall not be used as a headquarters or meeting location for the assembly of employees or subcontractors, including staging or dispatch of employees or subcontractors to other locations, except that meetings with off-site employees of the home occupation may occur up to four times in a calendar year;

(5) The following activities, as a home occupation, shall be prohibited in urban residential zones only:

(a) Repair of automobiles, trucks, watercraft, recreation vehicles, other motor vehicles, heavy equipment, and devices with internal combustion engines;

(b) Body work or painting of automobiles, trucks, watercraft, recreation vehicles, other motor vehicles, heavy equipment, and devices with internal combustion engines;

(c) Parking and storage of automobiles, trucks, watercraft, recreation vehicles, heavy equipment, and devices with internal combustion engines; and

(d) Storage of building materials for use on other properties;

(6) In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows: 

(a) One stall for a nonresident employed by the home occupation(s); and

(b) One stall for patrons when services are rendered on-site;

(7) Sales shall be limited to:

(a) Mail order sales; and

(b) Telephone sales with off-site delivery; 

(8) Services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment or provided off-site;

(9) The home occupation(s) may use or store a vehicle for pickup of materials used by the home occupation(s) or the distribution of products from the site, provided:

(a) No more than one such vehicle shall be allowed;

(b) Such vehicle shall not park within any required setback areas of the lot or on adjacent streets; and

(c) Such vehicle shall not exceed a weight capacity of one ton; 

(10) The home occupation(s) shall not use electrical or mechanical equipment that results in:

(a) A change to the occupancy type of the structure(s) used for the home occupation(s);

(b) Visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers, or electronic equipment located off-premises; or

(c) Fluctuations in line voltage off-premises.

(11) Home occupations shall be permitted to continue as a legal nonconforming use so long as the use continues to comply with the criteria that were in effect at the time of original approval and so long as the business complies with local and state regulations, including renewal of a required business license as set forth in Chapter 5.10 CMC.

(12) A home occupation shall not be transferable to any other person, nor shall a home occupation be valid at any address other than the one appearing on the issued permit.

(13) Uses not allowed as home occupations may be allowed as a home industry pursuant to CMC 18.80.110. (Ord. 15-09 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.080))


18.80.110 Home industry.

A resident may establish a home industry as an accessory activity, provided:

(1) The site area shall be no less than one acre;

(2) The area of the home industry shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas within attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home industry area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation;

(3) No more than four nonresidents shall be employed in a home industry;

(4) In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows:

(a) One stall for each nonresident employee of the home industry; and

(b) One stall for customer parking;

(5) Additional customer parking shall be calculated for areas devoted to the home industry at the rate of one stall per:

(a) One thousand square feet of building floor area; and

(b) Two thousand square feet of outdoor work or storage area;

(6) Sales shall be limited to items produced on-site, except for items collected, traded and occasionally sold by hobbyists, such as coins, stamps, and antiques;

(7) Ten feet of Type I landscaping shall be provided around portions of parking and outside storage areas which are otherwise visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; and

(8) The Director shall ensure compatibility of the home industry by:

(a) Limiting the type and size of equipment used by the home industry to those which are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood;

(b) Providing for setbacks or screening as needed to protect adjacent residential properties;

(c) Specifying hours of operation;

(d) Determining acceptable levels of outdoor lighting; and

(e) Requiring sound level tests for activities determined to produce sound levels which may be in excess of those set forth in the Covington noise ordinance, Chapter 8.20 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.090))


18.80.120 Protection of agricultural uses.

(1) Agricultural uses, having long-term commercial significance and existing at the time of adoption of this code, may request that any approval of a development permit, on abutting property, be required to take reasonable steps to protect the existing agricultural use. The determination of long-term commercial significance must first be made by the City Council. The Council, in making such determination, will consider the following:

(a) The property owner, requesting such determination, must submit written verification that the property is in active agricultural production. Such verification may include, but not be limited to, income tax statements showing that the agricultural land is primarily devoted to the commercial production of agricultural uses listed in RCW 36.70A.030(2), and that the property has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.

(2) The property owner of the long-term agricultural use desiring protection, upon receipt of a notice of a proposed development, must submit, in writing, verified, detailed information what adverse impacts the proposed development will have on the agricultural use and what specific protective measures are needed to protect the agricultural use from such impacts.

(3) In reviewing development permit applications, where an agricultural property owner has requested protection of the agricultural use, the reviewing agency will take the following into consideration:

(a) The unique need(s) of the agricultural use.

(b) The protective measure will be the minimum necessary to provide for the continued operation of the agricultural use, while not adversely impacting the rights of the abutting property owners.

(c) The verified information that the agricultural use is subject to adverse impacts. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.30.095))


Chapter 18.85 NONCONFORMANCE, TEMPORARY USES, AND RE-USE OF FACILITIES

Sections:

18.85.010    Purpose.

18.85.020    Nonconformance – Applicability.

18.85.030    Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status.

18.85.040    Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

18.85.050    Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

18.85.060    Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement.

18.85.070    Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements.

18.85.080    Nonconformance – Required findings.

18.85.090    Nonconformance – Residences.

18.85.100    Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

18.85.110    Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

18.85.120    Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

18.85.125    Temporary use permits – Farmers’ markets and public markets.

18.85.130    Temporary use permits – Parking.

18.85.140    Temporary use permits – Traffic control.

18.85.150    Temporary construction buildings.

18.85.160    Temporary construction residence.

18.85.170    Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

18.85.180    Temporary real estate offices.

18.85.190    Temporary school facilities.

18.85.200    Re-use of facilities – General standards.

18.85.210    Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities.

18.85.220    Re-use of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.


18.85.010 Purpose. 

The purposes of this chapter are to:

(1) Establish the legal status of a nonconformance by creating provisions through which a nonconformance may be maintained, altered, reconstructed, expanded or terminated;

(2) Provide for the temporary establishment of uses that are not otherwise permitted in a zone and to regulate such uses by their scope and period of use; and

(3) Encourage the adaptive re-use of existing public facilities, which will continue to serve the community, and to ensure public review of redevelopment plans by allowing:

(a) Temporary re-uses of closed public school facilities retained in school district ownership, and the reconversion of a temporary re-use back to a school use;

(b) Permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities (e.g., schools, fire stations, government facilities) not retained in school district ownership; or

(c) Permanent re-use of historic structures listed on the National Register or designated as City landmarks by the City Historian and accepted by the City Council. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.010))


18.85.020 Nonconformance – Applicability.

(1) All nonconformances shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Nonconformance standards referenced in Chapter 18.31 CMC shall be applicable within the downtown zone. Where all other standards in this section may conflict with Chapter 18.31 CMC, the standards contained in Chapter 18.31 CMC shall apply.

(3) The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or relieve a property owner from compliance with:

(a) The requirements of the International Building and Fire Codes; or

(b) The provisions of this code beyond the specific nonconformance addressed by this chapter. (Ord. 15-17 § 3; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 06-05 § 1; Ord. 23-04 § 19; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.020))


18.85.030 Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status.

Once created pursuant to CMC 18.20.800, a nonconformance may be continued in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. However, nonconformance status is forfeited if the nonconformance is discontinued beyond the provisions of CMC 18.85.050. Once nonconformance status is forfeited, the nonconformance shall not be re-established. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.025))


18.85.040 Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

Any use, structure or other site improvement not established in compliance with use and development standards in effect at the time of establishment shall be deemed illegal and shall be discontinued or terminated and subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.30 CMC. (Ord. 10-07 § 14; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.040))


18.85.050 Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

A nonconforming use which has been discontinued or a nonconforming structure or site improvement which has been damaged or destroyed may be re-established or reconstructed if:

(1) The nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement, which previously existed, is not expanded;

(2) A new nonconformance is not created; and

(3) The use has not been discontinued for more than 12 months prior to its re-establishment, or the nonconforming structure or site improvement is reconstructed pursuant to a complete permit application submitted to the Department within 12 months of the occurrence of damage or destruction. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.045))


18.85.060 Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement.

Modifications to a nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be reviewed and approved by the Department pursuant to the code compliance review process of Chapter 14.30 CMC; provided, that:

(1) The modification does not expand any existing nonconformance; and 

(2) The modification does not create a new type of nonconformance. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.055))


18.85.070 Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements.

A nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be expanded as follows:

(1) The Department may review and approve, pursuant to the Type I process of Chapter 14.30 CMC, an expansion of a nonconformance; provided, that:

(a) The expansion shall conform to all other provisions of this title, except that the extent of the project-wide nonconformance in each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent: 

(i) Building square footage; 

(ii) Impervious surface;

(iii) Parking; or

(iv) Building height.

(b) No subsequent expansion of the same nonconformance shall be approved under this subsection if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (1)(a) of this section.

(2) A special use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance within a development authorized by an existing special use or unclassified use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance:

(a) Within a development authorized by an existing planned unit development approval; or

(b) Not consistent with the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.065))


18.85.080 Nonconformance – Required findings. 

Modifications or expansions approved by the Department shall be based on written findings that the proposed:

Modification or expansion of a nonconformance located within a development governed by an existing conditional use permit, special use permit, unclassified use permit, or planned unit development shall provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit approval. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.075))


18.85.090 Nonconformance – Residences. 

Any residence nonconforming relative to use may be expanded, after review and approval through the Type I process of Chapter 14.30 CMC, subject to all other applicable codes besides those set forth in this chapter for nonconformances. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.085))


18.85.100 Temporary use permits – Uses requiring permits.

Except as provided by CMC 18.85.110 and CMC 18.85.125, a temporary use permit shall be required for:

(1) Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency; or

(2) Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but which exceeds the intended scope of the original land use approval.

Applications for temporary use permits shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 09-09 § 7; Ord. 20-07 § 130; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.100))


18.85.110 Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

(1) The following uses shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit when located in the TC, MC, GC, MHO, CC, NC, or I zones for the time period specified below:

(a) Uses not to exceed a total of 30 days each calendar year:

(i) Christmas tree lots;

(ii) Fireworks stands; and

(iii) Produce stands.

(b) Uses not to exceed a total of 14 days each calendar year:

(i) Amusement rides, carnivals, or circuses;

(ii) Community festivals; and

(iii) Parking lot sales.

(2) Any use not exceeding a cumulative total of two days each calendar year shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit.

(3) Any community event held in a park and not exceeding a period of seven days shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.110))


18.85.120 Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency. 

Temporary use permits shall be limited in duration and frequency as follows:

(1) The temporary use permit shall be effective for no more than 180 days from the date of the first event;

(2) The temporary use shall not exceed a total of 60 days; provided, that this requirement applies only to the days that the event(s) actually take place;

(3) Temporary use permits for recreational vehicles shall not exceed the duration and frequency as outlined in CMC 18.50.190(4);

(4) The temporary use permit shall specify a date upon which the use shall be terminated and removed; and

(5) A temporary use permit shall not be granted for the same temporary use on a property more than once per calendar year; provided, that a temporary use permit may be granted for multiple events during the approval period. (Ord. 05-16 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.120))


18.85.125 Temporary use permits – Farmers’ markets and public markets.

A temporary use permit shall be required for each location of a temporary farmers’ market or temporary public market. The following additional requirements shall apply for these uses:

(1) Application. Application shall be made by the market manager or his/her designee. The manager and/or designee shall provide a vendor register with contact information for all vendors, to be updated when new vendors are added.

(2) Permit Duration. The temporary use permit shall be effective for no more than 180 days from the date of the first event.

(3) Days of Operation. Markets may operate any day of the week at any time of the year, subject to an approved 180-day temporary use permit. Markets that sell food items other than produce, or that prepare foods, are subject to permanent food establishment guidelines under the King County Board of Health Code.

(4) Hours of Operation. Sales are permitted from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. between November 1st and April 30th, and from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. between May 1st and October 31st. Vendors must assemble and disassemble their spaces during these hours. The market manager or his/her designee shall be on site at all times of market operation.

(5) Tents/Canopies.

(a) The arrangement of tents/canopies to create vendor spaces shall meet all building and fire code requirements.

(b) A vendor space shall be a maximum of 120 square feet (e.g., a 10-foot by 12-foot tent), with no side being less than six feet in length.

(c) All tents and other market items shall be dismantled and stored safely on site or removed from the site at the end of each selling day, unless the structure is approved through a City-issued building permit. A structure requiring a building permit that is not used for two or more consecutive days, or is not used five or more days per week, shall be dismantled and removed from the site.

(6) Accessory Uses. Crafts sales, processed food sales, and prepared food sales shall be accessory uses to farmers’ and public markets.

(7) Vendors. Up to 30 percent of the vendors of a farmers’ market and up to 50 percent of the vendors of a public market may consist of resellers and other accessory uses allowed for that use. A single vendor using multiple spaces shall count as multiple vendors for the purpose of calculating primary to accessory vendors (e.g., a single vendor selling crafts that is using three spaces counts as three craft vendors).

(8) Signs. Two temporary signs advertising the market itself are permitted. Such signs shall be no more than six square feet in area and may be placed within 300 feet of the market entrance, excluding the public right-of-way. Individual vendor space signs shall be located only on vendor tables or tent structures. Vendor signs shall not project above the roofline of a tent.

(9) Parking. Two on-site parking spaces are required for each vendor space. Two bicycle parking spaces are required for markets with 10 or more vendor spaces; one additional bicycle parking space is required for every additional 10 vendor spaces.

(10) Revocation of Permit. A temporary use permit for a farmers’ market or public market issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked upon a finding that the market no longer complies with the terms of this section and all other applicable sections of the Covington Municipal Code. A market manager or his/her designee may appeal a revocation to the hearing examiner in accordance with Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 09-09 § 8)


18.85.130 Temporary use permits – Parking.

Parking and access for proposed temporary uses shall be approved by the City. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.130))


18.85.140 Temporary use permits – Traffic control.

The applicant for a proposed temporary use shall provide any parking/traffic control attendants as specified by the City of Covington Police Department. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.140))


18.85.150 Temporary construction buildings.

Temporary structures for storage of tools and equipment or for supervisory offices may be permitted for construction projects; provided, that such structures are:

(1) Allowed only during periods of active construction; and

(2) Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.150))


18.85.160 Temporary construction residence. 

(1) A mobile home may be permitted on a lot as a temporary dwelling for the property owner, provided a building permit for a permanent dwelling on the site has been obtained.

(2) The temporary mobile home permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months. The permit may be extended for one additional period of 12 months if the permanent dwelling is constructed with a finished exterior by the end of the initial approval period.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent residence, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.160))


18.85.170 Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

(1) A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary dwelling on the same lot as a permanent dwelling, provided:

(a) The mobile home together with the permanent residence shall meet the setback, height, building footprint, and lot coverage provisions of the applicable zone; and

(b) The applicant submits with the permit application a notarized affidavit that contains the following:

(i) Certification that the temporary dwelling is necessary to provide daily care, as defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC;

(ii) Certification that the primary provider of such daily care will reside on-site;

(iii) Certification that the applicant understands the temporary nature of the permit, subject to the limitations outlined in subsections (2) and (3) of this section;

(iv) Certification that the physician’s signature is both current and valid; and

(v) Certification signed by a physician that a resident of the subject property requires daily care, as defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC.

(2) Temporary mobile home permits for medical hardships shall be effective for 12 months. Extensions of the temporary mobile home permit may be approved in 12-month increments subject to demonstration of continuing medical hardship in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

(a) The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

(b) The cessation of provision of daily care. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.170))


18.85.180 Temporary real estate offices. 

One temporary real estate office may be located on any new residential development; provided, that activities are limited to the initial sale or rental of property or units within the development. The office use shall be discontinued within one year of recording of a short subdivision or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for an apartment development, and within two years of the recording of a formal subdivision. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.180))


18.85.190 Temporary school facilities.

Temporary school structures may be permitted during construction of new school facilities or during remodeling of existing facilities; provided, that such structures:

(1) Are allowed only during periods of active construction or remodeling;

(2) Do not expand the student capacity beyond the capacity under construction or remodeling; and

(3) Are removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.190))


18.85.200 Re-use of facilities – General standards. 

The interim or permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities in residential zoned areas shall require that no more than 50 percent of the original floor area be demolished for either permanent or interim re-use of facilities. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.200))


18.85.210 Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities. 

The re-establishment or reconversion of an interim nonschool use of school facilities back to school uses shall require a site plan and the issuance of a change of use permit, and is subject to payment of a fee as set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 20-07 § 131; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.210))


18.85.220 Re-use of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.

In order to ensure that significant features of the property are protected pursuant to Chapter 18.47 CMC, the following standards shall apply to conversion of historic buildings:

(1) Gross floor area of building additions or new buildings required for the conversion shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the historic building, unless allowed by the zone;

(2) Conversions to apartments shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 3,600 square feet of lot area, unless allowed by the zone; and

(3) Any construction required for the conversion shall require certification of appropriateness from the City of Covington Historian in accord with Chapter 18.47 CMC. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.32.220))


Chapter 18.90 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY INCENTIVES

Sections:

18.90.010    Purpose.

18.90.020    Permitted locations of residential density incentives.

18.90.030    Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review.

18.90.040    Public benefits and density incentives.

18.90.050    Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units.

18.90.060    Review process.

18.90.070    Minor adjustments in final site plans.

18.90.080    Applicability of development standards.


18.90.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide density incentives to developers of residential lands in urban areas and rural activity centers, in exchange for public benefits to help achieve comprehensive plan goals of affordable housing, open space protection, historic preservation and energy conservation, by:

(1) Defining in quantified terms the public benefits that can be used to earn density incentives;

(2) Providing rules and formulae for computing density incentives earned by each benefit;

(3) Providing a method to realize the development potential of sites containing unique features of size, topography, environmental features or shape; and

(4) Providing a review process to allow evaluation of proposed density increases and the public benefits offered to earn them, and to give the public opportunities to review and comment. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.010))


18.90.020 Permitted locations of residential density incentives.

Residential density incentives (RDI) shall be used only on sites served by public sewers and only in the following zones:

(1) In R-4 through R-18 zones; and

(2) In CC, NC, and DN zones when part of a mixed-use development. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.020))


18.90.030 Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review.

The maximum density permitted through RDI review shall be 150 percent of the base density of the underlying zone of the development site or 200 percent of the base density for RDI proposals with 100 percent affordable units. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.030))


18.90.040 Public benefits and density incentives. 

(1) The public benefits eligible to earn increased densities, and the maximum incentive to be earned by each benefit, are in subsection (6) of this section. The density incentive is expressed as additional bonus dwelling unit, or fractions of dwelling units, earned per amount of public benefit provided.

(2) Bonus dwelling units may be earned through any combination of the listed public benefits.

(3) The guidelines for affordable housing bonuses, including the establishment of rental levels, housing prices and asset limitations, will be updated and adopted annually by the Council in the consolidated housing and community development plan.

(4) Bonus dwelling units may also be earned and transferred to the project site through the transfer of density credit (TDC) process in Chapter 18.95 CMC, by providing any of the open space, park site or historic preservation public benefits set forth in subsection (6)(b) or (c) of this section on sites other than that of the RDI development.

(5) Residential development in R-4 through R-18 zones with property specific development standards requiring any public benefit enumerated in this chapter shall be eligible to earn bonus dwelling units in accordance with subsection (6) of this section if the public benefits provided exceed the basic development standards of this title. If a development is located in a special overlay district, bonus units may be earned if the development provides public benefits exceeding corresponding standards of the special district.

(6) The following are the public benefits eligible to earn density incentives through RDI review:

	BENEFIT	DENSITY INCENTIVE

	(a) AFFORDABLE HOUSING.

	(i) Benefit units consisting of rental housing permanently priced to serve nonsenior citizen low-income households (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for households at or below 50 percent of the City of Covington median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Covington shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit, up to a maximum of 30 low-income units per five acres of site area; projects on sites of less than five acres shall be limited to 30 low-income units.

	(ii) Benefit units consisting of rental housing designed and permanently priced to serve low-income senior citizens (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for one- or two-person households, one member of which is 62 years of age or older, with incomes at or below 50 percent of the City of Covington median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Covington shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit, up to a maximum of 60 low-income units per five acres of site area; projects on sites of less than five acres shall be limited to 60 low-income units.

	(iii) Benefit units consisting of senior citizen assisted housing units 600 square feet or less.	1 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	(iv) Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of the City of Covington median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on typical underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with no restriction placed on resale. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Covington on both buyer eligibility and housing prices.	0.75 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	(v) Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of the City of Covington median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on typical underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with a 15-year restriction binding prices and eligibility on resale to qualified moderate income purchasers. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Covington on both buyer eligibility and housing prices.	1 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	(vi) Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of the City of Covington median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing, with prices restricted to same income group, based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards for 30 years from date of first sale. A covenant on the site that specifies the income level and other aspects of buyer eligibility, price levels and requirements for reporting to the City of Covington shall be recorded at final approval.	1.5 bonus units per benefit unit.

	(vii) Projects in which 100 percent of the units are reserved for moderate income- and asset-qualified buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of the City of Covington median, adjusted for household size). All units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with prices restricted to same income group, for 15 years from date of first sale. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City of Covington on both buyer eligibility and housing prices. 	200 percent of the base density of the underlying zone. Limited to parcels five acres or less in size and located in the R-4 through R-8 zones. Housing types in the R-4 or R-6 zone shall be limited to structures containing four or less units, except for townhouses. Such RDI proposals shall not be eligible to utilize other RDI bonus density incentives listed in this section.

	(viii) Benefit units consisting of mobile home park space or pad reserved for the relocation of an insignia or non-insignia mobile home, that has been or will be displaced due to closure of a mobile home park located in the City of Covington.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	(b) OPEN SPACE, TRAILS AND PARKS.

	(i) Dedication of park site or trail right-of-way meeting the City of Covington location and size standards for neighborhood, community or regional park, or trail, and accepted by the Parks Department.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of park area or quarter-mile of trail exceeding the minimum requirement of Chapter 18.35 CMC for on-site recreation space or trail corridors, computed on the number of dwelling units permitted by the site’s base density.

	(ii) Improvement of dedicated park site to the City of Covington standards for developed parks.	0.75 bonus unit per acre of park improvement. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication. 

	(iii) Improvement of dedicated trail segment to the City of Covington standards.	1.8 bonus units per quarter-mile of trail constructed to City standard for pedestrian trails; or 

	2.5 bonus units per quarter-mile of constructed to City standard for multi-purpose trails (pedestrian/bicycle/ equestrian).

	Shorter segments shall be awarded bonus units on a pro rata basis. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication.

	(iv) Dedication of open space, meeting the City of Covington acquisition standards to the City or a qualified public or private organization such as a nature conservancy.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of open space.

	(c) HISTORIC PRESERVATION.

	(i) Dedication of a site containing an historic landmark in accordance with Chapter 18.47 CMC to the City of Covington or a qualifying nonprofit organization capable of restoring and/or maintaining the premises to standards set by the City Historian.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of historic site.

	(ii) Restoration of a site or structure designated as an historic landmark in accordance with Chapter 18.47 CMC to a specific architectural or site plan approved by the City Historian.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of site or 1,000 square feet of floor area of building restored.

	(d) ENERGY CONSERVATION.

	(i) Benefit units that incorporate conservation features in the construction of all on-site dwelling units heated by electricity that save at least 20 percent of space heat energy use from the maximum permitted by the Northwest Energy Code, as amended. No more than 50 percent of the required savings may result from the installation of heat pumps. None of the required savings shall be achieved by reduction of glazing area below 15 percent of floor area. Energy use shall be expressed as allowable energy load per square foot or as total transmittance (UA). 	0.15 bonus unit per benefit unit that achieves the required savings.

	(ii) Benefit units that incorporate conservation features in the construction of all on-site dwelling units heated by natural gas, or other nonelectric heat source, that save at least 25 percent of space heat energy use from the maximum permitted by the Northwest Energy Code, as amended. None of the required savings shall be achieved by reduction of glazing area below 15 percent of floor area. Energy use shall be expressed as allowable energy load per square foot or as total transmittance (UA).	0.10 bonus unit per benefit unit that achieves the required savings.

	(iii) Developments located within one-quarter mile of transit routes served on at least a half-hourly basis during the peak hours and hourly during the daytime nonpeak hours.	10 percent increase above the base density of the zone.

	(e) PUBLIC ART.

	(i) Devoting one percent of the project budget to public art on-site.	5 percent increase above the base density of the zone.

	(ii) Contributing one percent of the project budget to the City of Covington public art fund for development of art projects. The contribution shall be used for projects located within a one mile radius of the development project.	5 percent increase above the base density of the zone.

	NOTE: If proposed energy conservation bonus units of this section are reviewed in conjunction with a subdivision or a short subdivision, the applicant shall provide data and calculations for a typical house of the type to be built in the development that demonstrates to the Department’s satisfaction how the required savings will be achieved. A condition of approval shall be recorded with the plat and shown on the title of each lot specifying the required energy savings that must be achieved in the construction of the dwelling unit. The plat notation shall also specify that the savings shall be based on the energy code in effect at the time of preliminary plat application. 

(Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.040))


18.90.050 Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units. 

(1) The formula for calculating the total number of dwelling units permitted through RDI review is as follows:

	DUs allowed by RDI site base density	+	Bonus

DUs	+	DUs allowed by sending site density (if any)	=	TOTAL

RDI DUs

(2) The total dwelling units permitted through RDI review shall be calculated using the following steps:

(a) Calculate the number of dwellings permitted by the base density of the site in accordance with Chapter 18.30 CMC;

(b) Calculate the total number of bonus dwelling units earned by providing the public benefits listed in CMC 18.90.040;

(c) Add the number of bonus dwelling units earned to the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density;

(d) Add the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density of the site sending TDCs, if any;

(e) Round fractional dwelling units to the nearest whole number; .49 or less dwelling units are rounded down; and

(f) On sites with more than one zone or zone density, the maximum density shall be calculated for the site area of each zone. Bonus units may be reallocated within the zones in the same manner set forth for base units in CMC 18.30.210. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.050))


18.90.060 Review process. 

(1) All RDI proposals shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal to consider the proposed site plan and methods used to earn extra density as follows:

(a) For the purpose of this section, a primary proposal is defined as a proposed subdivision, conditional use permit or commercial building permit;

(b) When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this code or CMC Title 17, the public hearing on the primary proposal shall serve as the hearing on the RDI proposal, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development and use of RDI;

(c) When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this code or CMC Title 17, the RDI proposal shall be subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 18.125 CMC and to the procedures set forth in Chapter 14.30 CMC; and

(d) The notice for the RDI proposal also shall include the development’s proposed density and a general description of the public benefits offered to earn extra density.

(2) RDI applications which propose to earn bonus units by dedicating real property or public facilities shall include a letter from the applicable City receiving agency certifying that the proposed dedication qualifies for the density incentive and will be accepted by the agency or other qualifying organization. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.060))


18.90.070 Minor adjustments in final site plans.

When issuing building permits in an approved RDI development, the Department may allow minor adjustments in the approved site plan involving the location or dimensions of buildings or landscaping, provided such adjustments shall not:

(1) Increase the number of dwelling units;

(2) Decrease the amount of perimeter landscaping (if any);

(3) Decrease residential parking facilities (unless the number of dwelling units is decreased);

(4) Locate structures closer to any site boundary line; or

(5) Change the locations of any points of ingress and egress to the site. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.070))


18.90.080 Applicability of development standards. 

(1) RDI developments shall comply with dimensional standards of the zone with a base density most closely comparable to the total approved density of the RDI development; provided, that an RDI proposal in the R-4 through R-18 zones shall conform to the height requirements of the underlying zone in which it is located.

(2) RDI developments in the R-4 through R-18 zones shall be landscaped as follows:

(a) When 75 percent or more of the units in the RDI development consists of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide perimeter landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapter 18.40 CMC for townhouse or apartment projects.

(b) When less than 75 percent of the units in the RDI consists of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapter 18.40 CMC for townhouses or apartments on the portion(s) of the development containing such units; provided, that if buildings containing such units are more than 100 feet from the development’s perimeter, the required landscaping may be reduced by 50 percent.

(c) All other portions of the RDI shall provide landscaping or retain trees in accordance with Chapter 18.40 CMC.

(3) RDI developments in all other zones shall be landscaped or retain trees in accordance with Chapter 18.40 CMC.

(4) RDI developments shall provide parking as follows:

(a) Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide one off-street parking space per unit. The Director may require additional parking, up to the maximum standards for attached dwelling units, which may be provided in common parking areas.

(b) All other RDI proposals shall provide parking for:

(i) Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 18.50 CMC; and

(ii) Benefit units at 50 percent of the levels required for market rate/bonus units.

(5) RDI developments shall provide on-site recreation space as follows:

(a) Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide recreation space at 50 percent of the levels required in Chapter 18.35 CMC.

(b) All other RDI proposals shall provide recreation space for:

(i) Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 18.35 CMC; and

(ii) Benefit units at 50 percent of the levels required for market rate/bonus units. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.34.080))


Chapter 18.95 TRANSFER OF RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CREDITS

Sections:

18.95.010    Purpose.

18.95.020    Authority and application.

18.95.030    Sending sites.

18.95.040    Receiving sites.

18.95.050    Transfer rules.

18.95.060    Review process.


18.95.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the transfer of residential density credit system is to supplement land use regulation and open space acquisition programs and to encourage increased residential development density where it can be accommodated with the least impacts on the natural environment and public services, by:

(1) Providing an incentive for private property owners to protect open space, environmentally sensitive areas, park sites, historic sites, rural and resource areas beyond the minimum requirements of the code;

(2) Using the community planning process as one mechanism for involving the City of Covington residents, landowners, cities and other public agencies in designating appropriate sending and receiving areas; and

(3) Providing a review system to ensure that transfers of residential density credits to receiving sites are balanced with other City goals and policies, and are adjusted to the specific conditions of each receiving site. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.010))


18.95.020 Authority and application. 

The transfer of residential density credit (TDC) system for the City of Covington is established. The base residential density of a sending site may be transferred and credited to a noncontiguous receiving site only when the TDC is approved in accordance with the rules and procedures in this chapter. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.020))


18.95.030 Sending sites. 

(1) Sending sites shall be maintained in a natural state, except for agricultural lands, proposed park or trail sites suitable for active recreation, shoreline access areas or historic sites.

(2) Sending sites must contain one or more of the following features, as defined in the comprehensive plan, open space plan, other functional plan or a community plan:

(a) Open spaces;

(b) Wildlife habitat;

(c) Woodlands;

(d) Shoreline access;

(e) Community separator;

(f) Regional trail/natural linkage;

(g) Historic landmark designation;

(h) Park site that meets adopted size, distance and other standards for serving the receiving sites to which the density credits are being transferred. 

(3) Sending sites shall have zoning consistent with the comprehensive plan map designation.

(4) A community plan may develop policies that set priorities for protection of the types of features to be preserved at sending areas. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.030))


18.95.040 Receiving sites. 

(1) Receiving sites shall be zoned R-4 through R-18, NC, CC, or DN, or any combination thereof, and may be designated by community, neighborhood or subarea plan policies as appropriate for the transfer of residential density credits before being eligible to participate in a TDC.

(2) Except as provided in this chapter, development of a receiving site shall remain subject to all use, lot coverage, height, setback and other requirements of its zone.

(3) A receiving site may accept density credits, up to the maximum density permitted pursuant to Chapter 18.30 CMC, from any sending site or combination of sending sites unless a community, neighborhood or subarea plan adopts specific policies to allow only transfers from within the same community planning area or within a distance outside of the planning area as specified by the community plan. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.040))


18.95.050 Transfer rules. 

(1) The number of density credits that a sending site is eligible to send to a receiving site shall be determined by applying the base density of the zone the sending site is located in to the total sending site area, less any portion of the sending site already in a conservation easement or other encumbrance, or any land area already used to calculate residential density for other development. A plot plan showing environmentally sensitive areas and buffers, conservation easements or other encumbrances shall be submitted as part of the development application to demonstrate compliance with the density calculation rules set forth in Chapter 18.30 CMC.

(2) Sending sites with environmentally sensitive areas that have been declared unbuildable under Chapter 18.30 CMC shall be considered to have a base density calculated in accordance with that chapter, except that the areas of the sending and receiving sites shall be combined to calculate the overall site percentage of sensitive areas and buffers necessary for determining the allowable density credit as set forth in Chapter 18.65 CMC.

(3) Density credits from one sending site may be allocated to more than one receiving site. The credit from each segment shall be allocated to a specified receiving site.

(4) When the sending site consists only of a portion(s) of an unsubdivided parcel, said portion(s) shall be segregated from the remainder of the lot pursuant to CMC Title 17 or deed restrictions documenting the density credit transfers shall be recorded with the title to both the sending and receiving site. A parcel need not segregate a sending site from the remainder of the parcel when the entire parcel is subject to a conservation easement pursuant to subsection (5) of this section.

(5) Conservation easements shall be required for land contained in the sending site, whether or not such land is dedicated, as follows:

(a) A conservation easement as defined in the open space plan shall be recorded on the sending site to indicate development limitations on the sending site.

(6) Upon submitting an application to develop a receiving site under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall provide evidence of ownership or full legal control of all sending sites proposed to be used in calculating total density on the receiving site. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility, prior to application, to ascertain what form of permanent protection of the sending site will be acceptable to the City of Covington.

(7) Density credits from a sending site shall be considered transferred to a receiving site when the sending site is permanently protected by a completed and recorded land dedication or conservation easement.

(8) TDC developments shall comply with dimensional standards of the zone with a base density most closely comparable to the total approved density of the TDC development. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.050))


18.95.060 Review process.

All TDC proposals shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal as follows:

(1) For the purpose of this section, a primary proposal is defined as a proposed subdivision, conditional use permit, or commercial building permit.

(2) When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this title or CMC Title 17, that public hearing shall also serve as the hearing on the TDC proposal, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development and use of TDC.

(3) When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this title or CMC Title 17, that TDC proposal shall be subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 18.125 CMC and to the procedures set forth for the Director in Chapter 14.30 CMC. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.36.060))


Chapter 18.100 PROPERTY-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS/SPECIAL DISTRICT OVERLAYS

(Repealed by Ord. 20-16)


Chapter 18.105 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS/NOTICE METHODS

(Repealed by Ord. 10-10)


Chapter 18.110 COMMERCIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS

Sections:

18.110.010    Purpose.

18.110.020    Applicability.

18.110.030    Complete application.

18.110.040    Public comments.

18.110.050    Application of development standards.

18.110.060    Approval.

18.110.070    Financial guarantees.

18.110.080    Limitation of permit approval.

18.110.090    Modification to an approved permit.

18.110.100    Administrative rules.


18.110.010 Purpose. 

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive site review process of proposed commercial, industrial, or multifamily development, excluding single-family residences, resulting in a permit which can combine any or all of the following:

(a) Site development requirements specified prior to building and/or grading permit applications.

(b) Site review and application of rules and regulations generally applied to the whole site without regard to existing or proposed internal lot lines.

(c) Site development coordination and project phasing occurring over a period of years.

(d) Evaluation of commercial, industrial, and multifamily zoned property for the creation or alteration of lots when reviewed concurrently with a binding site plan application.

(2) Review and approval procedures shall be in accordance with applicable Washington State and City of Covington laws, rules and regulations, including permit processing procedures required by Chapter 14.35 CMC, and shall be subject to fees as set forth in the current fee resolution. 

(3) Compliance with the supplemental town center criteria, pursuant to CMC 18.31.040, shall be required for all development within the town center district of the downtown zone, other than the reuse, modification, or expansion of any existing development. The supplemental town center criteria are in addition the requirements of this chapter.

(4) The Director has the authority to determine if an applicant is required to hold a public meeting after a commercial site development application has been submitted for development within the town center district of the downtown zone. (Ord. 11-17 § 12; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 02-09 § 15; Ord. 20-07 § 132; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.010))


18.110.020 Applicability. 

(1) An application for commercial site development permit shall be submitted for all commercial, industrial or multifamily development projects on sites consisting of one or more contiguous lots legally created and zoned to permit the proposed uses. 

(2) A commercial site development permit is separate from and does not replace other required permits such as conditional use permits or shoreline substantial development permits. A commercial site development permit may be combined and reviewed concurrently with other permits. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.020))


18.110.030 Complete application. 

A complete application for site development review must include, but not be limited to, the items listed in subsections (1) through (9) of this section: 

(1) A completed application on a form supplied by the Department.

(2) A water and sewer availability certificates as provided by the appropriate service purveyor.

(3) A transportation concurrency certificate as provided by the Director of Community Development. 

(4) A completed environmental checklist, unless categorically exempt.

(5) A list of names and mailing addresses of property owners of all property within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject site and any contiguous property under the same ownership. 

(6) A property owner declaration.

(7) Affidavit concerning sensitive area compliance.

(8) Legal description.

(9) The following drawings, with dimensions, at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet, unless otherwise approved by the Director:

(a) Site Review.

(i) Site plan showing the location and size of all proposed structures, and existing structures to remain, buffer areas, setbacks, open spaces, common areas or plazas, walkways and parking areas, all abutting streets, contours at five-foot intervals, a north arrow and the scale.

(ii) Pedestrian circulation plan showing the location and dimensions of all sidewalks, walkways, plazas and pedestrian areas, including disabled accessibility routes of travel. Indicate likely pedestrian-oriented trip origins and destinations and indicate methods of connection.

(iii) Building elevations of all structures including, but not limited to, elevations, trim details, dimensions, the materials proposed for the roof, siding and windows.

(iv) Paving plan describing all pedestrian and vehicular paving materials, including type, color, texture, and the locations of travel detectable warnings as required by Washington State barrier free requirements.

(b) Engineering Review.

(i) Clearing, grading and drainage plan including, but not limited to, the location of all trees having a diameter of four inches or more and indicating which trees are to be retained. The plan must also show all streams, marshes and other natural features; cuts and fills; retaining walls; and the method of retaining all surface water on site, in accordance with the stormwater manuals adopted pursuant to Chapter 13.25 CMC.

(ii) Utility plan showing the existing/proposed location of all utility lines necessary to serve the development, and their relation to landscape and buffer areas and natural features. 

(iii) Contour map at two-foot intervals indicating existing and proposed grades, unless waived by the Department. 

(iv) Parking plan.

(v) Landscape plan listing the type, size, species and spacing of all landscaping to remain and all new landscaping pursuant to all City landscape, tree and design ordinances.

(vi) Irrigation plan showing the method of irrigation of all vegetation.

(vii) Exterior lighting plan showing the location of all existing/proposed lighting features other than those to be installed on the structure.

(viii) Utility screening plan showing the type, color, location and specifications of all fencing and landscape screening.

(ix) Outdoor furniture and accessory plan showing the type, color and location of all outdoor furniture, trash receptacles and other outdoor accessories.

(x) Comprehensive sign plan in accordance with CMC 18.55.080, Comprehensive sign program, showing the approximate size, height, location, color, material, etc., of all existing/proposed signs.

(xi) Fire protection system locations and access including proposed fire lanes, fire hydrants, fire Department connections, building construction type and sprinkler system designation. (Ord. 08-18 § 4 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-09 § 39; amended at request of department 2/08; Ord. 04-08 § 5; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.030))


18.110.040 Public comments.

All public notification and comment periods shall be in accord with the provisions of Chapter 14.40 CMC. (Ord. 02-09 § 16; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.050))


18.110.050 Application of development standards. 

(1) An application for site development permit shall be reviewed pursuant, but not limited, to this section, Chapter 43.21C RCW, SEPA, as implemented by Chapter 197-11 WAC; Chapter 13.25 CMC, Surface and Stormwater; Chapter 12.60 CMC, City of Covington Design and Construction Standards; Chapter 14.60 CMC, Clearing and Grading Regulations; Chapter 15.20 CMC, Fire Code; Chapter 16.05 CMC, Shoreline Master Program; Chapter 16.10 CMC, State Environmental Policy Act; CMC Title 18, Zoning; administrative rules; City tree ordinance; City approved utility plans; and compliance with Chapter 18.31 CMC, Downtown Development and Design Standards.

(2) Lot-based standards, such as internal circulation, landscaping signage and setback requirements, are typically applied to each individual lot within the site. However, the Director may approve an application for commercial site development where such standards have been applied to the site as if it consisted of one parcel. Lot-based regulations shall not be waived altogether. 

(3) The Director may modify lot-based or lot line requirements contained within the building, fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the City, provided the site is being reviewed concurrently with a binding site plan application. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 27-16 § 15; Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 20-07 § 133; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.060))


18.110.060 Approval. 

(1) The Director may approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a commercial site development (Type II). The decision shall be based on the following factors:

(a) Conformity with adopted City and State rules and regulations in effect on the date the complete application was filed, including but not limited to those listed in CMC 18.110.050.

(b) Consideration of the recommendations or comments of interested parties and those agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction, consistent with the requirements of this title. 

(2) Subsequent permits for the subject site shall be issued only in compliance with the approved commercial site development plan. Additional site development conditions and site review will not be required for subsequent permits provided the approved plan is not altered.

(3) Approval of the proposed site development permit shall not provide the applicant with a vested right to build without regard to subsequent changes in the building and fire codes.

(4) The Director shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant and any other person who has presented written comment to the Department. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.070))


18.110.070 Financial guarantees.

Performance guarantees consistent with the provisions of CMC Title 14 may be required to assure that development occurs according to the approved plan. If required, said guarantees, including type and amount, are subject to review and approval by the Finance Director and City Attorney. (Ord. 20-07 § 134; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.080))


18.110.080 Limitation of permit approval. 

(1) A site development permit approved without a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to file a complete building permit application(s) for all buildings within three years of the approval date, or by a date specified by the Director; and fails to have all valid building permits issued within three years of the site development permit approval date.

(2) A site development permit approved with a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to meet the conditions and time schedules specified in the approved phasing plan, unless otherwise approved through a development agreement pursuant to Chapter 18.114 CMC.

(3) A site development permit approved without a building permit shall be null and void if the applicant fails to meet the conditions and time schedules specified in the approved plan. If no time schedule is specified in the approved plan, then the applicant has one year to obtain a valid business license.

(4) The Director may approve one two-year extension of the above stated limits if the applicant can show good faith progress, a justifiable basis for delay not occasioned by the applicant’s own action or failure to act, and that the extension is reasonably necessary to complete the project. Requests for extension must be submitted in writing to the Director at least 14 days prior to the permit expiration date. Said request shall explain in detail the circumstances surrounding the request.

(5) Commercial site development permits associated with an approved and valid development agreement shall be subject to the terms and extension requirements in Chapter 18.114 CMC. (Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 06-11 § 1; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.100))


18.110.090 Modification to an approved permit.

(1) A subsequent building permit application may contain minor modifications to an approved commercial site development plan provided a modification does not:

(a) Increase the building floor area by more than 10 percent;

(b) Increase the number of dwelling units;

(c) Increase the total impervious surface area; provided, that relocatable facilities for schools shall be exempt from this restriction;

(d) Result in an insufficient amount of parking and/or loading;

(e) Locate buildings outside an approved building envelope; provided, that relocatable facilities for schools shall be exempt from this restriction;

(f) Change the number of ingress and egress points to the site;

(g) Significantly increase the traffic impacts of peak hour trips to and from the site;

(h) Significantly increase the quantity of imported or exported materials or increase the area of site disturbance.

(2) The Director has sole discretion to approve, deny or modify any request. Modifications which exceed the conditions of approval as stated in this section and require a new review as determined by the Director shall only be accomplished by applying for a new commercial site development permit for the entire site. The new application shall be reviewed according to the laws and rules in effect at the time of application.

(3) Commercial site development permits associated with an approved and valid development agreement shall be subject to the development agreement procedures in Chapter 18.114 CMC. (Ord. 06-13 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.110))


18.110.100 Administrative rules.

The Director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement the provisions and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.41.120))


Chapter 18.114 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS

Sections:

18.114.010    Purpose.

18.114.020    Authority.

18.114.030    General provisions of development agreements.

18.114.040    Processing procedure for development agreements.

18.114.050    No deadline for final decision, form of agreement, term, recording.

18.114.060    Judicial appeal.


18.114.010 Purpose.

A development agreement provides the opportunity for the City and a developer to agree on the scope and timing of a project, applicable regulations and requirements, mitigation requirements, and other matters relating to the development process. A development agreement promotes the general welfare by balancing public and private interests, providing reasonable certainty for a development project, and addressing other matters, including reimbursement over time for the financing of public facilities. Development agreements may provide public benefits such as affordable housing, pedestrian-oriented communities, mixed-use development, and creation of public amenities such as parks and open spaces. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.114.020 Authority.

(1) The execution of a development agreement is a proper exercise of the City’s police power and contract authority. The City may consider, and enter into, a development agreement with a person having ownership or control of real property within the City limits. The City may consider a development agreement for real property outside of the City limits but within the urban growth area (“UGA”), as defined in RCW 36.70A.030(15), or as designated by the County pursuant to RCW 36.70A.110 as part of a proposed annexation or a service agreement.

(2) A development agreement may obligate a party to fund or provide services, infrastructure, or other facilities. A development agreement shall be consistent with applicable development regulations adopted by the City under Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(3) A development agreement shall reserve authority to impose new or different regulations to the extent required by serious threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.114.030 General provisions of development agreements.

(1) Comprehensive Plan. A development agreement shall be consistent with the applicable policies and goals of the City of Covington’s Comprehensive Plan.

(2) Development Standards. A development agreement shall be consistent with all applicable development regulations; provided, a development agreement may extend the durations of approval of project permits and allow phasing plans different from those otherwise imposed under the Covington Municipal Code.

(a) A development agreement related to property in the Covington downtown zone, town center district (TC), may allow further deviations from development regulations imposed under Chapter 18.31 CMC for the following reasons:

(i) To provide flexibility to achieve public benefits; or

(ii) To respond to changing community needs; or

(iii) To encourage deviations that provide the functional equivalent or adequately achieve the purposes of otherwise applicable City standards.

(b) A development agreement may not authorize deviations from development regulations governing the uses, minimum and maximum densities, maximum gross floor area, or maximum structure height.

(c) A development agreement may not authorize deviations from the requirements of CMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction. Building permit applications shall be subject to the building codes in effect when a complete building permit application is submitted.

(d) A development agreement may not authorize deviations from the minimum requirements of CMC Title 16, Environment, and Chapter 18.65 CMC, Critical Areas.

(e) Any deviation from development standards in the Covington Municipal Code shall not require any further rezone, variance from City standards, or other City approval apart from development agreement approval by the City Council. Deviations from development standards as approved through a development agreement shall apply to and govern the development and implementation of each covered property in lieu of any conflicting or different standards or requirements elsewhere in the Covington Municipal Code.

(f) Subsequent amendments to the development standards in the Covington Municipal Code that differ from those deviations approved by the City Council in a development agreement shall apply to the covered property only where necessary to address imminent public health and safety hazards or where the development agreement specifies a time period or phase after which certain identified standards can be modified.

(3) As a minimum, the development agreement shall specify the following:

(a) Project components that define and describe the permitted uses, residential densities, nonresidential densities, and intensities or building sizes;

(b) The amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of State law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection fees, or dedications;

(c) Mitigation measures, development conditions, and other requirements of Chapter 43.21C RCW, State Environmental Policy Act;

(d) Design standards such as architectural treatment, maximum heights, setbacks, landscaping, drainage and water quality requirements, and other development features;

(e) Provisions for affordable housing, if applicable;

(f) Parks and common open space preservation;

(g) Signage;

(h) Parking;

(i) Phasing;

(j) Financial guarantees for performance and maintenance of public improvements;

(k) Maintenance and operation standards for public improvements;

(l) A build-out or vesting period for applicable standards;

(m) Duration of agreement; and

(n) Any other appropriate development requirement or procedure that is based upon a City policy, rule, regulation, or standard.

(4) As provided in RCW 36.70B.170, the development agreement shall reserve authority to impose new or different regulations to the extent required by a serious threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.114.040 Processing procedure for development agreements.

A proposed development agreement shall accompany and be processed in conjunction with the associated underlying land use application, approval, or annexation request. The type of land use application or other approval shall control the type of application set forth in CMC 14.30.040.

(1) A proposed development agreement associated with a legislative action, such as a Comprehensive Plan amendment or area-wide rezone, shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established in this title and pursuant to the noticing requirements set forth in CMC 14.30.060. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council on any proposed development agreement relating to legislative action. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development agreement and, if approved, shall authorize the City Manager to execute the development agreement on behalf of the City.

(2) A proposed development agreement associated with a land use application shall be processed in accordance with the permit application procedures established in Chapter 14.35 CMC and as further provided in this title as follows:

(a) If the underlying land use application is a Type 2 final decision by the Director, then the Director shall consider both the land use application and the proposed development agreement together. The Director shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed development agreement. The Director’s final decision on the underlying land use application shall not be made until the City Council holds a public hearing on the proposed development agreement and subsequently approves or rejects the proposed development agreement. If the City Council approves the development agreement, the City Council shall authorize the City Manager to execute the development agreement on behalf of the City. Nothing in this section obligates the Director to forward a recommendation to the City Council for further consideration of a proposed development agreement if the Director denies the underlying land use application.

(b) If the underlying land use application is a Type 3 final decision by the Hearing Examiner, then the Hearing Examiner shall consider both the land use application and the proposed development agreement together during the required public hearing for a Type 3 land use application. The Hearing Examiner shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed development agreement. The Hearing Examiner’s final decision on the underlying land use application shall not be made until the City Council holds a public hearing on the proposed development agreement and subsequently approves or rejects the proposed development agreement. If the City Council approves the development agreement, the City Council shall authorize the City Manager to execute the development agreement on behalf of the City. Nothing in this section obligates the Hearing Examiner to forward a recommendation to the City Council for further consideration of a proposed development agreement if the Hearing Examiner denies the underlying land use application.

(c) If a final decision on an underlying land use application has been previously made by the Hearing Examiner or Director, and the application was approved, the Director shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed development agreement. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development agreement. If the City Council approves the development agreement, the City Council shall authorize the City Manager to execute the development agreement on behalf of the City.

(3) Public Notice. All public meetings and public hearings on a development agreement shall be noticed pursuant to underlying land use type as set forth in Chapter 14.40 CMC. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.114.050 No deadline for final decision, form of agreement, term, recording.

(1) Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.020, development agreements are not land use applications and are not subject to processing deadlines. A signed written waiver of the deadline to issue a final decision on any land use application for the covered property shall accompany a request for a development agreement.

(2) No proposed development agreement shall be presented to the decision-making body unless in a form approved by the City Attorney. Prior to any public hearing held for the purpose of authorizing execution of the development agreement, a development agreement shall be signed by the property owner and all other parties with a substantial beneficial interest in the property that is the subject of the development agreement.

(3) Term.

(a) A development agreement may be approved up to a maximum period of 20 years.

(b) In determining the appropriate term for a development agreement, the City Council should consider the type, size, and location of development and phasing, if proposed. The City Council may consider shorter terms with extensions.

(c) Extensions. If extensions are authorized in a development agreement, an applicant must request the extension at least 60 days prior to expiration of the development agreement. For a development agreement associated with a land use application, the Director may grant an extension for up to five years, not to exceed a total of 25 years, if the applicant can satisfactorily show that at least 50 percent of the gross floor area is constructed. All other requests for extensions shall be reviewed by the City Council unless another process is expressly provided for in the development agreement.

(4) Recording. A development agreement shall be recorded against the property in the real property records of the King County Assessor’s office. Recording costs shall be paid by the applicant as provided for in the current fee schedule. During the term of the development agreement the agreement is binding on the parties and their successors, including the property owners in any area that is annexed to the City. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


18.114.060 Judicial appeal.

If the development agreement relates to a land use application, the provisions of Chapter 36.70C RCW shall apply to the appeal of the decision on the development agreement and in accordance with the appeal procedures in Chapter 14.45 CMC for a Type 4 decision type. (Ord. 06-13 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 18.115 REVIEW PROCEDURES/NOTICE REQUIREMENTS

(Repealed by Ord. 10-10)


Chapter 18.120 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 11-15)


Chapter 18.122 PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 10-17)


Chapter 18.125 DECISION CRITERIA

Sections:

18.125.010    Purpose.

18.125.020    Temporary use permit.

18.125.030    Variance.

18.125.040    Conditional use permit.

18.125.045    Expiration or renewal.

18.125.050    Modifications and expansions of a conditional use permit – When use is not permitted outright.

18.125.060    Modifications or expansions of a conditional use permit authorized by existing land use permits – Required findings. 

18.125.070    Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use, or unclassified use permits. 


18.125.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to allow for consistent evaluation of land use applications and to protect nearby properties from the possible effects of such requests by:

(1) Providing clear criteria on which to base a decision;

(2) Recognizing the effects of unique circumstances upon the development potential of a property;

(3) Avoiding the granting of special privileges;

(4) Avoiding development, which may be unnecessarily detrimental to neighboring properties;

(5) Requiring that the design, scope and intensity of development is in keeping with the physical aspects of a site and adopted land use policies for the area; and

(6) Providing criteria, which emphasize protection of the general character of neighborhoods. (Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.44.010))


18.125.020 Temporary use permit.

A temporary use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant submits an application and application fee as set forth in the current fee resolution, demonstrating that:

(1) The proposed temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare;

(2) The proposed temporary use is compatible with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity in terms of noise and hours of operation;

(3) The proposed temporary use, if located in a resource zone, will not be materially detrimental to the use of the land for resource purposes and will provide adequate off-site parking if necessary to protect against soil compaction;

(4) Adequate public off-street parking and traffic control for the exclusive use of the proposed temporary use can be provided in a safe manner; and

(5) The proposed temporary use is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which it is proposed. (Ord. 20-07 § 141; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.44.020))


18.125.030 Variance.

(1) Variance Authority. The Hearing Examiner shall have the authority to grant a variance from the terms of this title. The Hearing Examiner may impose conditions or restrictions on an existing or proposed use or structure in order to ensure that a requested variance will conform to the required findings below.

(2) Required Findings. The Hearing Examiner shall not grant a variance from the development standards of this title unless the Hearing Examiner finds that the variance request meets all of the following criteria and the Hearing Examiner makes written findings to that effect:

(a) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this title creates an unnecessary hardship to the property owner; 

(b) The variance is necessary because of the unique size, shape, topography, or location of the subject property; 

(c) The subject property is deprived, by provisions of this title, of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zone; 

(d) The variance does not create health and safety hazards, is not materially detrimental to the public welfare or is not unduly injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity;

(e) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any of the procedural provisions of this title; 

(f) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any standard or provision that specifically states that no variance from such standard or provision is permitted; 

(g) The variance does not relieve an applicant from conditions established during prior permit review;

(h) The variance does not allow establishment of a use that is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the proposal is located; 

(i) The variance does not allow the creation of lots or densities that exceed the base residential density for the zone by more than 10 percent; 

(j) The variance is the minimum necessary to grant relief to the applicant; 

(k) The variance from setback or height requirements does not infringe upon or interfere with easement or covenant rights or responsibilities;

(l) The variance does not relieve an applicant from any provisions of Chapter 18.65 CMC, Critical Areas, except for the required critical area buffer widths and building setbacks set forth in Chapter 18.65 CMC; and

(m) The variance is not eligible for wireless communication facilities that are governed under Chapter 18.70 CMC, Wireless Communication Facilities.

(3) Granting of a Use Variance Is Not Authorized. The Hearing Examiner shall not grant a variance which establishes a use otherwise prohibited within a zoning district.

(4) Applications for variances under this section shall require payment of an application fee to cover the costs of review. Such fees shall be set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 06-17 § 5 (Exh. C); Ord. 09-12 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 20-07 § 142; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.44.030))


18.125.040 Conditional use permit. 

(1) Conditional Use Permit Authority. The Hearing Examiner shall have the authority to issue a conditional use permit. When considering a request for a conditional use permit, the Hearing Examiner shall consider the applicable standards, criteria, intent and policies established by this title and the comprehensive land use plan as they pertain to the proposed use. 

(2) The Hearing Examiner may impose specific conditions upon the use, including an increase in the standards of this title, which will enable the Hearing Examiner to make the required findings below. The Hearing Examiner may impose conditions which include, but are not limited to, restrictions in hours of operations; location restrictions for structures and uses; structural requirements, including safety, noise reduction, view protection, and aesthetics; and increased buffering requirements, including open space, berms, fencing and landscaping. 

(3) Required Findings. The Hearing Examiner shall not grant a conditional use permit unless the Hearing Examiner finds that the conditional use permit request meets all of the following criteria and the Hearing Examiner makes written findings to that effect:

(a) The conditional use is designed in a manner which is compatible with the character and appearance of an existing or proposed development in the vicinity of the subject property; 

(b) The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the conditional use shall not hinder neighborhood circulation or discourage the permitted development or use of neighboring properties;

(c) The conditional use is designed in a manner that is compatible with the physical characteristics of the subject property;

(d) Requested modifications to standards are limited to those which will mitigate impacts in a manner equal to or greater than the standards;

(e) The conditional use is not in conflict with the health and safety of the community; 

(f) The conditional use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; 

(g) The conditional use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts on such facilities; and 

(h) The proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.

(4) Applications for a conditional use permit under this section shall require payment of an application fee to cover the costs of review. Such fees shall be set forth in the current fee resolution. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 20-07 § 143; Ord. 42-02 § 2 (21A.44.040))


18.125.045 Expiration or renewal.

(1) A variance or conditional use permit shall automatically expire in accordance with the approval time frame specified for the underlying land use application for subdivisions, short plats, binding site plan, commercial site development permit applications or other land use process specified in Chapter 14.20 CMC, CMC Title 17 and/or this title.

(2) Variances from development standards associated with a building permit, tenant improvement, or reuse shall expire within one year from date of issuance, or time specified by the Hearing Examiner. 

(3) The Hearing Examiner may grant one renewal for a variance or conditional use permit if the party seeking renewal can demonstrate extraordinary circumstances or conditions which were not known or foreseeable at the time of original application. A renewed variance or conditional use permit shall be substantially acted upon within six months or the variance or permit shall automatically expire. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.125.050 Modifications and expansions of a conditional use permit – When use is not permitted outright. 

Proposed modifications or expansions to a use or development authorized by an existing land use permit shall not require an amendment to the existing land use permit if the use is now permitted outright in the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.125.060 Modifications or expansions of a conditional use permit authorized by existing land use permits – Required findings. 

Modifications or expansions approved by the Department shall be based on written findings that the proposed modifications or expansions provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


18.125.070 Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use, or unclassified use permits. 

(1) The Department may review and approve pursuant to the Type I process in Title 14.30 CMC an expansion of a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use permit; provided, that it meets one of the following:

(a) The expansion shall conform to all provisions of this title and the original land use permit, except that the project-wide amount of each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent: 

(i) Building square footage; 

(ii) Impervious surface;

(iii) Parking; or

(iv) Building height.

(b) No subsequent expansions shall be approved under this subsection (1) if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (1)(a) of this section. 

(2) A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions within a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) This section shall not apply to modifications or expansions of telecommunication facilities, the provisions for which are set forth in CMC 18.70.130, or to modifications or expansions of nonconformities, the provisions for which are set forth in CMC 18.85.070. (Ord. 10-10 § 3 (Exh. C))


Title 19 IMPACT FEES

Chapters:

19.10    General Provisions

19.20    Imposition of Fees

19.30    Transportation Impact Fee

19.40    School Impact Fee

19.50    Fire Impact Fee

19.60    Park Impact Fee

 


Chapter 19.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.10.010    Purpose.

19.10.020    Authority.

19.10.030    Definitions.

19.10.040    Relationship to SEPA authority.


19.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to implement the capital facilities element of the Covington comprehensive plan and the policies and requirements of the Growth Management Act by:

(1) Ensuring that adequate public facilities are available to serve new development;

(2) Maintaining a high quality of life in Covington by requiring that new development bear a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to support planned land uses and does not decrease the level of service available to existing residents and businesses;

(3) Allowing recovery of the cost of completed public facilities to the extent that new growth is served by those facilities; and

(4) Ensuring fair collection and administration of such impact fees. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.10.020 Authority.

This title is enacted pursuant to the City’s police powers, the Growth Management Act as codified in Chapter 36.70A RCW (“the Act”), and the impact fee statutes as codified in RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.100. The provisions of this title shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the City Council in providing for the assessment of impact fees. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.10.030 Definitions.

Except for as provided herein, and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms in this title shall have the ascribed meaning as provided for in Chapter 18.20 CMC. Words and terms otherwise not defined in Chapter 18.20 CMC shall be defined pursuant to RCW 82.02.090, or given their usual and customary meaning.

(1) For the purposes of this title, these words and terms shall have the following meaning:

(a) “Applicant” is any person, collection of persons, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation obtaining a building permit. “Applicant” includes an applicant and owner for the purpose of the impact fee deferral program pursuant to this title.

(b) “Department” means both and either the City of Covington Community Development Department and/or the City of Covington Public Works Department.

(c) “Director” means both and either the City of Covington Community Development Director and/or the City of Covington Public Works Director, or each of their respective designees.

(d) “Fee payer” is a person, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation commencing a development activity which creates the demand for additional system improvements and which requires the issuance of a permit for a given development activity. “Fee payer” includes an applicant for a transportation impact fee credit.

(e) “Low-income housing” means housing with a monthly housing expense that is no greater than 30 percent of 80 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, in accordance with RCW 82.02.060.

(f) “RFA” means the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority, a Washington State municipal corporation established and operating pursuant to Chapter 52.26 RCW. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.10.040 Relationship to SEPA authority.

Nothing in this title shall preclude the City from also requiring the applicant for a land use or building permit, or a change in use if no building permit is required, to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of RCW 82.02.050. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.20 IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES

Sections:

19.20.010    Application.

19.20.020    Impact fee program elements.

19.20.030    Service area.

19.20.040    Imposition of impact fees.

19.20.050    Fee calculations – Payment.

19.20.060    Exclusions.

19.20.070    Deferral of impact fee payment.

19.20.080    Low-income housing exemption.

19.20.090    Credits.

19.20.100    Independent fee calculation.

19.20.110    Adjustment of fees.

19.20.120    Refunds.

19.20.130    Payments under protest – Appeals.

19.20.140    Impact fee accounts – Reporting.


19.20.010 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all impact fees imposed under this title. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.020 Impact fee program elements.

(1) The City shall impose impact fees on every development activity in the City for which an impact fee schedule has been established.

(2) Any impact fee imposed shall be reasonably related to the impact caused by the development and shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of system improvements that are reasonably related to the new development. The impact fee formula shall account in the fee calculation for future revenues the City will receive from the development.

(3) The impact fee shall be based on the capital facilities element adopted by the City as part of the City’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.030 Service area.

(1) Generally, except as provided for herein, the City of Covington is hereby established as the service area for impact fees under this title, including all property located within the corporate limits of the City.

(2) Fire Impact Fees. For purposes of the fire impact fees established in Chapter 19.50 CMC, all land within the boundaries of the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority shall be considered a single service area and the City shall impose impact fees within that portion of the Puget Sound Regional Fire Authority lying within the City corporate limits.

(3) School Impact Fees. For purposes of the school impact fees established in Chapter 19.40 CMC, all land within the boundaries of the Kent School District shall be considered a single service area and the City shall impose impact fees within that portion of the Kent School District lying within City corporate limits.

(4) The scope of the service areas identified in this section is hereby found to be reasonable, established on the basis of sound planning and engineering principles, and consistent with RCW 82.02.060. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.040 Imposition of impact fees.

(1) The City shall collect applicable impact fees adopted under this title from any fee payer seeking development permits or plat or other land use approval from the City where such development activity requires the recording of a residential subdivision, issuance of a building permit, or approval for a change in use, except for as provided otherwise in this title. This shall include, but is not limited to, the development of residential, commercial, retail, office, and industrial land, and includes the expansion of existing uses that creates a demand for additional system improvements as well as a change in existing use that creates a demand for additional system improvements.

(2) For a change in use of an existing building or dwelling unit, including any alteration, expansion, replacement or new accessory building that generates additional impact, the impact fee shall be the applicable impact fee for the land use category of the new use, less any impact fee previously paid for the land use category of the prior use. If no impact fee was paid for the prior use, the impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current impact fee rate of the current use.

(3) The impact fees assessed for developments containing more than one type of use shall be calculated separately for each type of use pursuant to this title and the City’s current fee resolution.

(4) Development activities that have been allowed credits pursuant to CMC 19.20.090 prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application or an application for a permit for a change in land use shall submit, along with the complete permit application, a copy of the letter issued by the Director pursuant to CMC 19.20.090 setting forth the dollar amount and basis of the approved credit. The net impact fees, as determined after the reduction of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the fee payer in accordance with this section. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.050 Fee calculations – Payment.

(1) A preliminary impact fee assessment will be provided by the Department during the review and approval of a given development activity, typically a building permit application or a permit for a change in land use.

(2) A final impact fee assessment, based upon the impact fee rate in effect as of the date the actual permit is issued, shall be made by the Department, and the fee(s) shall be due and payable in full at the time of issuance of the permit.

(3) All fee payers shall be required to pay an administrative fee for each impact fee collected at the rate set forth for each in the City’s current fee schedule.

(4) Failure to pay the impact fees assessed for a given development activity at the time that such impact fees are due and payable shall result in denial of the underlying permit for which the fee payer has applied, except for as provided in CMC 19.20.070. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.060 Exclusions.

(1) The following development activities and building permit applications do not create additional impact on public facilities and are excluded from the imposition of impact fees adopted under this title (additional exceptions from individual impact fees can be found in Chapters 19.30 and 19.40 CMC):

(a) Shelters or dwelling units for temporary placement, which provide housing to persons on a temporary basis as defined in CMC 18.20.220.

(b) Reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, or replacement of existing legally established single-family or multifamily dwelling unit(s) that does not result in the creation of additional dwelling units or a change of use.

(c) Reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, or replacement of an existing legally established nonresidential building that does not expand the usable space.

(d) Replacement of a structure with a new structure of the same gross floor area at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within one year of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure; provided, that there is no change in use.

(e) A legal accessory dwelling unit approved under CMC 18.20.350 and 18.25.030(B)(7), as it is considered part of the single-family use associated with this title.

(f) Any development activity that is exempt from the payment of an impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.100 due to full mitigation of the same system improvement under the State Environmental Policy Act.

(g) Mobile homes permitted as temporary dwellings pursuant to CMC 18.85.170.

(h) Miscellaneous site improvements that do not affect the use of the property or the primary structure, including, but not limited to, fences, retaining walls, swimming pools, mechanical units, and signs. Determination of the building and land use permits that qualify for exclusion under this subsection shall be at the sole discretion of the Community Development Director, or his/her designee, and shall be final.

(i) Demolition or moving of a structure.

(2) The Director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exemption identified in this section or under other applicable law. Determinations of the Director shall be in writing and are final. The Director’s determinations are not subject to an independent appeal process, but may be challenged as a condition of the associated development imposing the impact fee. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.070 Deferral of impact fee payment.

At any time prior to building permit issuance, and pursuant to the requirements of this section, an applicant for a single-family attached or detached dwelling unit may request to defer payment of impact fees assessed on such dwelling unit until final inspection.

(1) The applicant shall submit a deferred impact fee application, provided by the City, that shall include the following information, as applicable:

(a) The applicant’s corporate identity and contractor registration number;

(b) The full names of all legal owners of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur;

(c) The legal description of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur;

(d) The tax parcel identification number of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur; and

(e) The address of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur.

(f) All applications shall be accompanied by payment of an administrative fee according to the City’s current fee resolution.

(2) The impact fee amount due under any request to defer payment of impact fees shall be based on the schedule in effect at the time the applicant provides the City with the information required in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Prior to the issuance of a building permit that is the subject of a request for a deferred payment of impact fees, all applicants and/or legal owners of the property upon which the development activity allowed by the building permit is to occur must sign a deferred impact fee payment lien in a form acceptable to the City.

(a) The deferred impact fee payment lien shall be recorded against the property subject to the building permit and be granted in favor of the City in the amount of the deferred impact fee. Any such lien shall be junior and subordinate only to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property subject to the building permit.

(b) In addition to the administrative fee required in subsection (1) of this section, the applicant shall be responsible for, at their own expense, recording the lien agreement with the King County recorder.

(4) The City shall not approve a final inspection until the impact fees identified in the deferred impact fee payment lien are paid in full.

(5) In no case shall payment of the impact fee be deferred for a period of more than 18 months from the date of building permit issuance.

(6) Upon receipt of final payment of the deferred impact fee as identified in the deferred impact fee payment lien, the City shall execute a release of lien for the property. The property owner shall be responsible, at their own expense, to record the lien release with King County Recorder.

(7) In the event that the deferred impact fee is not paid within the time provided in this section, the City shall institute foreclosure proceedings under the process set forth in Chapter 61.12 RCW.

(8) An applicant is entitled to defer impact fees pursuant to this section for no more than 20 single-family dwelling unit building permits per year in the City. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.080 Low-income housing exemption.

Pursuant to RCW 82.02.060, any fee payer intending to develop low-income housing projects developed or owned by public housing agencies, or private nonprofit housing fee payers, may request to be exempt from up to 80 percent of the impact fees imposed on the low-income housing units to be developed, subject to the following:

(1) The fee payer shall be responsible for providing documentation to the City that their project qualifies for a low-income housing impact fee exemption pursuant to this section.

(2) Any claim or request for a waiver under this section shall be made no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. If a building permit is not required for the development activity, the claim shall be made when the impact fees are tendered. Any claim not made when required by this section shall be deemed waived.

(3) The low-income housing exemption shall not apply to fire impact fees. 

(4) Except for as provided otherwise in this title, the determination to grant or deny an exemption from impact fees under this section shall be in the sole discretion of the City Council after consideration in an open public meeting of the following criteria:

(a) Public benefit of the specific project;

(b) The hardship to the project of the impact fees;

(c) The impacts of the project; and

(d) Any other factors deemed relevant by the City Council.

(5) As a condition of receiving an exemption under this section, the owner shall execute and record in King County’s real property title records a City-drafted lien, covenant, or other contractual provision against the property that provides that the proposed housing unit or development will continue to be used for low-income housing and remain affordable to those households under the regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

(a) The term of this lien, covenant, or contractual provision shall be 10 years for individual owners and 15 years for private and private nonprofit applicants/builders.

(b) The lien, covenant, or other contractual provision shall run with the land and apply to subsequent owners and assigns.

(c) In the event that the housing unit(s) is no longer used for low-income housing during the term of the lien, covenant, or contractual provision, the owner shall be required to promptly pay to the City all impact fees owed for the property according to the current fee resolution at the time of payment. (Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.090 Credits.

(1) Unless otherwise defined in the respective impact fee chapter or associated interlocal agreements, the provisions for requesting and receiving credits toward impact fees shall follow the provisions of this section. 

(2) A fee payer may request that a credit or credits for the value of system improvements, including dedications of land, improvements, and/or construction provided by the fee payer, be applied toward assessed impact fees.

(a) Any claim for credit must be made no later than 14 calendar days after the submission of an application for a building permit or an application for a permit for a change in use. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit.

(b) Requests for a credit shall be made in writing and on the applicable City form, if provided.

(c) Each request for a credit or credits shall include, at a minimum, a legal description of the dedicated land and/or a detailed description of the improvements or construction provided, and a legal description or other adequate description of the development to which the credit will be applied.

(3) For each request for a credit or credits, the Director shall determine the value of the dedicated land, improvements, and/or construction on a case-by-case basis.

(a) If appropriate, the Director may select an appraiser from a list of independent appraisers. The appraiser shall be directed to determine the value of the dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the developer for the City.

(b) The developer shall pay for the cost of an appraisal conducted by the Department pursuant to this subsection, including time for review by City staff. An estimate of the appraisal and review costs will be prepared by the Department, and the fee payer shall pay the estimated costs prior to commencement of the appraisal and review. If the final cost of the appraisal and review is in excess of the initial estimate and payment, any difference will be due prior to the issuance of a letter or certificate from the Director. If the final cost of the appraisal and review is less than the initial estimate and payment, the Department shall give a refund for the difference.

(4) In the event that the fee payer disagrees with the Director’s valuation of land, improvements, or construction provided under subsection (3) of this section, the fee payer may submit a valuation for the Director’s consideration.

(a) The appraiser (or review engineer) used by the fee payer must be qualified, licensed, and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised.

(b) Appraisals and/or engineering valuations submitted by the fee payer shall be subject to review by the Director and, at the Director’s discretion, an independent review appraiser/engineer selected by the Director. The fee payer shall pay for the actual costs for the appraisal/valuation and the independent review pursuant to subsection (3)(b) of this section.

(5) A credit will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed are:

(a) Included within the capital facilities plan or would serve the goals and objectives of the capital facilities plan; and

(b) Are at suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the Director; and

(c) Serve to offset impacts of the fee payer’s development activity; and

(d) Are for one or more of the projects listed as the basis for calculating the respective impact fee.

(e) Any impact fee credits pursuant to this section shall be deducted from the calculated impact fee and a new impact fee shall be assessed for the development. If an impact fee is owed by the applicant, the outstanding fee shall be distributed evenly per building permit, unless otherwise determined by the city.

(f) No credit shall be given for project improvements required of the development by City code and/or SEPA; only dedications in excess of those required by law are eligible for credit.

(6) The Director shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria of this section, or under other applicable law.

(a) Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the discretion of the Director to decline to accept any proposed dedication.

(b) In no event shall the credit exceed the amount of the impact fees due. If the total value of any credit for such dedication, improvement, or construction costs exceeds the amount of the applicable impact fee assessment, the fee payer will not be entitled to reimbursement of the difference.

(c) If credit is awarded, the Director shall provide the fee payer with a letter setting forth the dollar amount of any credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the real property dedicated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The fee payer must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter and return such signed document to the Director before the Department will apply the impact fee credit. The failure of the fee payer to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days of the Director’s issuance of the letter shall nullify the credit.

(d) If credit is denied, the Director shall provide the fee payer with a letter setting forth the reasons for denial.

(7) Determinations made by the Director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 10-17 § 6 (Exh. D); Ord. 08-17 § 3 (Exh. B); Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.100 Independent fee calculation.

(1) As an alternative to the payment of impact fees as provided in the schedules set forth in this title, if, in the judgment of the Director, none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in this title accurately describes or captures the impacts of a new development, the Department may conduct independent fee calculations and the Director may impose alternative impact fees on a specific development based on those calculations.

(2) A fee payer may also request that assessed impact fees on the proposed development be calculated according to an independent fee calculation study submitted by the fee payer and approved by the Department as provided in this section. A fee payer may submit an independent fee calculation study for one or more impact fees and use the impact fee schedules in this title for one or more impact fees.

(3) All independent fee calculation studies by a fee payer shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval. The study shall be accompanied by the administrative fee required for conducting the review, as set forth in the current fee schedule. The independent fee calculation study shall meet the following standards:

(a) The study shall follow accepted impact fee assessment practices and methodologies.

(b) The study shall use acceptable data sources, and the data shall be comparable with the uses and intensities proposed for the proposed development activity.

(c) The study shall comply with applicable State laws governing impact fees, including but not limited to RCW 82.02.060, or its successor.

(d) The study, including any data collection and analysis, shall be prepared and documented by professionals qualified in their respective fields.

(e) The study shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

(4) Director’s Determination.

(a) There is a rebuttable presumption that the methodologies and rates set for the impact fees imposed by this title are valid.

(b) The Director shall consider the documentation submitted by the fee payer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the Director reasonably deems to be inapplicable, inaccurate, or not reliable.

(c) The Director may require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration.

(d) The Director is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness.

(e) The Director’s determination regarding the fees or alternative fees, and any associated calculations, shall be provided to the fee payer in writing.

(5) Determinations made by the Director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.110 Adjustment of fees.

(1) Impact fees may be adjusted by the City if one of the following circumstances exists and only if any applicable discount set forth in the applicable fee formula fails to adjust for the error in the calculation or fails to ameliorate for the unfairness of the fee:

(a) The fee payer demonstrates that the impact fee assessment was incorrectly calculated; or

(b) Unusual circumstances identified by the fee payer demonstrate that if the standard impact fee were applied it would be unfair or unjust.

(2) Request for Adjustment.

(a) Any request by a fee payer for an adjustment pursuant to this section shall be provided to the Department in writing. The fee payer shall pay an administrative fee as set forth in the City’s current fee schedule for an individually determined impact fee.

(b) A fee payer may provide studies and data to demonstrate that any particular factor used by the City may not appropriately apply to the development proposal; provided, that the City’s data shall be presumed valid unless clearly demonstrated to be otherwise by the fee payer.

(3) Director’s Determination.

(a) The Director shall be authorized to determine whether any adjustment of impact fees shall be awarded pursuant to this section.

(b) There is a rebuttable presumption that the individual impact fee rate calculations adopted pursuant to this title are valid.

(c) The Director shall consider the documentation submitted by the fee payer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the Director reasonably deems to be inapplicable, inaccurate or not reliable.

(d) The Director may require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration.

(e) The Director is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the specific characteristics of the development and/or principles of fairness.

(f) The Director’s final determination shall be made in writing and must set forth the reasons for the decision.

(4) For requests to adjust a transportation impact fee assessed pursuant to Chapter 19.30 CMC, specifically, the Director shall consider the following sources of information:

(a) The Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation User’s Guide, latest edition.

(b) If the fee payer proposes a trip generation rate other than that set forth in the ITE Trip Generation User’s Guide, latest edition, the fee payer shall provide supporting studies or data for a minimum of three comparison sites, at the same level of detail as would be necessary for the data to be accepted by ITE for inclusion in its database for trip generation.

(c) Any other data or studies submitted by a qualified transportation professional affiliated with the Institute of Transportation Engineers or a professional engineer licensed by the State of Washington.

(5) Determinations made by the Director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.120 Refunds.

(1) The City shall, in accordance with RCW 82.02.080:

(a) Refund to the current owners of property on which an impact fee has been paid any impact fees paid with respect to such property that has not been expended or encumbered for public facilities of the type of which such impact fees were collected within the time frame required under RCW 82.02.080.

(b) Refund to the current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid all impact fees paid with respect to such property if the development activity for which the impact fee was imposed did not occur and no impact has resulted.

(c) Refund all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, when the City seeks to terminate any or all impact fee requirements.

(2) If some, but not all, of the development activity for which the impact fee was imposed occurred, the impact will be deemed to have occurred, and no refund will be payable; provided, however, that the property on which the impact fee was paid shall be eligible to receive a credit toward any subsequent development activity on the property up to the full amount of the payment.

(3) Owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of impact fees to the Director or designee within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises, which, for purposes of refund claims authorized pursuant to subsection (1)(b) of this section only, shall be the date of voluntary or involuntary abandonment of the permit, or the date that notice is given, whichever occurs later.

(4) Any impact fees not expended within the time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within the one-year claim period, shall be retained and expended on system improvements for which such impact fees were initially collected, without further limitation as to the time of expenditure.

(5) The interest due on the refund of impact fees as required by RCW 82.02.080, or its successor, shall be calculated according to the average rate received by the City on invested funds throughout the period during which the impact fees were retained. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.130 Payments under protest – Appeals.

(1) The determination of the Director or designee regarding the applicability of an impact fee to a given development activity within the service area shall be final; however, a fee payer may pay an impact fee imposed pursuant to this title under protest in order to obtain a permit and, after such payment, file an appeal regarding the amount of the impact fee or a determination made pursuant to this title to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to the procedures for Type 2 decisions under Chapter 14.45 CMC.

(2) Appeals regarding the amount of the impact fee imposed on any development activity may only be filed by the applicant of the development activity, pursuant to Chapter 14.45 CMC.

(3) In addition to specific appeal procedures outlined in this title, any decision made by the Department in the course of administering this title may be appealed in accordance with the procedures for appealing the underlying permit and shall not be required to pursue a separate appeal process. This shall include the requirement to pay impact fees. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.20.140 Impact fee accounts – Reporting.

(1) The City of Covington Finance Department shall earmark all impact fees collected under this title as to the person paying them, the date paid, and the type of impact fee paid. The Finance Department shall promptly deposit all fees collected in appropriate special interest-bearing accounts. A separate account shall be established for each type of impact fee. All interest shall be retained in the account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fee was imposed. While maintaining fees in separate accounts, pooled investments may be used.

(2) Funds withdrawn from the impact fee accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of this title and applicable State law.

(3) On an annual basis, the Finance Director shall provide a report to the City Council on the impact fee accounts showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the public improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

(4) Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered for a permissible use within 10 years of receipt, unless the City Council identifies in written findings that there exists an extraordinary and compelling reason for impact fees to be held longer than 10 years. Under such circumstances, the Council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.30 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE

Sections:

19.30.010    Purpose.

19.30.020    Application.

19.30.030    Administrative guidelines.

19.30.040    Exemptions.

19.30.050    Assessment of fee.

19.30.060    Rate methodology – Fee schedule.

19.30.070    Use of funds.

19.30.080    Relationship to concurrency.


19.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Develop a program consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan for joint public and private financing of public streets and roads (“transportation facilities”) consistent with the capital facilities plan of the City of Covington comprehensive plan, as such transportation facilities are necessitated in whole or in part by development in the City;

(2) Ensure adequate levels of service in transportation facilities; and

(3) Establish a mechanism to charge and collect fees to ensure that all new development bears its proportionate share of the capital costs of transportation facilities reasonably related to new development, in order to ensure the availability of adequate transportation facilities at the time new development occurs. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.020 Application.

Except as otherwise provided for under this title, development activity in the City’s service area shall be charged a transportation impact fee pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.030 Administrative guidelines.

The Director shall be authorized to adopt internal guidelines for the administration of transportation impact fees under this chapter, which may include the adoption of standard operating procedures and administrative policy for transportation impact fees. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.040 Exemptions.

Public school districts, as fee payer, shall be exempt from the assessment and collection of transportation impact fees under this chapter, as authorized by exemptions for a broad public purpose under RCW 82.02.060(2). (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.050 Assessment of fee.

The transportation impact fee shall be assessed according to the units of daily vehicle trips applicable to the type of development as set forth in the current transportation impact fee schedule as created pursuant to this chapter and adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.060 Rate methodology – Fee schedule.

(1) Rate Methodology. The City has conducted extensive research and analysis documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new developments on public facilities, has prepared the “Rate Study for Transportation Impact Fees, City of Covington” dated 2009 (“rate study”), as may be amended from time to time, and incorporates that rate study into this chapter by this reference. The rate study utilizes a methodology (or formula) for calculating impact fees that fulfills all of the requirements of RCW 82.02.060(1). A copy of the rate study shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and is available to the public for review.

(2) Transportation Impact Fee Schedule.

(a) The City’s transportation impact fee schedule is generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the rate study adopted in subsection (1) of this section (Rate Methodology).

(b) The Department shall establish the traffic impact fee rate for a land use that is not listed in the transportation impact fee schedule.

(c) The fee payer shall submit all information requested by the Department for purposes of determining the impact fee rate pursuant to this section.

(d) Alternatively, the transportation impact fee schedule may be amended by a City Council resolution.

(3) For mixed-use developments, traffic impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use based on the applicable measurement in the traffic impact as set forth in the traffic impact fee schedule. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.070 Use of funds.

(1) Pursuant to this chapter, traffic impact fees:

(a) Shall be used for public improvements that will reasonably benefit new development; and

(b) Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in public facilities serving existing developments; and

(c) Shall not be used for maintenance or operations.

(2) Transportation impact fees may be spent for public improvements to streets and such other uses, including, but not limited to, transportation planning, engineering design studies, land surveying, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, and any other expenses that can be capitalized.

(3) Transportation impact fees may also be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the City to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

(4) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of public improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.30.080 Relationship to concurrency.

Neither compliance with this chapter nor the payment of any fee hereunder shall constitute a determination of concurrency under Chapter 12.95 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.40 SCHOOL IMPACT FEE

Sections:

19.40.010    Purpose – Authority.

19.40.020    Interlocal agreement required.

19.40.030    Submission of district capital facilities plan and data.

19.40.040    Annual Council review.

19.40.050    Exclusions.

19.40.060    Fee calculations.

19.40.070    Assessment of fees.

19.40.080    Use of funds.

19.40.090    Impact fee accounts – Payment.


19.40.010 Purpose – Authority.

The continuing growth and development in the City of Covington will create additional demand and need for school facilities. The Washington State Growth Management Act requires that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new facilities needed to serve the new growth and development.

Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the purpose of this chapter is to authorize the assessment and collection of school impact fees. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the City in establishing the school impact fee program. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.020 Interlocal agreement required.

As a condition of the City’s authorization and adoption of a school impact fee ordinance, the City and district shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the school impact fee program, and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.030 Submission of district capital facilities plan and data.

(1) On an annual basis, the district shall submit the following materials to the City Council:

(a) The district’s capital facilities plan as adopted by the school board;

(b) The district’s enrollment projections over the next six years, its current enrollment and the district’s enrollment projections and actual enrollment from the previous year;

(c) The district’s standard of service;

(d) The district’s overall capacity over the next six years, which shall take into account the available capacity from school facilities planned by the district but not yet built and be a function of the district’s standard of service as measured by the number of students which can be housed in district facilities; and

(e) An inventory of the district’s existing facilities.

(2) To the extent that the district’s standard of service identifies a deficiency in its existing facilities, the district’s capital facilities plan must identify the sources of funding other than impact fees for building or acquiring the necessary facilities to serve the existing student population in order to eliminate the deficiencies within a reasonable period of time.

(3) Facilities to meet future demand shall be designed to meet the adopted standard of service. If sufficient funding is not projected to be available to fully fund a capital facilities plan which meets the adopted standard of service, the district’s capital facilities plan should document the reason for the funding gap, and identify all sources of funding that the district plans to use to meet the adopted standard of service.

(4) The district shall also submit an annual report to the City Council showing the capital improvements which were serviced in whole or in part by the school impact fees.

(5) In its development of the financing plan component of the capital facilities plan, the district shall plan on a six-year horizon and shall demonstrate its best efforts by taking the following steps:

(a) Establish a six-year financing plan, and propose the necessary bond issues and levies required by and consistent with that plan and as approved by the school board consistent with RCW 28A.53.020, 84.52.052 and 84.52.056 as amended; and

(b) Apply to the State for funding, and comply with the State requirements for eligibility to the best of the district’s ability. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.040 Annual Council review.

The City Council shall review on an annual basis the materials received from the district and required under this chapter. The City Council may make adjustments to the school impact fee schedule as necessitated by its review or applicable law, and, if the City Council deems appropriate, shall adopt the school impact fee schedule by resolution. The review and fee schedule adoption decision may occur in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the City’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.050 Exclusions.

(1) The following development activities do not create any additional school impacts, or fully mitigate for any school impacts, and are exempt from the collection and assessment of school impact fees under this chapter:

(a) Any development of housing for the elderly, including nursing homes, retirement centers, and any type of housing units for persons age 55 and over, which have recorded covenants or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding school-aged children as residents in those units.

(b) Any construction or building permit that does not include residential sleeping/bedroom space.

(c) Any change of use that does not increase the scope or nature of the residential use of the property.

(d) Any development activity for which school impacts have been fully mitigated pursuant to a condition of development approval (e.g., plat approval) to pay fees, dedicate land, or construct or improve school facilities, unless the condition of the development approval provides otherwise.

(e) Any development activity for which school impacts have been fully mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the district to pay fees, dedicate land, or construct or improve school facilities, unless the terms of the voluntary agreement provide otherwise; provided, that the agreement predates the effective date of impact fee imposition.

(2) The Director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exclusion identified in this section or under other applicable law. Determinations of the Director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.060 Fee calculations.

(1) The school impact fee shall be based on a formula based on the capital facilities plan developed by the district and approved by the school board, and adopted by reference by the City as part of the capital facilities element of the City’s comprehensive plan.

(2) The school impact fees for the district shall be calculated based on a formula that takes into account:

(a) The capital facilities needs of the district as identified in the district’s capital facilities plan;

(b) The district’s student generation rates for single-family and multifamily dwelling units;

(c) The school site and school construction costs per student per grade level;

(d) The district’s standard of service; and

(e) The relocatable facilities cost per student per grade level.

(3) Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and separate student generation rates must be determined by the district for each type of dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, manufactured homes shall be treated as single-family dwelling units and duplexes shall be treated as multifamily dwelling units.

(4) The fee calculations shall be made on a district-wide basis to assure maximum utilization of all school facilities in the district currently used for instructional purposes. Impact fees shall be calculated annually and set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.070 Assessment of fees.

(1) The City shall collect school impact fees, based on the fee schedule adopted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter, from any fee payer seeking development approval from the City where such development activity requires the issuance of a residential building permit or a manufactured home permit, except as otherwise provided for herein.

(2) School impact fees will be imposed on a district by district basis, on behalf of any school district which provides to the City a capital facilities plan, the district’s standards of service for the various grade spans, estimates of the cost of providing needed facilities and other capital improvements, and the data from the district. Any school impact fee imposed shall be reasonably related to the impact caused by the development and shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements that are reasonably related to the development. The school impact fee shall account in the fee calculation for future revenue the district will receive from the development. The resolution adopting the fee schedule shall specify under what circumstances the fee may be adjusted in the interests of fairness. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.080 Use of funds.

School impact fees for the district’s system improvements shall be expended by the district only for capital improvements, including, but not limited to, school planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, relocatable facilities, capital equipment pertaining to educational facilities, and any other expenses that could be capitalized and are consistent with the district’s capital facilities plan. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


19.40.090 Impact fee accounts – Payment.

(1) The district shall establish a school impact fee account. The account shall be an interest-bearing account, and the school impact fees received shall be prudently invested in a manner consistent with the investment policies of the district.

(2) For administrative convenience while processing the fee payments, school impact fees may be temporarily deposited in a City account. On a monthly basis, the City shall deposit the school impact fees collected for the district in the district’s school impact fee account or pursuant to the accounting procedures established by the City’s Finance Department. (Ord. 16-16 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.50 FIRE IMPACT FEE

Sections:

19.50.010    Purpose – Authority.

19.50.020    Interlocal agreement required.

19.50.030    Submission of RFA capital facilities and equipment plan and data.

19.50.040    Annual Council review.

19.50.050    Exclusions.

19.50.060    Fee calculations.

19.50.070    Assessment of fees.

19.50.080    Use of funds.

19.50.090    Impact fee accounts – Payment.


19.50.010 Purpose – Authority.

The City Council of the City of Covington hereby finds and determines that continuing growth and development in the City of Covington will create additional demands and need for fire protection facilities. The Council further finds that the Washington State Growth Management Act requires that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new facilities needed to serve the new growth and development.

Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the Council adopts this chapter to assess fire impact fees. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the Council in establishing the fire impact fee program. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.020 Interlocal agreement required.

As a condition of the City’s authorization and adoption of a fire impact fee ordinance, the City and RFA shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the fire impact fee program, and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.030 Submission of RFA capital facilities and equipment plan and data.

(1) On an annual basis, the RFA shall submit the following materials to the City Council:

(a) The RFA’s capital facilities and equipment plan as adopted by the RFA’s governing board. The capital facilities and equipment plan shall contain a six-year financing component as set forth in Chapter 82.02 RCW.

(b) The RFA’s growth projections over the next six years.

(c) The RFA’s standard of service.

(d) The RFA’s overall capacity to meet levels of service over the next six years.

(e) The expected service improvements from fire protection facilities planned by the RFA but not yet built or implemented.

(f) An inventory of the RFA’s existing facilities. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.040 Annual Council review.

The City Council shall review on an annual basis the materials received from the RFA and required under this chapter. The City Council may make adjustments to the fire impact fee schedule as necessitated by its review or applicable law, and, if the City Council deems appropriate, shall adopt the fire impact fee schedule by resolution. The review and fee schedule adoption decision may occur in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the City’s comprehensive plan. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.050 Exclusions.

(1) In addition to the exclusions in CMC 19.20.060, the following development activities do not create an additional fire impact and are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

(a) Projects in which existing dwelling units are converted into condominium ownership and where no new dwelling units are created.

(b) Any development activity for which fire impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the RFA to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve fire protection facilities; provided, that the agreement predates the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(c) Any development of 200 square feet or less that does not use or store hazardous materials that would create a life safety risk. 

(d) Two-thirds of the normal residential impact fee is exempted for the construction of accessory dwelling units constructed on a property with an existing single-family dwelling unit.

(e) Pursuant to RCW 82.02.100(2), where automatic fire sprinklers are installed in single-family residential occupancies, a reduced fee equal to 70 percent of the impact or level of service fee shall serve to mitigate the costs of needed EMS and rescue resources.

(2) The Director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exclusion identified in this section or under other applicable law. Determinations of the Director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 14.45 CMC. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.060 Fee calculations.

(1) The fee shall be calculated based on an RFA-wide basis using the appropriate factors and data to be supplied by the RFA as indicated in Appendix A of the RFA’s Mitigation and Level of Service Policy using the capacity analysis formula set out in Appendix B, as amended and incorporated herein by reference. 

(2) Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family, multifamily, commercial/industrial, assisted care and hospital and medical facilities and others identified in Appendix A. For purposes of this chapter, manufactured homes shall be treated as single-family dwelling units and duplexes shall be treated as multifamily dwelling units. 

(3) The capacity analysis formula in Appendix B provides for a credit where creditable mitigations are implemented or where voluntary agreements between the RFA and developer provide for fire protection facilities, fire protection facility sites or other related developer contributions that the RFA finds acceptable. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.070 Assessment of fees.

The impact fee shall be based on the capital facilities and equipment plan developed by the RFA and approved by the RFA governing board, and adopted by reference by the City as part of the City’s Capital Facilities Element of the Comprehensive Plan, as amended. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.080 Use of funds.

Impact fees for the RFA’s system improvements shall be expended by the RFA only in conformance with the RFA’s adopted Capital Facilities and Equipment Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


19.50.090 Impact fee accounts – Payment.

(1) The RFA shall establish a fire impact fee account. The account shall be an interest-bearing account, and the fire impact fees received shall be prudently invested in a manner consistent with the investment policies of the RFA.

(2) For administrative convenience while processing the fee payments, fire impact fees may be temporarily deposited in a City account. On a monthly basis, the City shall deposit the fire impact fees collected for the district in the district’s fire impact fee account or pursuant to the accounting procedures established by the City’s Finance Department. (Ord. 08-17 § 2 (Exh. A))


Chapter 19.60 PARK IMPACT FEE

Sections:

19.60.010    Purpose.

19.60.020    Application.

19.60.030    Administrative guidelines.

19.60.040    Exemptions.

19.60.050    Assessment of fees.

19.60.060    Use of funds.

19.60.070    Credits.


19.60.010 Purpose.

(1) The purposes of this chapter are to:

(a) Establish the City of Covington as a service area for parks and recreation facilities;

(b) Ensure that new growth and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of parks and recreation facilities needed to service and support new growth;

(c) Implement the policies of the parks and recreations element of the City of Covington comprehensive plan; and

(d) Provide funds related to parks and recreation as identified in the City of Covington comprehensive plan as necessary to meet additional growth. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.020 Application.

Except as otherwise provided for under this title, development activity in the City’s service area shall be charged a park impact fee pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.030 Administrative guidelines.

The Director shall be authorized to adopt internal guidelines for the administration of impact fees under this chapter. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.040 Exemptions.

Public school districts, as fee payer, shall be exempt from the assessment and collection of park impact fees under this chapter, as authorized by exemptions for a broad public purpose under RCW 82.02.060(2). (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.050 Assessment of fees.

(1) Impact fees shall be assessed based on the City’s fee schedule, as updated by the City Council, through resolution. The park impact fee shall be generated from the formula for calculating park impact fees as set forth in the Rate Study for Park Land Impact Fee by Henderson, Young and Company, dated October 29, 2015 (“Park Rate Study”) as may be amended from time to time, and the Park Study is incorporated into this chapter by this reference. The Park Rate Study utilizes a methodology for calculating impact fees that fulfills all the requirements of RCW 82.02.060(1). A copy of the Park Rate Study shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and is available for public review.

(2) Park Impact Fee Schedule.

(a) The park impact fee schedule is generated from the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the Park Rate Study adopted in subsection (1) of this section.

(b) The park impact fee schedule is adopted by the City Council through the fee resolution.

(3) Development activities that have received vested rights prior to the adoption of the impact fee rate by resolution of the City Council shall be required to mitigate for park impacts through a park fee-in-lieu, as assessed through an approved preliminary plat or by providing park space at the rate of 450 square feet per lot for single-family residential for densities of four units per acre or more or 100 square feet per dwelling unit for multifamily at a density of eight or more dwelling units per acre. A deficiency in adequate park facilities associated with development activities with vested rights shall be subject to payment of the park impact fee in place at the time of building permit issuance. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.060 Use of funds.

(1) The City shall base continued authorization to collect and expend impact fees on revising its comprehensive plan in compliance with RCW 36.70A.070, and on the capital facilities plan identifying:

(a) Deficiencies in public facilities serving existing development and how existing deficiencies will be eliminated within a reasonable period of time;

(b) Additional demands placed on existing public facilities by new development; and

(c) Additional public facility improvements required to serve new development.

(2) Park impact fees collected for system improvements shall be used only in conformance with the most recent capital facilities plan element of the comprehensive plan adopted by the City Council.

(3) Park impact fees shall not be used to eliminate or reduce deficiencies in existing facilities serving existing development.

(4) Park impact fees shall not be used for maintenance or operation expenses.

(5) Park impact fees may be spent for public improvements for planned facilities, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, easement or access acquisition, construction, permitting, financing, engineering, architectural design, project management and any other expenses that are consistent with the most recent capital facilities plan element adopted by the City Council.

(6) Park impact fees may be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the City to the extent that new growth and development activity will be served by the previous acquisition; provided, such fee shall not be imposed to make up for any system improvement deficiencies. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))


19.60.070 Credits.

Requests for park impact fee credits shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.35 CMC and CMC 19.20.090. (Ord. 10-17 § 3 (Exh. A))



-----------------------------

The Covington Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 11-2020, passed July 28, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Covington Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.covingtonwa.gov/ City Telephone: (253) 480-2400

Code Publishing Company