EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 1
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:
1.01 Code Adopted
1.02 Form of Government
1.04 Penalty
1.08 Notices
1.12 Criminal Cases--Costs
1.20 Claims for Injuries and Damages
1.22 Civil Code Enforcement
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 2
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTED1
(Reserved)
Chapter 1.02
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Sections:
1.02.010 Noncharter code city classification adopted.
1.02.010 Noncharter code city classification adopted. There is adopted for the city of Ephrata, Washington, the classification of noncharter code city operating under the Mayor-Council plan of government. (Ord. 1164 §1, 1986, Ord. 96-14, 1996, Ord. 02-10).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 3
Chapter 1.04
PENALTY2
Sections:
1.04.010 Violation--Penalty.
1.04.020 Penalties for civil violations--Generally.
1.04.030 Penalties for civil violations--Designated.
1.04.040 Specific penalties--Additional assessment.
1.04.010 Violation--Penalty.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any requirements of this code is deemed to have committed a civil infraction unless otherwise expressly provided by an ordinance of the city. Every person, firm or corporation found by the court to have committed a civil infraction under this code shall be subject to a penalty of up to five thousand dollars; provided further, that minimum monetary penalties may be established pursuant to Section 1.04.020.
(b) In cases where an ordinance of the city provides a violation of that ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, any person, firm or corporation convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(c) Each person, firm or corporation is deemed to have committed a separate civil infraction for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and such person, firm or corporation is subject to paying penalties accordingly.
(d) Each person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate misdemeanor for each and every day during any portion of which any misdemeanor violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person, firm or corporation, and such person, firm or corporation is punishable accordingly. (Ord. 87-2 §1, 1987: Ord. 765 §1, 1968; Ord. 11-05, 2011).
1.04.020 Penalties for civil violations--Generally. Civil penalties for violations of any section or sections of this code where specific provision is made in the section or sections to establish a minimum penalty to be imposed, such minimum penalty shall not be suspended, deferred, or forgiven by the court, nor shall the court defer to continue a determination the defendant shall have committed the infraction under any condition that allows the suspending, deferring, or forgiving of any minimum penalty. (Ord. 87-2 §2 (part), 1987).
1.04.030 Penalties for civil violations--Designated. The following specific, nondeferrable, nonsuspendable civil penalties may be adopted by categorical reference in other
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 4
sections of this code as a specific civil penalty to be imposed for a civil violation of the sections specified:
Category Penalty
C-1 $ 610.00
C-2 $ 488.00
C-3 $ 390.00
C-4 $ 312.00
C-5 $ 250.00
C-6 $ 200.00
C-7 $ 160.00
C-8 $ 140.00
C-9 $ 121.00
C-10 $ 105.00
C-11 $ 92.00
C-12 $ 80.00
C-13 $ 72.00
C-14 $ 65.00
C-15 $ 60.00
C-16 $ 55.00
C-17 $ 51.00
C-18 $ 33.00
C-19 $ 22.00
C-20 $ 15.00
(Ord. 87-2 §2(part), 1987; Ord. 11-05, 2011; Ord. 12-24, 2012; Ord. 13-20, 2013; Ord. 14-18, 2014; Ord. 15-20, 2015; Ord. 16-20, 2016; Ord. 17-11, 2017; Ord 19-06, 2019))
1.04.040 Specific penalties--Additional assessment. Whenever there shall have been established by any action of the city council a specific nondeferrable, nonsuspendable penalty for violation of any section of this code, the designated representative of the city, who shall issue a notice of infraction or a citation for the commission of a crime as defined by Section 1.04.010 where a specific penalty is provided, shall add to the penalty provided by this code, the cost of all court filing fees as defined in Section 3.35, Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services, together with any assessments or penalties required to be imposed by state law. (Ord. 87-2 §2(part), 1987; Ord. 11-05, 2011).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 5
Chapter 1.08
NOTICES
Sections:
1.08.010 Publication.
1.08.010 Publication. Whenever a hearing on any matter, or a notice is required to be given, and neither law nor ordinance provides a different manner of giving notice, notice shall be given by publishing the notice under the signature of the city clerk, in the official paper of the city, in two issues, and at least ten days before the hearing. (Ord. 359 §1, 1952; Ord 11-05, 2011).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 6
Chapter 1.12
CRIMINAL CASES--COSTS
Sections:
1.12.010 Assessment.
1.12.020 Disposition.
1.12.030 Failure to pay, penalty.
1.12.010 Assessment. Whenever in any criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding to enforce any ordinance of the city of Ephrata, the municipal court judge finds the defendant, or defendants, guilty after trial or plea of guilty, the judge, in addition to any penalty imposed for the ordinance violation, shall assess the appropriate service fees as established in Section 3.35 titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services, together with current IRS mileage reimbursement rate for each mile traveled in effecting service. (Ord. 985 §1, 1979: Ord. 650 §1, 1961; 11-05, 2011).
1.12.020 Disposition. The costs assessed hereunder, when collected by the Municipal Court, shall be delivered to the city clerk, to be paid into the city's current expense fund. These costs shall not be suspended by the Municipal Court. (Ord. 89-13, 1989; Ord. 11-05, 2011).
1.12.030 Failure to pay, penalty. Defendant adjudged to pay a fine and costs who fails to pay said fines and costs shall be turned over to collections. Additional fees associated with collection agency will be applied. (Ord. 650 §3, 1961; Ord. 11-05, 2011).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 7
Chapter 1.20
CLAIMS FOR INJURIES AND DAMAGES
Sections:
1.20.010 Claims for Damages.
1.20.020 Litigation Expenses.
1.20.010 Claims for Damages.
(a) No action shall be commenced against the city in which monetary damages are being claimed until a written claim for damages has been presented to and filed with the City Administrator. Such a claim must name the claimant, include the claimant's address, specify the date and location of the claimed loss, describe any alleged act or omission on the part of the city and the basis upon which liability is being asserted against the city, identify any unknown witnesses, detail the nature and extent of the injury or damage sustained and state the amount being claimed. The claim form must be signed by the claimant or an authorized representative and notarized prior to its filing.
(b) All claims for damages shall be investigated and evaluated by the City’s insurance carrier or City Administrator. Formal reports concerning any claim will be requested from all interested departments, which reports shall constitute and be treated as privileged communications to the City Attorney, City’s insurance carrier and City Administrator. (Ord 11-05, 2011)
(c) A lawsuit based upon the allegations of a Claim for Damages may not be instituted against the City within sixty (60) days of the filing of such claim, unless the applicable statute of limitations will expire within that period of time. The requirements of this section shall not affect in any manner the commencement and running of any applicable statute of limitations. (Ord 11-05, 2011)
1.20.020 Litigation Expenses. The city attorney is authorized to make payment to private and/or public agencies, firms, and/or individuals who provide services to the city in support of any litigation and/or claim and/or threatened litigation or claim filed or contemplated against the city or where the city is a plaintiff or potential plaintiff in legal action.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 8
Chapter 1.22
CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
1.22.010 Purpose.
1.22.020 Definitions.
1.22.030 Declaration of Public Nuisance.
1.22.040 Applicability.
1.22.050 Notice of Civil Infraction.
1.22.060 Notice of Civil Infraction—Response.
1.22.070 Infraction—Hearings.
1.22.080 Infraction—Penalties.
1.22.090 Infraction—Order, Modification, Fees.
1.22.100 Administrative Notice and Order to Correct Civil Violation.
1.22.110 Administrative Notice and Order—Administrative Appeal.
1.22.120 Administrative Notice and Order—Hearing Examiner Appeal.
1.22.130 Administrative Notice and Order—Appeal—Hearing Examiner Hearing.
1.22.140 Administrative Notice and Order—Appeal—Hearing Examiner Decision.
1.22.150 Voluntary Correction Agreement.
1.22.160 Stop Work Orders.
1.22.170 Emergency Orders.
1.22.180 Abatement by the City.
1.22.190 Additional Code Enforcement Procedures.
1.22.200 Interference.
1.22.210 Collection of monetary penalties.
1.22.220 Lien—Authorized.
1.22.230 Right of Entry.
1.22.240 Conflicts.
1.22.250 Adoption of Certain Other Laws.
1.22.010 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; to identify processes and methods to encourage compliance with City code, ordinances, and regulations; and, to provide opportunity for a prompt hearing, decision, and appeal as to alleged violations of the land use code and other ordinances and regulations described in this chapter.
1.22.020 Definitions.
Except where specifically defined in this section, all words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meanings. The word “shall” is always mandatory, and the word “may” denotes a use of discretion in making a decision. The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
A. ”Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, demolish, board-up, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a civil violation by such means, in such a manner, and to such extent as the City Building Official, City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 9
Administrator, or his or her designee determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
B. “Code Enforcement Officer” means the City Code Enforcement Officer, the City Building Official, and all other City officials designated by ordinance or by the City Administrator for purposes of enforcing the regulations subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. “Emergency” means a situation or civil violation which, in the opinion of the City Building Official, City Administrator, or his or her designee, requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons or property.
D. “Hearing Examiner” means the Ephrata Hearing Examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to the Ephrata Municipal Code.
E. “Omission” means a failure to act.
F. “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or by an agent or employee.
G. “Person responsible for violation” means either the person who caused the violation and/or the owner, lessor, tenant, or other person entitled to control, use, and/or occupy property where a civil code violation occurs.
H. “Public Nuisance” is an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:
1. Annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of one or more persons;
2. Offends public decency;
3. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage a public park, street, sidewalk, alley, highway or other public area; or
4. In any way renders one or more persons insecure in life or the use of property.
I. “Regulation” means and includes all of the code provisions, ordinances, standards, regulations, procedures, terms and/or conditions specified under MMC 1.22.040.
J. “Violation” means:
1. An act or omission contrary to any City regulation that promotes or protects the public health, safety, or welfare or the use and development of land or water, whether or not the regulation is codified; and/or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 10
2. An act or omission contrary to the conditions of any permit, notice and order, or stop work or other order issued pursuant to any such regulation.
1.22.030 Declaration of Public Nuisance. All civil code violations are determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and environment, and are declared to be public nuisances. All conditions determined to be civil code violations shall be subject to and enforced pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except where specifically excluded by law or regulation. Any person who willfully or knowingly causes, aids or abets a civil code violation pursuant to this title by any act of commission or omission shall be deemed to have committed a civil violation subject to the following penalties:
A. First violation within any 12 month period C-11
B. Second violation within any 12 month period C-7
C. Third or subsequent violation(s) within any 12 month period C-1
1.22.040 Applicability. This chapter may be applied for the purposes of enforcing the following regulations:
A. EMC Title 3, Revenue and Finance;
B. EMC Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations;
C. EMC Title 6, Health and Sanitation;
D. EMC Title 8, Animals;
E. EMC Title 9, Public Peace, Morals and Safety
F. EMC Title 10, Vehicles and Traffic;
G. EMC Title 12, Streets and Sidewalks;
H. EMC Title 13, Water and Sewers;
I. EMC Title 14, Cemeteries;
J. EMC Title 16, Buildings and Construction;
K. EMC Title 17, Land Development;
L. EMC Title 18, Subdivisions;
M. EMC Title 19, Zoning
N. EMC Title 20, Environment;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 11
O. EMC Title 21, Street and Utility Construction Permits; and
P. Such other code provisions, ordinances, resolutions, or public rules that promote or protect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the use and development of land and water.
1.22.050 Notice of Civil Infraction.
A. Issuance. When the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may issue a notice of infraction to the person responsible for the violation.
B. Content. The notice of infraction shall include the following information:
1. A statement describing the specific civil infraction for which the notice was issued, including the date and location, as well as the accompanying statutory citation, ordinance number, or regulation;
2. A statement that the notice of civil infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed by the person named in the notice and that the determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter;
3. A statement that a civil infraction is a noncriminal offense for which imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction;
4. A statement of the monetary penalty established for the civil infraction;
5. A statement of the options provided in this chapter for responding to the notice and the procedures necessary to exercise these options;
6. A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination, the City has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the civil infraction was committed and that the person may subpoena witnesses including the Code Enforcement Officer who issued the notice;
7. A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, the person will be deemed to have committed the civil infraction and may not subpoena witnesses;
8. A statement that the person named in the notice must respond as provided in this chapter within 15 days of issuance; and
9. A statement that failure to respond to the notice or a failure to appear at a hearing requested for the purpose of contesting the determination or for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances will result in a default judgment against the person in the amount of the penalty.
C. Identification and Detention of Person Receiving Notice. A person who receives a notice of civil infraction under this chapter is required to identify himself or herself to the Code Enforcement Officer by giving his or her true name, address,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 12
and date of birth. Upon request of the Officer, the person shall produce reasonable identification, including a driver’s license or State identification card. The Code Enforcement Officer may cause to be detained any person who is unable or unwilling to reasonably identify himself or herself for purposes of issuing a civil infraction, for a time not longer than is reasonably necessary to identify the person.
D. Service. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice of civil infraction upon the person responsible for the violation, either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice of civil infraction by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such person at his or her last known address. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be personally served within Grant County and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the notice of civil infraction conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person completing the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made and, if by posting, the facts showing the attempts to serve the person personally or by mail.
E. Filing. A notice of civil infraction shall be filed with a court having jurisdiction within five (5) days of issuance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
F. Determination Final Unless Contested. A notice of civil infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed. The determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter.
G. Further Action Not Limited. Issuance or disposition of a notice of infraction shall not limit or preclude any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter.
1.22.060 Notice of Civil Infraction—Response.
A. Response. A person who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such notice as provided in this section within 15 days of the date of the notice. If the response is mailed, it must be postmarked not later than midnight of the day the response is due.
B. Uncontested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does not contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the notice of infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. A check or money order in the amount of the penalty prescribed for the civil infraction must be submitted with the response. The clerk of the court may accept cash in payment for a civil infraction. When a response that does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate order is entered into the court’s records.
C. Contested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction wishes to contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it to the court, either by mail or in person. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 13
be earlier than 14 days nor more than 90 days from the date of notice of the hearing, except by agreement.
D. Failure to Respond or Appear. The court shall enter a default judgment assessing the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil infraction if a person issued a notice of infraction fails to respond or appear as provided in this section.
1.22.070 Infraction—Hearings.
A. Rules of Procedure. Procedures for the conduct of all hearings provided in this chapter are those established by the Washington State Supreme Court in the IRLJ.
B. Counsel. A person subject to proceedings under this chapter may be represented by counsel. The attorney representing the City may appear in any proceedings under this chapter, but need not appear, notwithstanding a statute or rule of court to the contrary.
C. Contested Determination.
1. A hearing held to contest the determination that an infraction has been committed shall be without a jury.
2. The court may consider the notice of infraction and any sworn statements submitted by the authorized representative who issued and served the notice in lieu of his or her personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the notice may subpoena witnesses, including the authorized representative who has issued and served the notice, and has the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.
3. The burden of proof is on the City to establish the commission of the infraction by a preponderance of evidence.
4. After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall determine whether the infraction was committed. If it has not been established that the infraction was committed, an order dismissing the notice shall be entered in the court’s records. If it has been established that a civil infraction has been committed, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court’s records.
5. An appeal from the court’s determination or order shall be to the superior court in the manner provided by the Rules for Appeal of Decisions of Courts of Limited Jurisdiction. The decision of the superior court is subject only to discretionary review pursuant to the Rules of Appellate Procedure.
1.22.080 Infraction—Penalties.
A. Monetary Penalties Assessed. Unless otherwise specifically provided in connection with particular sections, chapters, or titles of the City code, violations of the City code shall be a civil infraction subject to a maximum penalty of $5,000.00 per offense. Each and every calendar day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person shall constitute a separate offense.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 14
B. Monetary Penalties Payable Immediately. A monetary penalty imposed by the court under this chapter is immediately payable. If the penalty is not paid, the City may proceed to collect the penalty in the same manner as other civil judgments and may notify the City Attorney of the failure to pay.
C. Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to a notice of infraction does not relieve the person to whom the notice was issued of the duty to correct the violation.
D. Restitution. The court may also order a person found to have committed a civil infraction to make restitution.
1.22.090 Infraction—Order, Modification, Fees.
A. An order entered after the receipt of a response that does not contest the determination, or after it has been established at a hearing that the civil infraction was committed is civil in nature.
B. The court may not waive, reduce, or suspend the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil infraction.
C. Each party to a civil infraction case is responsible for costs incurred by that party.
1.22.100 Administrative Notice and Order to Correct Civil Violation.
A. Issuance. When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may issue an administrative notice and order to correct civil violation (“notice and order”) to the person responsible for the violation.
B. Content. The notice and order shall include the following:
1. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;
2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;
3. A brief description of the violation(s), including a citation of the applicable City regulation(s);
4. The name of the citing officer;
5. The required corrective action and a date by which the correction must be completed;
6. A statement that the person to whom the notice and order is directed may appeal the notice and order pursuant to EMC 1.22.110;
7. A statement that if the violation is not corrected and the notice and order is not appealed, the determination is final and a monetary penalty shall be assessed
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 15
in an amount per day for each violation for each day the violation continues following the date set for correction;
8. A statement advising that, if any of the work is not commenced or completed within the time specified in the notice and order, the City may proceed to abate the violation, cause work to be done, and assess the costs and expenses of abatement incurred by the City against the person responsible for the violation, and that the City may take any other legal action.
C. Service. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice and order upon the person responsible for the violation, either personally or by mailing a copy by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such person at his or her last known address. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be personally served within Grant County and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the notice and order conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made and, if by posting, the facts showing the attempts to serve the person personally or by mail.
D. Optional Recording Procedure. The City may, at its discretion, record a notice and order to correct civil violation against the subject property.
E. Extension and Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the City if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation, but unforeseen circumstances delay correction under the original conditions and the responsible person provides the request in writing clearly establishing the need for such an extension.
F. Monetary Penalty. The assessment of a two hundred fifty dollar ($250) monetary penalty per day up to a sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall commence beginning on the day the correction was to be completed. Civil penalties, in whole or in part, may be waived by the City Administrator or his or her designee if the code violations which formed the basis for the civil violation have been corrected, and the City Administrator or his or her designee finds that compelling reasons justify waiver of all or part of the outstanding civil penalties.
G. Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this section does not relieve the person to whom the notice and order was issued of the duty to correct the violation.
H. Declaration of Compliance. When the violation has been corrected and the penalty paid, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a declaration of compliance which shall so state, and shall also indicate the date upon which the violation was fully corrected, beyond which no further penalty shall accrue. If the City previously recorded the notice and order against the subject property, then it shall also record the declaration of compliance.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 16
1.22.110 Administrative Notice and Order—Administrative Appeal.
A. Any Notice of Violation and Order to Correct or Cease Activity issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be appealable to the City Administrator or designee. Any dispute as to whether or not a violation for which a Notice of Violation and Order to Correct or Cease Activity has been issued has been resolved so as to comply with the underlying city standard shall be appealable to the City Administrator or designee so long as such appeal is filed before the penalty sum has reached five thousand dollars ($5,000).
B. How to Appeal. A person to whom a notice and order is issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the City Administrator by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 calendar days from the date of service of the notice and order. The written appeal notice must contain at a minimum the following information:
1. A brief statement of what is being appealed;
2. A statement of the relief sought and the reasons why the city official's determination should be reversed, modified or set aside;
3. The property owner's or violator's current address;
4. Identification of any witness testimony, photographs, or documentary evidence to be presented; and
5. A statement or verification under penalty of perjury, made by the appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal, pursuant to RCW 9A. 72.085.
C. Effect of Appeal. The timely filing of an appeal pursuant to this section shall stay the requirement for action specified in the notice and order that is the subject of the appeal. The monetary penalty for a continuing violation does not continue to accrue during the pendency of the appeal.
D. Effect of Failure to Appeal. The violation shall be deemed committed, the notice and order shall become the final administrative order, and the monetary penalties assessed shall be immediately due and subject to collection if (a) an appeal is not filed within 14 calendar days after the notice and order was served, or (b) an appeal was timely filed, but the appellant or his or her representative failed to appear at the hearing.
E. Appeal Hearing. The City Administrator, or his or her designee if he or she is unavailable, shall schedule the initial appeal hearing within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of the written notice requesting the initial appeal hearing, and conduct the hearing within forty-five (45) calendar days. The City Administrator or designee shall apply the evidentiary standard of beyond a preponderance of the evidence and shall issue a written determination affirming, modifying, or rescinding the city official's determination. A copy of his or her decision shall be provided to the property owner or violator requesting the initial appeal hearing by mailing to the address provided in subsection (B)(3) above. (Ord. 17-04, 2017; Ord. 18-17, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 17
1.22.120 Administrative Notice and Order—Hearing Examiner Appeal.
A. Any Notice of Violation and Order to Correct or Cease Activity issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and affirmed or modified by the City Administrator or designee or decision of the City Administrator or designee regarding compliance with any Notice of Violation and Order to Correct or Cease Activity shall be appealable to the Hearing Examiner by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date or mailing of the City Administrator’s or designee’s written decision.
B. Effect of Appeal. The timely filing of an appeal pursuant to this section shall stay the requirement for action specified in the notice and order that is the subject of the appeal. The monetary penalty for a continuing violation does not continue to accrue during the pendency of the appeal; however, the Hearing Examiner may impose a daily monetary penalty from the date of service of the notice and order if he or she finds that the appeal is frivolous or intended solely to delay compliance.
C. Effect of Failure to Appeal. The violation shall be deemed committed, the notice and order shall become the final administrative order, and the monetary penalties assessed shall be immediately due and subject to collection if (a) no appeal is timely filed within the time limits set forth above after the notice and order was issued, or (b) an appeal was timely filed, but the appellant or his or her representative failed to appear at the hearing.
1.22.130 Administrative Notice and Order—Appeal—Hearing Examiner Hearing.
A. Date of Hearing. Within 10 days of the Clerk’s receipt of the appeal, the Hearing Examiner shall set a public hearing for a date within 45 days of the Clerk’s receipt of the appeal, unless a longer period is agreed to between the parties.
B. Notice of Hearing. The Clerk shall cause a notice of the appeal hearing to be posted on the property that is the subject of the notice and order, and mailed to the appellant and the complainant, if not anonymous, at least 10 calendar days before the hearing. The notice shall contain the following:
1. The file number and a brief description of the matter being appealed;
2. A statement of the scope of the appeal, including a summary of the errors alleged and the findings and/or legal conclusions disputed in the appeal;
3. The date, time and place of the public hearing on the appeal;
4. A statement of who may participate in the appeal; and
5. A statement of how to participate in the appeal.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 18
C. Conduct of Hearing. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct the hearing on the appeal pursuant to Chapter 2.44 MMC and the rules of procedure of the Hearing Examiner.
1.22.140 Administrative Notice and Order—Appeal—Hearing Examiner Decision.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall determine whether the City has established by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the required correction is reasonable and shall affirm, vacate, or modify the City’s decisions regarding the alleged violation and/or the required corrective action, with or without written conditions.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall issue an order to the person responsible for the violation which contains the following information:
1. The decision regarding the alleged violation including findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in support of the decision;
2. The required corrective action;
3. The date by which the correction must be completed;
4. The monetary penalties assessed based on the provisions of this chapter;
5. The date after which the City may proceed with abatement of the unlawful condition if the required correction is not completed.
C. Assessment of Monetary Penalty. Monetary penalties assessed by the Hearing Examiner shall be in accordance with the monetary penalty schedule in MMC 1.22.110(6).
D. Abatement. Where action to abate the violation is required, the hearing examiner shall give substantial weight to the City’s determination regarding the nature of any such action required, and whether such action has been satisfactorily performed.
E. Notice of Decision. The hearing examiner shall mail a copy of the decision, including findings of fact, conclusions, and order, to the applicable department director within 14 working days of the hearing. The City shall forward a copy of the decision to the appellant no later than two working days after its receipt of the decision.
F. Judicial Review. Judicial review of a decision by the Hearing Examiner may be sought by any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision, pursuant to the provisions of the Land Use Petition Act, Chapter 36.70C RCW, if applicable, or other applicable authority, if any, if the petition or complaint seeking review is filed and served on all parties within 21 days of the date of the decision. For purposes of this section, “aggrieved or adversely affected” shall have the meaning set forth in RCW 36.70C.060(2).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 19
G. Effect of Decision. If judicial review is not obtained, the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall constitute the final decision of the City, and the failure to comply with the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall constitute a civil violation punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000. In addition to civil penalties pursuant to this subsection, the City may pursue collection and abatement as provided in this chapter.
1.22.150 Voluntary Correction Agreement.
A. Content. When the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he or she may enter into a voluntary correction agreement with the person responsible for the violation. The voluntary correction agreement is a written contract prepared by the City and the person responsible for the violation, under which such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:
1. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;
2. The street address or other description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;
3. A description of the violation(s) and a reference to the regulation(s) which has been violated;
4. The necessary corrective action to be taken, and the date by which the correction must be completed;
5. An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement;
6. The amount of the civil penalty that will be imposed pursuant to this section if the voluntary compliance agreement is not satisfied; and
7. An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that if the City determines that the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the City may impose any remedy authorized by this chapter, including:
a. Assessment of civil penalties identified in the voluntary correction agreement;
b. Abatement of the violation;
c. Assessment of all costs and expenses incurred by the City to pursue code enforcement and to abate the violation, including legal and incidental expenses; and
d. Suspension, revocation, or limitation of a developmental permit.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 20
8. A statement that the person responsible for the violation waives the right to a hearing.
B. Right to a Hearing Waived. In consideration of the City’s agreement to enter into a voluntary correction agreement, the person responsible for the violation shall have no right to an administrative or judicial hearing, under this chapter or otherwise, regarding the matter of the violation and/or the required corrective action.
C. Extension and Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the City if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation, but unforeseen circumstances delay correction under the original conditions and the responsible person provides the request in writing clearly establishing the need for such an extension.
D. Monetary Penalty. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each violation per day or portion thereof. Civil penalties, in whole or in part, may be waived by the City Administrator or his or her designee if the code violations which formed the basis for the civil violation have been corrected, and the City Administrator or his or her designee finds that compelling reasons justify waiver of all or part of the outstanding civil penalties.
1.22.160 Stop Work Orders. Whenever a continuing violation of this chapter will materially impair the Code Enforcement Officer’s ability to secure compliance with this chapter, or when the continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop work order specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. Any violation of a stop work order is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means as may be available. The costs, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees, for the injunction or abatement shall be recovered by the City from the owner, tenant, occupant, manager, agent, or other responsible person in the manner provided by law.
1.22.170 Emergency Orders. Whenever any use or activity in violation of the Ephrata Municipal Code immediately threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be corrected. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not corrected within the time specified is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the City is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means as may be available. The cost of such injunction or abatement, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees, shall be recovered from the owner, tenant, occupant, manager, agent, or other person responsible in the manner provided by law.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 21
1.22.180 Abatement by the City.
A. The City may abate a condition which was caused by or continues to be a civil violation or civil infraction when:
1. The terms of the voluntary correction agreement pursuant to this chapter have not been met; or
2. An administrative notice and order has been issued, the period for filing an appeal with the City Administrator has expired, and the required correction has not been completed; or
3. An administrative notice and order has been issued, a timely appeal was filed, the appellant failed to appear at the scheduled hearing or a hearing was held as provided in this chapter and the required correction has not been completed by the date specified by the decision of the City Administrator or order of the Hearing Examiner; or
4. The condition is subject to abatement as provided for in RCW 35.21.310 and subsection (C) below. (Ord. 17-07, 2017)
5. The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in this chapter or other provisions of City or State law.
B. Summary Abatement. When a violation of a regulation causes a condition, the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate and emergent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment, the City may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.
C. Abatement of Obstructing, Overhanging, Dead, or Hazardous Vegetation. When a hazardous condition described in RCW 35.21.310 exists upon property located within the city, the city council may initiate proceedings against the landowner by resolution, passage of which shall not occur until at least five (5) days’ prior written notice has been provided to the landowner. The resolution shall describe the subject property and the hazardous condition(s), and shall require the landowner to remove or destroy the same by the deadline established therein, which shall be not less than ten (10) days from the date of passage of the resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be provided to the landowner following passage. If the landowner fails to remove or destroy the hazardous condition(s) identified in the resolution by the deadline established therein, the city may cause the removal or destruction of such condition(s). Any costs incurred by the city shall become a charge to the landowner and a lien against the subject property. Notice of the lien herein authorized shall as nearly as practicable be in substantially the same form, filed with the same officer within the same time and manner, and enforced and foreclosed as is provided by law for liens for labor and materials. (Ord. 17-07, 2017)
D. Authorized Action by the City. Using any lawful means, the City may enter upon the subject property and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 22
abatement. The City may seek judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.
E. Recovery of Costs and Expenses. All costs incurred by the City in correcting the violation shall be billed to the person responsible for the violation and/or the owner, lessor, tenant, or other person entitled to use and/or have control of the property, and shall become due and payable to the City within 10 calendar days. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, the following expenses:
1. “Legal expenses” which shall include, but are not limited to:
a. Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney’s fees and all costs incurred by the City Attorney’s office or its designee to abate nuisances and code violations;
b. Actual and incidental expenses and costs incurred by the City in preparing notices, contracts, court pleadings, and all other necessary documents required to abate nuisances and code violations; and
c. All costs associated with retention and use of expert witnesses and consultants during the course of abatement.
2. “Abatement expenses” which shall include, but are not limited to:
a. Costs incurred by the City for preparation of notices, contracts, and related documents necessary to abate nuisances and code violations;
b. All costs associated with inspection of the property and monitoring of said property consistent with correction orders issued by the City’s Hearing Examiner or a court of competent jurisdiction;
c. All costs incurred by the City for hauling, storage, disposal, or removal of vegetation, trash, debris, dangerous structures or structures unfit for human habitation, potential vermin habitat, potential fire hazards, junk vehicles, obstructions to public rights-of-way, and setback obstructions; and
d. All costs incurred by law enforcement or related enforcement agencies necessary to assist the City during abatement of nuisances or code violations.
1.22.190 Additional Code Enforcement Procedures. The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to other code enforcement provisions authorized by the Ephrata Municipal Code or other applicable law or regulation.
1.22.200 Interference. Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the City or its agents, or with a person responsible for a violation, any of whom are engaged in performing duties imposed by this chapter, shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable by a fine of up to $5,000.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 23
1.22.210 Collection of Monetary Penalties. The monetary penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom a notice of civil infraction or notice and order is directed. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid to the City within 10 calendar days from the date of mailing of the court’s decision, Hearing Examiner’s decision, or a notice from the City that penalties are due. Any such monetary penalty shall further constitute a lien against the affected real property. The City attorney is authorized to take all actions available to collect the monetary penalty.
1.22.220 Lien—Authorized.
A. The City of Ephrata shall have a lien for any monetary penalty imposed, the cost of any abatement proceedings under this chapter, and all related costs including attorney and expert witness fees, against the real property on which the monetary penalty was imposed or any of the abatement work was performed. The lien shall be subordinate to all previously existing special assessment liens imposed on the same property and shall be superior to all other liens, except for State and County taxes, with which it shall be on parity.
B. The City shall cause a claim for lien to be filed for record within 90 days from the later of the date that the monetary penalty is due, or the date the work is completed or the violation abated.
C. The claim of lien shall contain sufficient information regarding the civil violation, as determined by the City, a description of the property to be charged with the lien and the owner of record, and the total amount of the lien.
D. Any such claim of lien shall be verified by the City, and may be amended from time to time to reflect changed conditions.
1.22.230 Right of Entry. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter upon property or premises at any reasonable time to determine whether a civil violation has occurred or is occurring, or to enforce any provision of the Ephrata Municipal Code or any City regulation, violation of which is a civil violation under this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer may make examinations, surveys, and studies as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duties. These may include the taking of photographs, digital images, videotapes, video images, audio recordings, samples, or other physical evidence. If the premises are occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first present credentials and request entry. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses entry, the City may seek an administrative or criminal search warrant.
1.22.240 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of the Ephrata Municipal Code or City ordinance providing for a civil penalty, the more specific provision shall apply.
1.22.250 Adoption of certain other laws. To the extent that any provision of the Grant County Code, or any other law, rule or regulation referenced in the enforcement code, is necessary or convenient to establish the validity, enforceability or interpretation of the enforcement code, then such provision of the Grant County Code, or other law, rule or regulation, is hereby adopted by reference.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 - 24
(Ord. 08-20, 2008; Ord. 11-05, 2011; Ord. 15-24, 2015)
1. For statutory provisions authorizing cities and towns to codify their ordinances and/or resolutions, see RCW 35.21.500--35.21.570.
2. For statutory provisions authorizing prosecution, fines and penalties, see
RCW 35.24.290 (12) and RCW 35.24.230.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 1
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:
2.04 City Council
2.05 City Administrator
2.07 Departmental Organization
2.08 Bonds
2.09 Park and Recreation Commission
2.10 Recreation Department
2.12 Office Hours
2.14 Public Works Department
2.16 Planning and Community Development Department
2.21 Planning Commission
2.23 Police Civil Service
2.25 Firemen's Civil Service
2.37 Fire Department
2.44 Retirements and Pensions
2.46 Qualified Pension Plan
2.56 Police Department
2.58 City Attorney
2.61 City Clerk
2.68 Indemnification
2.72 Municipal Court Judges
2.84 Public Corporations
2.90 Ephrata Recreational Center Use Restrictions
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 2
Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:
2.04.010 Meetings.
2.04.020 Council Compensation
2.04.030 Mayor's Compensation
2.04.040 Ordinance Enactment Procedure
2.04.050 Mayor - Duties Generally
2.04.060 Appointments by Mayor
2.04.070 Council Rules
2.04.080 Accepting Donations Procedure
2.04.010 Meetings. The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each month at seven p.m. at the city hall unless the first or third Wednesday fall on a holiday, in which case the regular meeting shall be held on the next business day following the holiday at seven p.m. (Ord. 90-4, 1990).
2.04.020 Council Compensation. Each city council member other than the mayor shall be paid two ($200.00) per month.
2.04.030 Mayor's Compensation. The mayor shall be paid five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. (Ord. 95-17, 1995)
2.04.040 Ordinance Enactment Procedure. Ordinances shall be read by title only unless the ordinance has been placed on the consent agenda for consideration; provided that should a council member in attendance at the time the consent agenda is considered desire to remove an ordinance from the consent agenda, that request shall be granted. (Ord. 92-12, 1992)
2.04.050 Mayor - Duties Generally
A. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council, shall report to the council concerning the affairs of the City and its financial and other needs, and shall make recommendations for council consideration and action.
B. The Mayor shall be the official and ceremonial head of the City and shall represent the City on ceremonial occasion.
(Ord. 96-16, 1996)(Ord. 02-13, 2002)
2.04.060 Appointments by Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, and he is authorized to appoint, subject to conformation by the City Council, members of the following
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 3
commissions:
A. Planning Commission. (Ord. 96-16, 1996)
B. Parks & Recreation Commission (Ord. 12-08, 2012)
2.04.070 Council Rules.
(A) The Council has the statutory power to organize and regulate its internal affairs and shall determine its rules of proceedings. Pursuant to this authority, the Council will adopt its rules of proceedings by motion or resolution. Violation of the rules of proceedings shall constitute disorderly conduct by such member.
(B) RCW 35.23.270, as now enacted or hereafter amended, is adopted by reference. (Ord. 02-26, 2002)
2.04.080 Accepting Donations Procedure.
The Ephrata City Council shall accept all donations of all property and/or money by motion and affirmative vote of the majority of the Council present, and in accordance with Policy 9030 and RCW 32.21.100. (Ord. 12-08, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 4
Chapter 2.05
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Sections:
2.05.010 City Administrator-Office created
2.05.020 Administrator and assistant executive
2.05.030 Duties
2.05.040 Compensation
2.05.010 City Administrator-Office created. There is created the office of City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and may be removed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the whole council prior to termination. The City, at its discretion, may specify additional terms and conditions of the City Administrator’s employment in a written agreement executed by the Mayor and approved by a majority of the whole City Council. (Ord. 13-03, 2013)
2.05.020 Administrator and assistant executive. The City Administrator shall be and act as the administrator and assistant executive of the city, under the direction and authority of the Mayor.
2.05.030 Duties. The City Administrator shall assist the Mayor in the performance of their duties in the administration of the city government. The City Administrator shall oversee the various departments as directed by the Mayor, and shall act as the liaison between the Mayor, City Council and various city offices, departments, commissions and boards. In addition, and not as a limitation upon the powers and duties of the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall be charged with the following responsibilities.
A. To attend all meetings of the City Council and such other meetings as may be suggested by the Mayor;
B. To recommend for adoption by the Mayor and/or the City Council such measures as the Administrator may deem necessary or expedient;
C. To prepare and submit to the Mayor and City Council such reports as may be required by them or as the Administrator may deem advisable;
D. To keep the Mayor and City Council fully advised of the financial condition of the city and its future needs and to assist in the preparation and submission to the Mayor and City Council a tentative budget for each fiscal year.
E. Shall serve as personnel officer of the city and evaluate city employees, under the direction of the Mayor.
F. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 5
administration of government of the city and regarding the services maintained by public utilities in the city, to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; and
G. To assist the Mayor generally in conducting the city’s business in all matters, and perform such other duties and assume such other responsibilities as the Mayor may direct, and as by ordinances and resolutions of the City Council may be required. (Ord. 13-03, 2013)
2.05.040 Compensation. Compensations for the City Administrator shall be set by the City Council and shall be provided for annually in the city budget. (Ord. 02-14, 2002)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 6
Chapter 2.07
Departmental Organization
Sections:
2.07.005 Purpose of Chapter
2.07.010 Departmental heads-enumerated.
2.07.020 Appointment
2.07.030 Removal
2.07.005 Purpose of Chapter. The intent of the City in the adoption of this chapter is to provide to those personnel of the City who are without the protection of either the police or fire civil service systems and who hold executive positions, a job security and protection from removal from their position with the City. The job protection afforded the department heads designated below is to be considered a form of civil service for the purposes of RCW 35A.12.090. (Ord. 13-04, 2013)
2.07.010 Departmental heads-enumerated. The City shall be organized into departments which shall be directed by heads. There shall be the following department heads: City Administrator, Police Chief, Public Works Director, Planning and Community Development Director, Recreation/Public Relations Director, Attorney, Clerk/Treasurer, and Fire Chief. (Ord. 13-04, 2013)
2.07.020 Appointment. All department heads shall be appointed positions. The council may determine that certain positions be filled pursuant to a contractual relationship. For those positions, the employment contract shall be negotiated by the mayor and approved by a majority of the whole city council. All department heads shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be confirmed by a majority of the whole council before assuming office. (Ord. 13-04, 2013)
2.07.030 Removal. The department heads shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and the City Council. The Mayor may recommend removal, with or without cause, of any of the department heads listed above. Such recommendation shall require the confirmation of a majority vote of the whole council before becoming effective. The Mayor shall have the power to suspend any of the above listed department heads pending a vote by the City Council upon the Mayor’s recommendation of removal. (Ord. 02-15, 2002, Ord 03-16, 2003, Ord. 05-02, 2005, Ord. 13-04, 2013)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 7
Chapter 2.08
BONDS
Sections:
2.08.010 Bonds of City officials. (Ord 93-38, 1993)
2.08.010 City officials. The following city officials shall before entering upon their duties, execute a bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices, in the penal sum, as follows:
City clerk-treasurer ............. $100,000.00
Police chief ........................ 100,000.00
(Ord. 400 §1, 1953) (Ord 93-38, 1993).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 8
Chapter 2.09
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:
2.09.010 Commission Established
2.09.020 Membership
2.09.025 Removal
2.09.030 Meetings
2.09.040 Duties of Commission
2.09.050 Subcommittees
2.09.010 Commission Established: There is created a Park and Recreation Commission for the City, consisting of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council, from citizens of recognized ability who reside within the corporate limits of the City, the boundaries of the City’s urban growth area, and/or the boundaries of the Ephrata School District #165. (Ord. 04-32, 2004)
2.09.020 Membership: Each member shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. Upon vacancy by death, resignation, or other cause, the Mayor shall fill the vacancy by appointing a member, with consent of the council, for the unexpired portion of the term.
2.09.025 Removal: A member may be removed for cause during his or her term upon a recommendation from the Mayor and the affirmative majority vote of the Council sitting with a quorum. If a member is absent from two (2) meetings per year without excuse, excuses being permitted for personal or family illness and vacations, cause exists for removal. The member wishing to be excused from a meeting must notify the secretary to the Commission prior to the meeting. The absence shall be announced and the reason therefor at the time roll call is taken at the meeting and shall be recorded as excused in the minutes of the meeting, if minutes are taken.
2.09.030 Meetings: The Park and Recreation Commission shall devote such time as may be necessary to properly discharge all duties developing upon them, and they shall serve without compensation. The Commission members shall appoint from among themselves a chairman and vice-chairman whose terms shall run for one (1) year, from the first meeting of the Commission after the first of the year until a new chairman and vice-chairman are appointed in the subsequent year. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and an affirmative majority vote shall be necessary to carry any
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 9
proposition. A meeting of the Commission shall be held at least once each month.
2.09.040 Duties of Commission: The Commission shall advise the Mayor, the City Council, the City Administrator, or officials administering parks and recreation, regarding the parks and recreation facilities and programs of the city. The Commission shall also make recommendations pertaining to the following matters:
A. Cultural activities that will employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive and wholesome manner;
B. Control and supervision of all parks belonging to the city, with reference to planning, promotion, management, acquisition, construction, development, maintenance, and operation thereof, compensation to be paid for concessions or privileges in parks or playgrounds, either within or without the city limits and/or municipally owner recreational facilities, including community buildings;
C. Advisability of entering into written contracts with the United States or any other governmental organization for the purpose of conducting a recreational program or exercising any other power granted by this chapter;
D. Promote tourism within the City of Ephrata and coordinate with adjacent communities, local/state tourism boards.
(Ord. 01-02, 2001) (Ord 01-18, 2001)(Ord. 02-17, 2002)
2.09.050 Subcommittees. The Park and Recreation Commission is authorized to establish subcommittees for the purpose of assisting the Commission in fulfilling its responsibility to advise the mayor, city council, city administrator, parks and recreation department and other city departments with respect to park and recreation facilities and programs of the city. These subcommittees shall be advisory to the Commission. At least one Commission member shall be assigned to each subcommittee; however, no more than three Commission members may be assigned to any one subcommittee. Appointments to any subcommittee shall be by the mayor with council approval.
(Ord. 05-11, 2005)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 10
Chapter 2.10
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Sections:
2.10.010 Established
2.10.020 Powers and Duties
2.10.030 Appointment and Duties of Director
2.10.010 Established. There is established a Recreation Department in the City.
(Ord. 96-18, 1996).
2.10.020 Powers and Duties. The Recreation Department shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for effective administration and shall have all the powers and perform such other duties as provided by state laws, this code, ordinances, resolutions and direction of the Mayor and/or his designee.
(Ord. 96-18, 1996)(Ord.02-16, 2002)
2.10.030 Appointment and Duties of Director.
(A) The Mayor shall appoint the Recreation Director pursuant to EMC section 2.07.020. (Ord. 02-16, 2002)
(B) The Director shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for management of the Recreation Department, supervision of any departmental personnel, and for the effective administration, construction and development of the public recreation system. (Ord. 96-18, 1996)(Ord. 02-16, 2002).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 11
Chapter 2.12
OFFICE HOURS
Sections:
2.12.010 Designated.
2.12.010 Designated. City offices shall be kept open to the public for the transaction of any city business between the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m. each day of the week, excepting Saturday and Sunday and legal holidays. (Ord. 91-4, 1991)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 12
Chapter 2.14
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Sections:
2.14.010 Established
2.14.020 Powers and Duties
2.14.030 Appointment and Duties of Director
2.14.010 Established. There is established a Public Works Department in the city.
2.14.020 Powers and Duties. The Public Works Department shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for effective administration and shall have all the powers and perform such other duties as provided by state laws, this code, ordinances, resolutions and the direction of the Mayor and/or his designee. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the city streets, water and sewer system, garbage utility and engineering. Engineering services may be provided by consultant contracts entered into by the Mayor and/or his designee if such costs are authorized by the city=s budget. (Ord. 02-18, 2002).
2.14.030 Appointment and Duties of Director.
(A) The Mayor shall appoint the Public Works Director pursuant to EMC section 2.07.020. (Ord 02-18, 2002)
(B) The Director shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for management of the Public Works Department, supervision of departmental personnel, and for the effective administration, construction and development of public works and related public facilities. (Ord. 96-28, 1996; Ord.02-18,2002)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 13
Chapter 2.16
PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Sections:
2.16.010 Established
2.16.020 Powers and Duties
2.16.030 Appointment and Duties of Director
2.16.010 Established. There is established a Planning and Community Development Department in the city.
2.16.020 Powers and Duties. The Planning and Community Development Department shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for effective administration and shall have all the powers and perform such other duties as provided by state laws, this code, ordinances, resolutions and the direction of the Mayor and/or his designee. The Planning and Community Development Department shall be responsible for planning, zoning, land use and community development. (Ord. 02-19, 2002)
2.16.030 Appointment and Duties of Director.
(A) The Mayor shall appoint pursuant to EMC section 2.07.020, the Senior Planner who shall be the director of the Planning and Community Development Department.
(B) The Senior Planner shall be responsible to the Mayor and/or his designee for management of the Planning and Community Development Department, supervision of department personnel, and for planning, zoning, land use and community development.(Ord. 96-27, 1996)(Ord. 02-19, 2002)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 14
Chapter 2.21
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:
2.21.010 Members - Appointment
2.21.020 Removal
2.21.030 Powers and Authority
2.21.040 Recommendations on Proposed Legislation
2.21.050 Approval of Plats
2.21.060 Secretary
2.21.070 Quorum
2.21.010 Members-Appointment. The Planning Commission of the city shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. The Planning Commission members shall appoint from among themselves a chairman and vice-chairman whose terms shall run for one year, from the first meeting of the Planning Commission after the first year until chairman and vice-chairman are appointed in the subsequent year. The terms of office of the Commission members now serving are hereby confirmed. At the expiration of the terms of existing Commission members, their successors shall be appointed for a term which shall expire on December 31st of the sixth year after appointment.
2.21.020 Removal. A member may be removed for cause during his or her term upon a recommendation from the Mayor and the affirmative majority vote of the City Council sitting with a quorum. If a member is absent from four (4) meetings per year without excuse, excuses being permitted for personal or family illness, and vacations, cause exists for removal. The member wishing to be excused from a meeting must notify the secretary to the Planning Commission prior to the meeting. The absence shall be announced and the reason as excused in the minutes of the meeting, if minutes are taken.
2.21.030 Powers and Authority: The Planning Commission shall have all of the powers and perform each and all of the duties of a planning agency as specified in RCW Chapter 35A.63, together with any other duties or authority which may hereafter be conferred upon them by the laws of the state, the performance of such duties and the exercise of such authority to be subject to such and all the limitations expressed in each legislative enactment or enactments.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 15
2.21.040 Recommendations on Proposed Legislation: The City Council may refer to the Commission, for its recommendation and report, any ordinance, resolution, or other proposal relating to any of the matters and subjects referred to in RCW Chapter 35A.63, and the Commission shall promptly report to the Council thereon, making such recommendation and giving such counsel as it may deem proper in the premises.
2.21.050 Approval of Plats: All major plats or plans of subdivisions of land within the city, as well as dedications of streets, alleys, and other public spaces, shall be submitted to the Commission as provided in RCW Chapter 58.17
(Ord. 98-19, 1998)
2.21.060 Secretary The Commission may designate one of its members to act as secretary without salary, or if requested by the Commission, the City Administrator shall designate a member of the paid staff of the city to serve as such secretary, any person so designated by the City Administrator to serve without additional compensation. (Ord. 02-20, 2002)
2.21.070 Quorum: A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any action taken by a majority of those present at any regular or special meeting of the Commission is deemed and taken as the action of the Commission.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 16
Chapter 2.23
POLICE CIVIL SERVICE
Sections:
2.23.010 Ephrata Civil Service System
2.23.020 Civil Service Commission
2.23.030 Term
2.23.040 Powers and Duties
2.23.050 Powers
2.23.010 Ephrata Civil Service System pursuant to the authority conferred upon the City of Ephrata by RCW 41.12.010, there is recreated and there shall exist a Civil Service system, which will have rules and/or regulations which substantially accomplish the purposes of state law concerning among other things but not limited to the selection, appointment, and employment of individuals in the Police Department of the City, except for the position of Police Chief and a number of additional positions designated as the unclassified service, which are excluded by the authority contained in RCW 41.12.050, and further, specifically excepting to the extent permitted by law reservist and part time positions in the Police Department. (Ord. 90-1, 1990, Ord. 96-10, 1996, Ord. 17-08, 2017).
2.23.020 Civil Service Commission. The Civil Service Commission shall be composed of three members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve without compensation. No person shall be appointed a member of such commission who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of such city for at least three years immediately preceding such appointment, and an elector of the county wherein he resides. All members of the Civil Service Commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 90-1, 1990, Ord. 96-10, 1996, Ord. 02-21, 2002).
2.23.030 Term. The term of the Civil Service Commission's Commissioners shall be six years. (Ord. 90-1, 1990)
2.23.040 Powers and Duties. The Civil Service Commission, upon appointment qualification and organization shall hold meetings, adopt rules and regulations, perform duties and exercise powers in compliance with this chapter for covered commissioned police officers and specifically excepting the position of Police Chief, designated unclassified service positions, and to the extent permitted by law all reservist and part-time positions. (Ord. 90-1, 1990, Ord. 96-10, 1996, Ord. 17-08, 2017).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 17
2.23.050 Powers. The Civil Service Commission shall be aware of RCW Chapter 41.12 in its decisions but it shall have the power to make variances in the procedures and time limits set forth in state law to accomplish specific local purposes. (Ord. 90-1, 1990)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 18
Chapter 2.25
FIREMEN'S CIVIL SERVICE
Sections:
2.25.020 Ephrata Civil Service System
2.25.020 Civil Service Commission-Powers and Duties.
2.25.010 Ephrata Civil Service System pursuant to the authority conferred upon the City of Ephrata by RCW Chapter 41.08.010, there is created a Civil Service System, which will have rules and/or regulations which substantially accomplish the purposes of state law concerning among other things but not limited to the selection, appointment, and employment of individuals in the Fire Department of the city, except for the position of Fire Chief, which is excluded by the authority contained in RCW 41.08.050 and specifically excepting to the extent permitted by law non-commissioned positions in the Fire Department including but not limited to secretaries, clerks, and the like. (Ord. 90-2, 1990, Ord. 96-11, 1996)
2.25.020 Civil Service Commission-Powers and Duties. The Civil Service Commission shall be composed of three members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve without compensation. No person shall be appointed a member of such commission who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of such city for at least three years immediately preceding such appointment, and an elector of the county wherein he or she resides. All members of the Civil Service Commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the City. This Civil Service Commission, upon appointment, qualification and organization, shall hold meetings, perform duties and adopt rules and/or regulations which substantially accomplish the purposed of RCW Chapter 41.08 for covered fire fighters and specifically excepting the position of Fire Chief and to the extent permitted by law all other positions including but not limited to secretaries, clerks, and the like. This Commission is specifically granted the authority and power in the place and stead of the Council to adopt and enforce its rules and/or regulations which substantially accomplish the purpose of this chapter which is in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 90-2, 1990, Ord. 96-11, 1996, Ord. 02-22, 2002).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 19
Chapter 2.37
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sections:
2.37.010 Fire department created.
2.37.020 Chief.
2.37.030 Member acceptability, number.
2.37.040 Duties.
2.37.050 Authority.
2.37.060 Traffic right-of-way.
2.37.070 Vehicle restrictions near fire apparatus.
2.37.080 Right of entry at fire site.
2.37.090 Obedience to fire chief required.
2.37.100 Penalty for violation.
2.37.110 Relief and pension fund--Adoption of state laws.
2.37.120 Enrollment fee for death and disability provisions.
2.37.130 Enrollment fee for pension provisions.
2.37.140 Forfeiture, reinstatement of benefits.
2.37.150 Management, control of relief and pension fund.
2.37.160 Board of trustees duties.
2.37.170 Membership restriction.
2.37.010 Fire department created. There is created a fire department for the city consisting of a chief and volunteer members, who shall apply to and be accepted by the fire chief and confirmed by the mayor and the city council. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.020 Chief.
(a) The fire department shall be under the command of the fire chief.
(b) The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor with the confirmation of the council as provided in this code.
(c) The fire chief shall be the head of the Ephrata fire department and control all fire department operations.
(d) The fire chief shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of the International Fire Code pursuant to RCW 19.27.030, any local codes or ordinances that come under the local jurisdiction of the fire department and any other statutes, ordinances or rules requiring his administration or enforcement,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 20
maintain fire department records and coordinate maintenance programs for fire department equipment.
(e) The fire chief shall work in close cooperation with and receive some direction from the building official/engineer of the city.
(f) The fire chief shall perform such other duties as shall be assigned by the mayor. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987, Ord. 03-17, 2003, Ord. 05-01, 2005)
2.37.030 Member acceptability, number. The number and acceptability of the members of the volunteer fire department shall be determined by the ordinances, resolutions and rules approved by the city council from time to time. (Ord. 87-3 §1 (part), 1987).
2.37.040 Duties. The duties of the fire department shall be to care for all fire equipment and use their best effort to attend and extinguish all fires and such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the city council. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.050 Authority. The volunteer fire department shall have authority to make such rules and regulations as may be consistent with the laws of the state and the ordinances and resolutions of the city, but the same shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief, mayor and council. (Ord. 87-3 §1 (part), 1987).
2.37.060 Traffic right-of-way. The fire department shall have the right-of-way over all traffic on the streets and alleys of the city, and it shall be the duty of every person to clear the streets of their equipment and not to get in the way or hinder the fire department or ambulance service during any fire or while the department or service is going to or coming from a call. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.070 Vehicle restrictions near fire apparatus. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle or a volunteer fireman to follow any fire apparatus proceeding in response to a fire alarm at a distance of less than five hundred feet or to park any vehicle within two hundred feet of any fire apparatus, or in front of or within thirty feet of a fire hydrant, or at any time within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant. (Ord. 87-3 §1 (part) 1987).
2.37.080 Right of entry at fire site. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner or renter to go upon any premises upon which there is a fire without first securing the permission of the fire chief or the member of the fire department in charge of the fire, or to in any way remove any property from the buildings or to open any doors or windows, or to do any act of destruction without first securing such permission. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 21
2.37.090 Obedience to fire chief required. The chief of the fire department or the member in charge shall have authority to command any person to perform any act he desires done in connection with any fire and it is unlawful not to obey any command of such chief or member in charge or to hinder or delay any equipment or to obstruct any member in the performance of duties. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.100 Penalty for violation. Any violation of Section 2.37.010 through 2.37.090 constitutes a violation of this code and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.04.010. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.110 Relief and pension fund--Adoption of state laws. The city adopts the provisions of the applicable laws of the state relative to the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund for the purpose of enabling the members of the volunteer fire department to avail themselves of the benefits of the Volunteer Firemen' s Relief and Pension Fund. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.120 Enrollment fee for death and disability provisions. The city authorizes the payment of the fee of three dollars per member of the fire department per year for the purpose of providing for the enrollment of every fireman under the death and disability provisions of the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.130 Enrollment fee for pension provisions. Any member of the volunteer fire department may enroll under the pension provisions of the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund by applying therefor and by paying to the city an annual fee of twelve dollars. For each fireman so enrolled, the city pays an additional thirteen dollars annually to the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund. All payments made by firemen to the city, and all contributions to the fund made by the city, shall be paid to the state treasury as provided by law. Enrollment under the pension provisions shall include and provide protection for death and disability without any additional payment. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.140 Forfeiture, reinstatement of benefits. Any fireman enrolled under the pension provisions of the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall forfeit his right to participate in the benefits under the act unless he has paid his annual cost of twelve dollars on or before March 1st of each year; providing, however, that where a fireman has forfeited his right to participate in the retirement provisions, he may be reinstated so as to participate to the same extent as if all fees had been paid by the payment of all back fees with interest at the rate of one percent per month, providing he has at all times been otherwise eligible. (Ord. 87-3 §1 (part) 1987).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 22
2.37.150 Management, control of relief and pension fund. The Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall be under the management and control of the board of trustees consisting of the mayor, the city clerk, the fire chief, one councilman, and one member of the fire department chosen annually by the members of the fire department by ballot in the manner prescribed by law. The mayor shall be the chairman of the board, and the city clerk shall be its secretary-treasurer. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987, Ord. 96-22, 1996).
2.37.160 Board of trustees duties. The board of trustees shall determine a regular monthly meeting date and shall meet on that date at the call of the chairman when there is business to come before it. It shall make all rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes for which it is created, and shall in all respects proceed in accordance with and be governed by the terms and provisions of the laws of the state relating to the Volunteer Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
2.37.170 Membership restriction. The membership of the volunteer fire department is limited to a total membership of not to exceed twenty-five firemen for each one thousand population or fraction thereof as determined by the last official census of the city. (Ord. 87-3 §l(part), 1987).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 23
Chapter 2.44
RETIREMENTS AND PENSIONS
Sections:
2.44.010 Employee participation in Social Security System.
2.44.020 Mayor and city clerk action.
2.44.030 Payment provisions.
2.44.040 Authorization of employee participation in State Employees' Retirement System.
2.44.050 Evidence of authorization, approval.
2.44.010 Employee participation is Social Security System. The city council ordains that this municipality become a participant in the Social Security System and that the benefits of old age and survivors' insurance be extended to its employees and officers. (Ord. 337 (part), 1951).
2.44.020 Mayor and City Clerk action. The Mayor and the City Clerk are authorized to execute and deliver to the Washington Department of Employment Security for its approval the plan or plans required under the provisions of RCW 41.48.050 and the Social Security Act to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this municipality and to do all other things necessary to that end. (Ord. 337 (part), 1951, Ord. 96-25, 1996)(Ord. 02-23, 2002).
2.44.030 Payment provisions. The proper fiscal officers are authorized to make all required payments into the contribution fund established by RCW 41.48.050 and to establish such system of payroll deductions from the salaries of employees and officers as may be necessary to their coverage under the old age and survivors' insurance system. (Ord. 337 (part), 1951).
2.44.040 Authorization of employee participation in State Employees' Retirement System. The city authorizes and approves the membership and participation in the State Employees' Retirement System of its eligible employees as provided for by RCW 41.40.020. (Ord. 648 §1, 1961).
2.44.050 Evidence of authorization, approval. The city clerk is directed to transmit a certified copy of Sections 2.44.040 and 2.44.050 to the Retirement Board of the System as evidence of city authorization and approval. (Ord. 648 §2, 1961).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 24
Chapter 2.46
QUALIFIED PENSION PLAN
Sections:
2.46.010 Created.
2.46.020 Benefits--Availability.
2.46.030 Benefits--Accumulation.
2.46.040 Rights--Obligations.
2.46.050 Mayor--Authorization.
2.46.010 Created. There is created and established in the city, a qualified pension plan in the form of a deferred annuity for all eligible employees and officials. (Ord. 851 §1, 1973).
2.46.020 Benefits--Availability. Such pension plan or deferred annuity benefits shall be available to those employees who elect to participate in the plan and who agree to take a reduction in salary in the equivalent amount of the contribution required to be made by the city for and on behalf of each such employee or official. (Ord. 851 §2, 1973).
2.46.030 Benefits--Accumulation. In order to accumulate the appropriate funds to pay participating employees' and officials' benefits in accordance with the deferred compensation plan, the council of the city does authorize and approve the purchase of retirement annuity contracts as issued by Aetna Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company in such amounts as may be appropriate to provide plan benefits. (Ord. 851 §3, 1973).
2.46.040 Rights--Obligations. It is the intention of the city that the premiums paid by the city for such annuity contracts will not currently be considered as income paid to the employees and officials concerned. Thus, the city will own and have all rights under the annuity contracts and such contracts will not be held in any way as collateral security for the fulfilling of any of the obligations of the city, but shall be held as a general, unpledged, and unrestricted asset. (Ord. 851 §4, 1973).
2.46.050 Mayor--Authorization. The council does authorize the mayor of the city to act on its behalf in respect to these annuity contracts and to formulate rules and procedures for the purchase and administration of them. (Ord. 851 §5, 1973).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 25
Chapter 2.56
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sections:
2.56.010 Services and reports--Fee schedule.
2.56.020 Fee Collection and deposit.
2.56.030 Warrants--Fees.
2.56.035 Police force--Definitions.
2.56.040 Duties and powers.
2.56.050 Eligibility for employment.
2.56.060 Chief of police.
2.56.080 Other personnel.
2.56.010 Services and reports--Fee schedule. There is hereby established a schedule of charges for making copies of certain reports and for providing certain services by the Ephrata police department as established in Chapter 3.35 titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services. (Ord 11-12, 2011)
2.56.020 Fee collection and deposit. The Ephrata police department is authorized to collect the fees set forth in Chapter 3.35 titled Fee Schedule and charges for City Services and deposit them in the current expense fund of the city. (Ord. 1069 §2, 1982: Ord. 966 §2, 1978; Ord. 11-12, 2011).
2.56.030 Warrants--Fees. The Ephrata police department shall collect the following official services as established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 11-12, 2011):
(1) For serving an arrest warrant in any action or proceeding;
(2) For each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to or returning from any place of service, or attempting service. (Ord. 90-7, 1990; Ord 11-12, 2011)
2.56.035 Police force--Definitions.
(a) Police Force. The police force of the city of Ephrata shall consist of commissioned police officers and civilian police reserve officers. This chapter shall govern the police force, except the civilian police reserve which shall be governed by Policy 350 of the Ephrata Police Department Policy Manual entitled “Reserve Officer”. (Ord. 11-12, 2011)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 26
(b) Commissioned Police Officers. A commissioned officer is a full-time police officer employed subject to the Ephrata civil service commission.
(Ord. 90-7, 1990; Ord. 11-12, 2011)
2.56.040 Duties and powers.
(a) It is the duty of all police officers governed by this chapter to act under the control and direction of the chief of police. Officers shall assist the chief in maintaining public order and safety and shall obey all lawful orders issued by the chief of police. Officers shall investigate and prosecute violations of city ordinances, as their duties may require or as assigned, which come to the knowledge of the police department. Officers may arrest and pursue violators of city ordinances beyond the city limits as permitted by state law.
(b) All officers shall have all powers invested in them by the chief of police, by city ordinance and by state law while in the performance of their officially authorized duties. Commissioned officers and noncommissioned officers shall have all power invested in them by the chief of police, city ordinance and state law, whether on duty or off duty, unless otherwise limited by the chief of police. (Ord. 1135 §2, 1985: Ord. 1086 §l(part), 1983).
2.56.050 Eligibility for employment.
(a) Employment as a commissioned officer shall be subject to the requirements of the City Civil Service Commission.
(b) Any member of the police force may resign upon notification to the chief of police. Upon separation from the organization, all equipment issued to the resigning police officer by the city must be returned immediately.
(c) All members of the police force shall enter and complete such training courses as the chief of police requires. (Ord. 1086 §l(part), 1983; Ord. 11-12, 2011).
2.56.060 Chief of police. The chief of police is the commanding officer of the Ephrata police department. He/she shall be responsible for establishing a training program, formulating rules and regulations for conduct of members of the police force, prescribing police uniforms and supervising the performance of the police force. The police chief shall select and appoint persons to serve as police reserve officers, and appoint such subordinate officers to serve within the ranks of the police reserve as he deems necessary. (Ord. 90-7, 1990; Ord. 11-12, 2011).
2.56.080 Other personnel. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the chief of police from hiring additional personnel to assist in the efficient administration of the police department. However, no personnel other than police officers set forth in this chapter and Chapter 2.32 of this code shall have law enforcement powers. Police
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 27
administration employees shall serve at the pleasure of the chief of police and they shall obey all lawful orders issued them by the chief of police. (Ord. 90-7, 1990)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 28
Chapter 2.58
CITY ATTORNEY
Sections:
2.58.010 Appointive position.
2.58.020 Duties.
2.58.010 Appointive position. Pursuant to the authority set forth in RCW 35A.12.020, the position of city attorney is an appointed position. The appointment to the position shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the whole City Council. Until a city attorney is appointed on a full or part time basis as a city employee, the city shall enter into a contractual arrangement for such professional services. (Ord. 988 §1,1979, Ord. 96-12, 1996)(Ord. 02-24, 2002).
2.58.020 Duties. The city attorney shall advise members of the city council and the various city officials in all legal matters pertaining to the business of the city and to their respective offices. He shall approve all ordinances as to form. He shall represent the city in all litigation in all courts in which the city is a party or directly interested and shall prosecute all violations of city ordinances. He shall act generally as attorney for the city and the several departments of the city government.
He shall perform such other specialized duties as the city council may from time to time direct. Such duties shall not prohibit the use of a specialized counsel to assist the city attorney in cases of specialized nature upon prior authorization by the city council. (Ord. 988 §2, 1979).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 29
Chapter 2.61
CITY CLERK
Sections:
2.61.010 Clerk’s Powers.
2.61.020 Appointive position.
2.61.030 Duties.
2.61.040 Investments.
2.61.010 Clerk’s Powers. As required by RCW 35A.12.020 there is created the position of
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall exercise and is authorized to carry out all duties
required by state laws, city ordinances, resolutions and the Mayor and/or his
designee. The City Clerk shall be designated as the City Treasurer to perform in that capacity whenever the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city refer to such position.(Ord. 02-25, 2002)
2.61.020 Appointive position. The position of City Clerk is appointed by the Mayor and shall be confirmed by a majority of the whole City Council before assuming office. (Ord.02-25, 2002)
2.61.030 Duties. The City Clerk shall keep a full and true record of every act and proceeding of the City Council and keep such books, accounts and take such reports as may be required by office of State Auditor. The City Clerk shall record all ordinances, annexing thereto his/her certificate giving the number and title of the ordinance, stating that the ordinance was published according to law and that the record is a true and correct copy thereof. The City Clerk shall be custodian of the seal of the city and shall have authority to acknowledge the execution of all instruments by the city which require acknowledgment. The Mayor may appoint deputy clerks to assist in the performance of the duties of the clerk and to act in the absence of the clerk.(Ord.02-25, 2002).
2.61.040 Investments.
(A) RCW Chapter 35.39, as now codified or hereafter amended, provides a city may invest excess funds, may designate an investment official, and may deposit certain investment returns into the current expense fund.
(B) Pursuant to RCW 35.39.032, as now codified or hereafter amended, the City Clerk is authorized to determine the amount of money available in each fund for investment purposes and to make the investments allowed by law. The City Clerk shall make a monthly report of all investment transactions to the Council.
(C) Pursuant to RCW 35.39.034, as now codified or hereafter amended, the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 30
City Clerk is directed to deposit all income derived from investments into current expense fund, except for that income required by the laws of the state of Washington or the United States to be returned to the participating fund. (Ord. 96-26, 1996) (Ord. 04-26, 2004)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 31
Chapter 2.68
INDEMNIFICATION
Sections:
2.68.010 Indemnification of officials and employees.
2.68.010 Indemnification of officials and employees. The city of Ephrata indemnifies and holds personally harmless all of its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents for any action, claim, or proceeding instituted against said individual arising out of the performance, purported performance, or failure of performance, in good faith of the duties for, or the employment with, the city of Ephrata. The city of Ephrata holds said individuals harmless from any expenses connected with the defense, settlement, or monetary judgements from such actions, claims, or proceedings. The purchase of insurance for this purpose for said individuals shall not be considered compensation for them. (Ord. 1149 §1, 1986).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 32
Chapter 2.72
MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGES
Sections:
2.72.010 Finding.
2.72.020 Appointment of Municipal Court Judges.
2.72.030 Term and Removal.
2.72.040 Term Independent of Mayor.
2.72.010 Finding. The City has established a municipal department of the Grant County District Court pursuant to RCW chapter 3.46. The City is required to provide by ordinance for the appointment of the judges of the District Court to serve as judges of the City's municipal department.
2.72.020 Appointment of Municipal Court Judges. The mayor shall appoint one or more of the currently elected or appointed district court judges and their pro tems as the part time municipal court judge or judges.
2.72.030 Term and Removal. Any municipal court judge appointed by the mayor shall serve in such capacity for his or her term as district court judge and may be removed from so serving in the same manner and for the same reasons as he or she may be removed from office of district court judge.
2.72.040 Term Independent of Mayor. Any municipal court judge appointed by the mayor pursuant to this ordinance shall remain a municipal court judge for the duration of his or her district court term, despite any change in the status of the appointing mayor.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 33
Chapter 2.84
PUBLIC CORPORATIONS
Sections:
2.84.010 Authorization
2.84.020 Definitions
2.84.030 Powers - Generally
2.84.040 Limitation of powers
2.84.050 Corporate structure
2.84.060 Application for charter
2.84.070 Charter contents
2.84.080 Review of application
2.84.090 Issuance of charter
2.84.100 Effect of issuance of charter
2.84.110 Organization meeting
2.84.120 Corporate name
2.84.130 Membership
2.84.140 Board review and concurrence
2.84.150 Membership concurrence
2.84.160 Bylaws
2.84.170 Proposing charger amendments
2.84.180 Code of ethics - Conflict of interest
2.84.190 Discrimination prohibited
2.84.200 Composition of the board
2.84.210 Access to records
2.84.220 Meetings of the board
2.84.230 Meetings of any membership
2.84.240 Quorum
2.84.250 Tenure in office
2.84.260 Deposit of public funds
2.84.270 Establishment and maintenance of office and records
2.84.280 Reports and information
2.84.290 Audits and inspections
2.84.300 Charter amendment
2.84.310 Board removal
2.84.320 Trusteeship
2.84.330 Dissolution
2.84.340 Dissolution - Statement
2.84.350 Dissolution - Disposition of assets
2.84.360 Insurance
2.84.370 Unauthorized representation
2.84.380 Ancillary authority
2.84.390 Construction
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 34
2.84.010 Authorization. The City authorizes the establishment and chartering of one or more public corporations, commissions and/or authorities (in this chapter called "public corporations"), each as an independent legal entity, to conduct activities as provided in RCW 35.21.730 through 35.21.759. (Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the term:
A. "Board of Directors" shall mean the group of persons vested with the management of the affairs of the public corporation, irrespective of the name by which such group is designated. It includes, but is not limited to, such designations as "board of director," "board," "trustees," "managers," "directorate," "commission," or "council".
B. "Bonds" means any bonds, promissory notes, interim certificates, debentures, certificates of indebtedness or other obligations issued by the public corporation pursuant to its charter and this chapter.
C. "Bylaws" means the code or codes of rules adopted for the regulations of management of the affairs of the public corporation irrespective of the name of manes by which such bylaws are designated.
D. "Charter" means the articles of organization of the public corporation irrespective of the name applied thereto and all amendments thereto.
E. "City" means the City of Ephrata.
F. "City Administrator" means the City Administrator.
G. "City Finance Director" means the City Finance Director or a person authorized to act on his or her behalf; and in the event of reorganization of the office of City Finance Director, the successor official performing such duties or a person authorized to act on his or her behalf.
H. "City Council" means the legislative body of the City.
I. "Corporate" shall refer to pertain to a public corporation.
J. "Corporate official" means members of the board and such employees as the board shall designate.
K. "Director" means a member of the board of directors.
L. "Immediate family" means:
1. A spouse;
2. Any dependent parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 35
3. Any parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sibling; uncle, aunt, cousin, niece or nephew residing in the household of a corporate official or employee.
M.. "Insolvent" or "insolvency" means an inability of a public corporation to pay debts as they become due in the usual course of its affairs.
N. "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City of Ephrata.
O. "Membership" means the class of persons entitled to participate (whether in a voting or advisory capacity) in the internal processes of the public corporation in accordance with its charter or bylaws.
P. "Member" means a member of the membership.
Q. "Public corporation" shall mean a corporation, commission, or authority organized under this chapter.
R. "Real property" includes all lands, including improvements and fixtures thereon and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith, and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, therein. including terms for years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise and the indebtedness secured by such liens.
S. "Resolution" means an action of the board with the quorum required in Section 2.84.240.
T. “State" (when used as a noun) shall mean the State of Washington.
U. "Voting membership" means the total number of voting positions on the board authorized by the charter, whether filled or vacant.
2.84.030 Powers - Generally.
Except as otherwise limited by the State Constitution, the City Charter, this chapter, or the charter of the public corporation, a public corporation shall have an exercise all lawful powers necessary or convenient to effect the purposes for which the public corporation is organized and to perform authorized corporate functions, including, without limitations, the power to:
A. Own and sell real and personal property as provided by law;
B. Contract for any corporate purpose with the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, and with individuals, associations and corporations;
C. Sue and be sued in its name;
D. Lend and borrow money;
E. Do anything a natural person may do;
F. Perform all manner and type of community services and activities;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 36
G. Provide and implement such municipal services and functions as the City Council may be ordinance direct;
H. Transfer any funds, real or personal property, property interests, or services, with or without consideration as provided by law.
I. Receive and administer federal or private funds, goods, or services for any lawful public purpose;
J. Purchase, lease, exchange, mortgage, encumber, improve, use, or otherwise transfer or grant security interests in real or personal property or any interests herein; grant or acquire options on real and personal property; and contract regarding the income or receipts from real property;
K. Issue negotiable bonds and notes in conformity with applicable provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code and state law in such principal amounts, as in the discretion of the public corporation, shall be necessary or appropriate to provide sufficient funds for achieving any corporate purposes; or to secure financial assistance, including funds from the United States, a state, or any political subdivision or agency of either for corporate projects and activities; provided, however, that all bonds and notes or liabilities occurring thereunder shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets, properties or credit of such public corporation, and no creditor or other person shall have any recourse to the assets, credit or services of the City thereby, unless the City Council shall by resolution expressly guarantee such bonds or notes;
L. Contract for, lease and accept transfers, gifts or loans of funds or property from the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, including property acquired by any such governmental unit through the exercise of its power of eminent domain, and from corporations, associations, individuals or any other source, and to comply with the terms and conditions therefor;
M. Mange, on behalf of the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, any property acquired by such entity through gift, purchase, construction, lease, assignment, default, or exercise of the power of eminent domain;
N. Recommend to appropriate governmental authorities public improvements and expenditures in areas of the City in which the public corporation by its charter has a particular responsibility;
O. Recommend to the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, any property which, if committed or transferred to the public corporation, would materially advance the public purpose for which the public corporation is chartered;
P. Initiate, carry out, and complete such improvements of benefit to the public consistent with its charter as the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either may request;
Q. Recommend to the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either such tax, financing, and security measures as the public corporation may deem appropriate to maximize the public interest in areas of the City in which the public corporation by its charter has a particular
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 37
responsibility;
R. Lend its funds, property, credit or services for corporate purposes, or act as a surety or guarantor for corporate purposes;
S. Provide advisory, consultative, training, educational, and community services or advice to individuals, associations, corporations, or governmental agencies, with or without charge;
T. Control the use and disposition of corporate property, assets, and credit;
U. Invest and reinvest its funds;
V. Fix and collect charges for services rendered or to be rendered, and establish the consideration for property transferred;
W. Sponsor, lease, manage, construct, own, or otherwise participate in housing projects, where such activity furthers the purposes for which with public corporation is chartered;
X. Maintain books and records as appropriate for the conduct of its affairs;
Y. Conduct corporate affairs, carry on its operations, and use its property as allowed by law and consistent with this chapter, its charter and its bylaws; name corporate officials, designate agents, and engage employees, prescribing their duties, qualifications, and compensation; and secure the services of consultants for professional services, technical assistance, or advice;
Z. Identify and recommend to the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, the acquisition by the appropriate governmental entity - for transfer to or use by the public corporation - of property and property rights, which, if so acquired, whether through purchase or the exercise of eminent domain, and so transferred or used, would materially advance the purpose for which the public corporation is chartered; and
AA. Exercise and enjoy such powers as may be authorized by laws.
2.84.040 Limitation of powers.
A public corporation, organized under this chapter, in all activities and transactions shall be limited to the following respects:
A. A public corporation shall have no power of eminent domain nor any power to levy taxes or special assessments.
B. A public corporation may not incur or create any liability that permits recourse by any contracting party or member of the public to any assets, services, resources, or credit of the City.
C. No funds, assets, or property of any public corporation shall be used for any partisan political activity or to further the election or defeat of any candidate for public office; nor shall any funds or a substantial part of the activities of any public corporation be used for publicity or educational purposes designed to support or defeat legislation pending before the Congress of the United States, or the legislature of the State or the City Council; provided, however, that funds may be used for representatives of a public corporation to communicate with members of Congress, state legislators or City Council members concerning funding and other matters
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 38
directly affecting the public corporation, so long as such activities do not constitute a substantial part of the corporation's activities and unless such activities are specifically limited in its charter.
D. All funds, assets, or credit of the public corporation shall be applied toward or expended upon services, projects and activities authorized by its charter. No part of the net earnings of a public corporation shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable as such to, the board members, officers of a public corporation or other private persons, except that public corporation is authorized and empowered to:
1. Compensate corporate officials and other performing services for the public corporation a reasonable amount for services rendered, and reimburse reasonable expenses actually incurred in performing their duties;
2. Assist corporate officials as members of a general class of persons to be assisted by a corporate approved project or activity to the same extent as other members of the class as long as no special privileges or treatment accrues to such corporate official by reason of his or her status or position in the public corporation.
3. Defend and indemnify any current or former board member or employee of their successors against all costs, expenses, judgments, and liabilities, including attorneys' fees, reasonably incurred by or imposed upon him or her in connection with or resulting from any claim, action, or proceeding, civil or criminal, in which he or she is or may be made a party by reason of being or having been taken or omitted by him or her as such official, provided that he or she was acting in good faith on behalf of the public corporation and within the scope of duties imposed or authorized by law. This power of indemnification shall not be exclusive of other rights to which corporate officials may be entitled as a matter of law;
4. Purchase insurance to protect and hold personally harmless any of its officials (including its employees and agents) from any action, claim, or proceeding instituted against the foregoing individuals arising out of the performance, in good faith, of duties for, or employment with, the public corporation and to hold these individuals harmless from any expenses connected with the defense, settlement, or monetary judgment from such actions, claims, or proceedings. The purchase of such insurance and its policy limits shall be discretionary with the board, and such insurance shall not be considered to be compensation to the insured individuals. The powers conferred by this subsection shall not be exclusive of any other powers conferred by law to purchase liability insurance; and
5. Sell assets for a consideration greater than their reasonable market value or acquisition costs, charge more for services than the expense of providing the, or otherwise secure an increment in a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 39
transaction, or carry out any other transaction or activity, as long as such gain is not the object or purpose of the public corporation's transactions or activities and is applied to or expended upon services, projects, and activities as aforesaid.
E. A public corporation organized under this chapter shall not issue shares of stock, pay dividends, make private distribution of assets, make loans to its board members or employees or otherwise engage in business for private gain.
F. A public corporation organized under this chapter shall only dispose of property as provided by law and particularly by RCW 35.21.747.
2.84.050 Corporate structure.
A. A public corporation shall have two or more corporate officers. The corporate officers shall manage the daily affairs and operations of the public corporation. If the charter so provides, corporate officers may be members of the board. The same persons shall not occupy both the chief executive office of the corporation and the office responsible for the custody of funds and maintenance of accounts and finances.
B. Unless the charter provides otherwise, the chief executive officer shall be the agent of the public corporation for service of process; the bylaws may designate additional corporate officers as agents to receive or initiate process.
C. The board shall oversee the activities of corporate officers, establish and/or implement policy, and participate in corporate activities to the extent provided by Section 2.84.140, its charter and bylaws.
2.84.060 Application for charter.
A. To initiate proceedings to charter a public corporation under this chapter, any person or group of persons shall apply in duplicate to the City Administrator therefor. The application shall set forth:
1. The charter requested;
2. The proposed initial bylaws;
3. The name, occupation, place of employment, business and home addresses and business and home telephone numbers of persons nominated as the initial board members;
4. The funds and other assets necessary to undertake the activities or functions contemplated within the coming year; the anticipated sources of such funds and assets; a projected first year operating budget; and any other supporting data the applicants deem appropriate and necessary to evaluate their application; and
5. The name and address of each applicant. The applicant(s) may amend, correct or supplement the application during review and processing thereof. No applicant shall be an official or employee of the City.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 40
B. One copy of the application shall be filed with the City Administrator as a public record open to public inspection and one copy shall be returned for the use of the City. To allow for public inspection and review, at least thirty days shall elapse between filing of an application and issuance of a charter. (Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.070 Charter contents.
A. The charter shall set forth the following:
1. The name of the public corporation;
2. The period of duration of the public corporation, which may beperpetual or for a fixed period;
3. This statement in a prominent place:
(name of public corporation)
is organized pursuant to Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 2.84 and RCW 35.21.730 - .759. RCW 35.21.750 provides as follows: "All liabilities incurred by such public corporation, commission, or authority shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets and properties of such public corporation, commission, or authority and no creditor or other person shall have any right of action against the city, town, or county creating such corporation, commission, or authority on account of any debts, obligations or liabilities of such public corporation, commission, or authority."
4. The purpose or purposes of the public corporation;
5. The composition of the board;
6. The composition of the membership, if any;
7. Any provisions, not inconsistent with law, which the applicants elect to set forth in the charter for the regulation of the internal affairs of the public corporation.
B. The charter shall require that any corporate official responsible for accounts and finances shall file with the public corporation a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the public corporation to be adequate and appropriate, and may hold the corporate office only as long as such a bond continues in effect. (Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.080 Review of application. The City Administrator shall review all applications for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and RCW 35.21.730 - .759 and shall refer to the City Council his or her findings and recommendations with respect to:
A. Approval of, denial of, or modifications to the proposed charter or the proposed initial bylaws for compliance with this chapter and State law, and for furtherance of the best interests of the City; and
B. Qualifications of the initial board members.
(Ord. 96-24, 1996, Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.090 Issuance of charter.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 41
A. The City council, in its discretion, shall issue a charter:
1. Upon its concurrence in affirmative findings and favorable recommendations by the City Administrator.
2. Upon acceptance by the applicants of changes, revisions, modifications, conditions, restrictions or contingencies suggested by the City; or
3. Upon satisfactory resolution of differences between the applicant and the City.
B. A charter establishing a public corporation shall be issued in duplicate originals, each signed by the Mayor and bearing the City Seal attested by the City Administrator. One original shall be retained by the City Administrator and filed as a public record, and a duplicate original shall be delivered to the applicant(s). The City Administrator shall give notice of the issuance of the charter to the Secretary of State and furnish a copy of the charter and this chapter upon request therefor.
(Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord.02-29, 2002)
2.84.100 Effect of issuance of charter. The public corporation shall commence its existence effective upon filing of its charter as issued and attested, unless a different time be specified therein. Except as against the State or the City in a proceeding to cancel or revoke the charter, or to compel compliance with a representation made in the application, filing of an original charter and delivery of a duplicate original charter shall conclusively indicate that all conditions precedent have been fulfilled and that the public corporation has been established in compliance with the procedures of this chapter.
2.84.110 Organizational meeting. Upon issuance of the charter, the applicant(s) shall call an organizational meeting of the persons nominated as board members in the application as approved within thirty days, giving at least ten days' advance written notice to each, unless waived in writing, provided that the organizational meeting may be postponed to a more appropriate time when the charter provides for a corporate existence contingent on certain events or occurrences or commencing at a future time. At such meeting, the board shall organize itself, may appoint interim officers and nonvoting members of the board to serve until the selection processes provided in or by the charter be complied with, select the temporary place of business, and assist in organizing the membership, if any.
2.84.120 Corporate name. The corporate name shall not:
A. End with "incorporated," "company" or "corporation" or any abbreviation thereof or use the term "grange," "bank," "banking," "trust" or "savings" therein, or any combination of words that are restricted from its usage by state law; and
B. Adopt or appear deceptively similar to the name of any corporation, existing or organized under the laws of the State or authorized to transact business or conduct affairs in the State, or a corporate name reserved or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 42
registered as permitted by the laws of the State.
2.84.130 Membership.
A. A public corporation may have one or more classes of members or may have no members, as set forth in the charter. If a membership be provided, the board or a committee thereof shall report to the membership at a meeting held at least once a year and receive such advice, counsel or directions as the charter shall designate.
B. If no membership be provided, the board or a committee thereof shall hold a public meeting at least once a year to report on public corporation activities and receive public comment thereon. Notice of such meetings shall be given in the same manner as that required for membership meetings where the membership is larger than one hundred persons.
2.84.140 Board review and concurrence.
A. At least quarterly, the board shall review monthly statements of income and expenses which compare budgeted expenditures to actual expenditures. Boards of public corporations with annual operating budgets in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall also review, at least quarterly, balance sheets and statements of changes in their financial position for the previous three months. Boards shall review all such information at regular meetings, the minutes of which shall specifically note such reviews and include such information.
B. General or particular authorization or review and concurrence of the board by resolution shall be necessary for any of the following transactions:
1. Transfer or conveyance of an interest in real estate, other than release of a lien or satisfaction of a mortgage after payment has been received, or the execution of a lease for a current term less than one year;
2. The contracting of debts, issuances of notes, debentures, or bonds, and the mortgaging or pledging of corporate assets to secure the same;
3. The donation of money, property or other assets belonging to the public corporation;
4. An action by the public corporation as a surety or guarantor;
5. All capital expenditures in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and all other transactions in which: (i) the consideration exchanged or received by the public corporation exceeds the greater of one percent of the previous year's operating budget or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); (ii) the performance by the public corporation shall extend over a period of one year from the date of execution of an agreement therefor; or (iii) the public corporation assumes duties to the City, the State, the United States or other governmental entity;
6. Any project or activity outside the limits of the City;
7. Adoption of an annual budget and a separate capital budget;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 43
8. Certification of annual reports and statements to be filed with the City Administrator as true and correct in the opinion of the board and of its members except as noted; (Ord. 96-24, 1996)
9. Proposed amendments to the charter and bylaws; and
10. Such other transactions, duties, and responsibilities as the charter shall repose in the board or require board participation by resolution. (Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.150 Membership concurrence.
A. The initial bylaws of a public corporation shall be adopted by its initial board and shall be submitted with its application for charter. The power to alter, amend, or repeal the bylaws or adopt new ones shall be vested in the board unless otherwise provided in the charter or the bylaws. The bylaws may contain any provisions for the regulation and management of the affairs of the public corporation not inconsistent with law or the charter.
B. Amendments to the bylaws shall not take effect until ten days after filing of the same with the City Administrator, unless such amendments(s) shall have been passed by unanimous vote of the board and the membership (if any and if affected by the amendment), and an earlier effective date be set.
(Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord.02-29, 2002)
2.84.170 Proposing charter amendments.
A. A public corporation may propose to the City Council that its charter be amended by resolution of its board passed by a procedure outlined in its charter and in conformity with Section 2.84.240 at a regular or special meeting of which thirty days' advance written notice was given; and where concurrence of the membership, if any, be required by the charter, by approval of the membership through either written ballots by mail or a vote of members at a regular or special meeting at which consideration of the proposed amendment was scheduled and thirty days' advance written notice given.
B. Information regarding a proposed charter amendment shall be provided to members of the board and to members, if any, two weeks prior to the meeting at which a vote will be taken and shall include the proposed amendment and a statement of its purpose and effect.
2.84.180 Code of Ethics - Conflict of Interest.
A. Except as provided in this section, a board member or employee of a public corporation may not participate in a decision of the public corporation in which that person or a member of that person's immediate family has a financial interest unless the financial interest is a remote financial interest and participation is approved under subsection B of this section.
B. A board member or employee may participate in a decision if that person or a member of that person's immediate family has only a remote financial interest, the fact and extent of the interest is disclosed to the board in a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 44
public meeting and is noted in the minutes of the board before any participation by the member in the decision, and thereafter in a public meeting the board by vote authorizes or approves the participation. If the person whose participation is under consideration is a board member, that person may not vote under this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, "remote financial interest" means:
(i) that of a nonsalaried officer of a nonprofit corporation;
(ii) that of an employee or agent of a contracting party where the compensation of the employee or agent consists entirely of fixed wages or salary and the contract is awarded by bid of by other competitive proceeds;
(iii) that of a landlord or tenant of a contracting party, except in cases where the property subject to the ease or sublease is owned or managed by the public corporation;
(iv) that of a holder of less than one percent of the shares of the corporation or cooperative that is the contracting party;
(v) that of an owner of a savings and loan or bank savings or share account or credit union deposit account if the interest represented by the account is less than two percent of the total deposits held by the institution; or
(vi) other interests that are defined as remote by bylaws adopted by the public corporation.
C. A board member or employee is not considered to be financially interested in a decision when the decision could not affect that person in a manner different from its effect on the public at large.
D. The board may adopt additional conflict of interest and ethical rules it considers appropriate.
E. For purposes of this section, "participate in a decision" includes all discussions, deliberations, preliminary negotiations, and votes.
F. The board may recommend to the City Council the removal of a board member who intentionally violates this section or a rule adopted hereunder. In addition, violation of any provision of this section constitutes an infraction for which a monetary fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), may be assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction. Violation may be proven by a preponderance of evidence and need not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
2.84.190 Discrimination prohibited.
A. Neither board membership nor any general membership may directly or indirectly be based upon or limited by age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or the presence of any physical handicap.
B. To ensure equality of employment opportunity, the public corporation shall not discriminate in any matter related to employment because of age, race, color, religion, six, national origin, or the presence of any physical handicap. The public corporation shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the public corporation, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 45
employment without regard to age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or the presence of any physical handicap.
2.84.200 Composition of the board.
A. The Board shall have three or more members. No term of a position on the board shall exceed four years. If no duration of term be provided by the charter, the term of a position on the board shall be three years.
B. All appointments to the board shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
2.84.210 Access to records.
A. A public corporation shall keep an official journal containing the minutes of proceedings at all meetings of the board and any meetings of any membership and the resolutions of the board.
B. Any person shall have access to records and information of the public corporation to the extent required by state law.
2.84.220 Meetings of the board.
A. The board shall meet at least eight times each year; special meetings of the board may be called as provided by the charter, the bylaws or RCW 42.30.010 et seq.
B. The board of a public corporation shall be the governing body of a public agency as defined in RCW 42.30.020, and all meetings of the board shall be held and conducted in accordance with RCW 42.30.010 et seq.
C. All board meetings, including executive sessions, all other permanent and ad hoc committee meetings and membership meetings shall be open to the public, to the extent required by RCW 42.30.010 et seq. The board and committees may hold executive sessions to consider matters enumerated in RCW 42.30.010 et seq., or privileged matters recognized by law, and shall enter the cause therefor upon its official journal.
2.84.230 Meetings of any membership.
A. Meetings of the membership, if any, shall be held at least once a year or at more frequent intervals as provided in the charter. Special meetings of the membership, if any, may be called by the board or by petition of the members as provided by the charter or the bylaws.
B. Notice of any membership meeting, stating the place, day and hour, shall be mailed to members entitled to be present at least ten days and not more than thirty days before the meeting, provided that, if the membership is larger than fifty persons, notice may be made by publication of notice for three days in the official newspaper of the city together with posting in a prominent place in the public corporation's offices.
2.84.240 Quorum.
The charter or bylaws shall establish the requirements for a quorum. The act of a majority of the board present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 46
the act of the board; provided, however, that:
A. A quorum to commence a board meeting shall be no fewer than a majority of the board's total voting membership.
B. Any resolution authorizing or approving an action described in Section 2.84.140 shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the board members voting on the issue, provided that such majority equals not less than one-third of the board's total voting membership; and
C. Where the charter provides for concurrence of the membership, such concurrence shall require an affirmative vote representing a majority of the members voting on the issue and at least (I) twenty percent of any membership comprising less than fifty persons or (ii) ten percent of any membership comprising fifty persons or more.
2.84.250 Tenure in office.
A. A board member shall serve for the term designated and until his or her successor shall have been elected or appointed and qualified.
B. Any board member may be removed from any corporate office or position in such manner as the charger or bylaws shall prescribe. Upon removal from any office or position or upon the abrogation or extinction thereof, such board member shall have no power of office.
2.84.260 Deposit of public funds.
All moneys belonging to or collected for the use of the public corporation, coming into the hands of any corporate official or officer thereof, shall be deposited in a qualified public depositary as determined by the Washington Public Deposit Protection Commission.
2.84.270 Establishment and maintenance of office and records.
The public corporation shall:
A. Maintain a principal office at a location within the limits of the city;
B. File and maintain with the City Administrator a current listing of all corporate officials, their positions and their home addresses, their business and home telephone numbers, the address of its principal office and of all other offices used by it, and a current set of its bylaws: and (Ord. 96-24, 1996)
C. Maintain all of its records in a manner consistent with the Preservation and Destruction of Public Records Act, RCW Chapter 40.14. (Ord.02-29, 2002)
2.84.280 Reports and information.
The public corporation shall:
A. Within three months after the end of its fiscal year, file an annual report with the City Administrator and the City Council containing an audited statement of assets and liabilities, income and expenditures and changes in its financial position during the previous year; a summary of significant accomplishments; a list of depositories used; a projected operating budget
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 47
for the current fiscal year; a summary of projects and activities to be undertaken during the current year; a list of corporate officials; during the previous year; a summary of significant accomplishments; a list of depositories used; a projected operating budget for the current fiscal year; a summary of projects and activities to be undertaken during the current year; a list of corporate officials; and a list of corporate officials bonded pursuant to Section 2.84.070. (Ord. 96-24, 1996, Ord 02-29, 2002)
2.84.290 Audits and inspections.
The public corporation shall, at any time during normal business hours and as often as the City Administrator or the State Auditor deem necessary, make available to the City Administrator and the State Auditor for examination all of its financial records, and shall permit the City Administrator and State Auditor to audit, examine and make excerpts or transcripts from such records, and to make audits of all contracts, invoices, materials, payrolls, records of personnel, conditions of employment and other data relating to all the aforesaid matters. (Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord.02-29, 2002)
2.84.300 Charter amendment.
A. After adoption of a proposed charter amendment, a public corporation shall file two complete copies of the charter with the City Administrator. One copy shall be in a format that strikes over material to be deleted and underlines new material. The City Council may approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. If the City Council approves the proposed amendment, it shall cause to be issued duplicate originals of the revised charter, each signed by the Mayor and bearing the City Seal attested by the City Administrator. One original and the underlined and over stricken copy shall be retained by the City Administrator as a public record and the other original shall be delivered to the public corporation. A charter amendment proposed by a public corporation shall take effect and become a part of the charter upon the filing of the Council's approval with the City Administrator. (Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord.02-29, 2002)
B. When required by law, each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall propose to the City Council an amendment to the public corporation's charter that will conform with said law. Any membership approval shall not be required for any proposed charter amendment required by law.
2.84.310 Board removal.
If it is determined for any reason that any or all of the board members should be removed from office, after a full public hearing, and after selection of appropriate replacements by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to this section, the City Council may be ordinance remove any or all voting board members from office. The term of any board member removed pursuant to this section shall expire when the member receives a copy of the ordinance removing him or her from office and a letter signed by the Mayor advising him or her that he or she has been removed
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 48
pursuant to this section. Any person appointed to the board pursuant to this section shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council in the same way other persons appointed to positions requiring City Council approval are appointed and confirmed. The term of any person appointed and confirmed pursuant to this section shall be gin at the expiration of the term of the person being replaced and shall continue until the regular expiration of the term of the position being filled.
2.84.320 Trusteeship.
A. If it is determined for any reason that a trusteeship should be imposed over a public corporation organized pursuant to this chapter, the City, by resolution of the City Council, after a public hearing held with notice to the public corporation, may petition the Superior Court to impose a trusteeship over the public corporation and to appoint the trustees therefor.
B. The trustees appointed by the Superior Court shall take such actions as necessary during the trusteeship to achieve the object thereof as reasonable. The trustees shall have the power and authority to reorganize the public corporation and recommend amendment of its charter and/or its bylaws; suspend and/or remove corporate officials, and manage the assets and affairs of the public corporation; and exercise any and all corporate powers as necessary or appropriate to fulfill outstanding agreements, to restore the capability of the public corporation, to perform the functions and activities for which it is chartered, to reinstate its credit or credibility with its creditors or obliges, and, if so authorized by the Superior Court, to oversee its dissolution.
2.84.330 Dissolution.
If the City Council makes an affirmative finding that dissolution is warranted for any reason, the existence of a public corporation may be terminated by resolution of the City Council at or after a public hearing, held with notice to the public corporation and affording it a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence.
2.84.340 Dissolution - Statement.
Upon enactment of a resolution by the City Council for dissolution of the public corporation or by the public corporation for its own dissolution, the public corporation shall file a dissolution statement signed by its chief executive officer setting forth:
A. The name and principal office of the public corporation;
B. The debts, obligations and liabilities of the public corporation, and the property and assets available to satisfy the same; the provisions to be made for satisfaction of outstanding liabilities and performance of executory contracts; and the estimated time for completion of its dissolution;
C. Any pending litigation or contingent liabilities;
D. The board resolution providing for such dissolution and the date(s) and proceedings leading toward its adoption, whenever the dissolution be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 49
voluntary; and
E. A list of persons to be notified upon completion of dissolution. The City Administrator shall review the statement filed and oversee the dissolution to protect the public interest and prevent impairment of obligation, or if so authorized by law, authorize or initiate proceedings in the Superior Court for the appointment and supervision of a receiver for such purposes. Upon satisfactory completion of dissolution proceedings, the City Administrator shall indicate such dissolution by inscription of "charter canceled" on the original charter of the public corporation, on file with the City Administrator and, when available, on the duplicate original of the public corporation, and the existence of the public corporation shall cease. The City Administrator shall give notice thereof to the Secretary of State and other persons requested by the public corporation in its dissolution statement. (Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.350 Dissolution - Disposition of assets.
Upon dissolution of a public corporation and the winding up of its affairs, all of the rights, assets and property of the public corporation shall pass to and be distributed according to the terms of the applicable grant agreements or covenants with the federal government, or agreements with donors, or other parties made at the time of acquisition, or to a qualified entity, including the City as determined by the City Council.
2.84.360 Insurance.
Each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in an amount sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death or disability and for property damage, which may arise from or be related to projects and activities of the public corporation, naming the City as an additional insured.
2.84.370 Unauthorized representation.
All persons who assume to act for the public corporation without authority to do so shall be jointly and severally liable for the debts and liabilities incurred or arising as a result thereof.
2.84.380 Ancillary authority.
The City Administrator is granted all such power and authority as reasonably necessary or convenient to enable him to administer this chapter efficiently and to perform the duties imposed in this chapter. (Ord. 96-24, 1996)(Ord. 02-29, 2002)
2.84.390 Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes and the purposes of RCW 35.21.730 - .759.
(Ord No. 92-36, 1992)(Ord.02-29, 2002)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 50
CHAPTER 2.90
EPHRATA RECREATIONAL CENTER USE RESTRICTIONS
2.90.010 Prohibited Conduct
2.90.020 Exceptions
2.90.030 Waiver
2.90.040 Fees
2.90.050 Violation - Penalty
2.90.060 No Waiver
2.90.070 Severability
2.90.010 Prohibited Conduct
There shall be prohibited certain suggestive, lewd and/or obscene conduct within the structural confines of the Ephrata Recreational Center. The following acts or conduct within the structural confines of the Ephrata Recreational Center are prohibited within the conditions set forth above:
A. To employ or use any person in or upon the Ephrata Recreational Center while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals.
B. To permit any person to mingle with other persons present while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subparagraph A above.
C. To encourage or permit any person to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person.
D. To permit any person to wear or use any device or coverage, exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof.
E. To permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate:
1. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law.
2. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals.
3. The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 51
F. To permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above.
G. To permit any person to remain in or upon the premises of the Ephrata Recreational Center who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
H. To permit the show of any lewd or obscene film. Still pictures, electronic reproduction or other lewd or obscene visual reproductions, which films, electronic reproductions, still pictures or other visual reproductions depict:
1. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law.
2. Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the anus or genitals.
3. Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, anus or genitals.
4. Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described above.
2.90.020 Exceptions
Section .010 of this chapter shall not be applied to performances of traditional ethnic dancing such as belly dancing, flamenco dancing, Hawaiian, or Tahitian dancing, etc., or to such other dancing or activities performed by patrons, guests or other persons in the practice of an established and recognized religion, provided that the following conditions are met:
A. That the licensee of the Ephrata Recreational Center shall have applied for and received written approval of the City Council for such activity, as provided for in Sections .030 and .040 of this chapter.
B. That the dancers or actors performing under this section shall be compensated by the licensee of the Ephrata Recreational Center, if such compensation is required.
C. That the licensee of the Ephrata Recreational Center shall keep and have available for inspections by the Police Chief or his designee at al reasonable times and during any license performance, a list of all traditional ethnic dancers or actors employed at the Ephrata Recreational Center for the purposes enumerated in the section. Such list shall be retained for a period of thirty (30) days after termination of employment and shall designate the following information with respect to each dancer or actor:
1. True name and professional and/or stage name, if any;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 52
2. Residence address and phone number;
3. Social Security number;
4. Terms of the agreement of employment; and
5. Signature of both the licensee of the Ephrata Recreational Center
and the dancer or actor.
D. That a person employed as a traditional, ethnic or religious dancer or actor at the Ephrata Recreational Center shall not act as an employee in any other capacity such as a waiter, waitress, host/hostess, etc., or as an entertainer in any other capacity at the Ephrata Recreational Center.
E. The dance or acting performance authorized by this ordinance shall be those performed for the enjoyment of the general audience, guests and other persons within the structural confines of the Ephrata Recreational Center, and not for individual guests or persons.
F. Dancers and actors employed under this ordinance must conduct their performance on a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest guest or other persons within the structural confines of the Ephrata Recreational Center.
2.90.030 Waiver
Notwithstanding the prohibitions enumerated in Section 010 and Section .020 of this chapter, a license applicant for use of the Ephrata Recreational Center may petition the City Council of the City of Ephrata for a waiver of the prohibitions enumerated in Section .010 and Section .020 of this chapter. The petition shall contain:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of the licensee applicant;
B. The license applicant’s Social Security number;
C. A list of the specific prohibitions sought to be waived by the licensee applicant;
D. The terms of the agreement of employment between the licensee applicant and the dancers, actors or entertainers whose conduct or actions would be in violation of this ordinance absent the approval of the licensee applicant’s petition for waiver of prohibited acts by the City Council of the City of Ephrata;
E. Information enumerated in Section .020(c) (1) - (5) of this chapter, as it related to all dancers, actors and performers who would engage in the acts prohibited by this chapter;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 53
F. The signatures of the licensee applicant and all dancers, actors, entertainers or other persons who are subject to the agreement of employment with the licensee applicant to conduct any acts prohibited in Section .010 and Section .020 of this chapter.
2.90.040 Fees.
All petitions for a waiver of prohibition made to the City Council of the City of Ephrata under Section .030 of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) payable to the City of Ephrata. One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) of this fee shall be reimbursed to the licensee applicant in the event the City Council of the City of Ephrata denies the licensee applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions. The City Council of the City of Ephrata shall have final authority over the approval or denial of a licensee applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibition, however, the City Council of the City of Ephrata shall not unreasonably withhold its approval of a licensee applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions, and shall approve or refuse the licensee applicant’s petition within twenty-one (21) days. If no decision is made within twenty-one (21) days, the petition shall be deemed approved; PROVIDED THAT the City Council may impose reasonable time, place and manner restrictions upon its approval of an applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions. Upon the City Council’s approval of an applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions, the full Two Thousand Dollar ($2,000.00) application fee shall become non-refundable. Upon approval of the licensee applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions, the licensee shall keep and have available for inspection by the City Council, or any peace officer, at all reasonable times, and during any licensed performance, a list of all dancers, actors, and performers, whose performances would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance absent an approved waiver of prohibition. Such list shall be retained for a period of thirty (30) days, and shall designate the information enumerated in Section .020.
2.90.050 Violation - Penalty
The occurrence of any conduct or act enumerated in Section .010 or Section .020 of this chapter, without a license granted upon the approval of a petition for a waiver of prohibitions pursuant to Section .030 and Section .040 of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction punishable by a fine of Four Thousand Dollars ($4,000.00) together with all costs and assessments. Upon the City Council’s approval of a licensee applicant’s petition for a waiver of prohibitions, and upon the issuance of a license thereby, the occurrence of any conduct or act enumerated in Section .010 or Section .020 of this ordinance not specifically approved by the City Council of the City of Ephrata and licensed pursuant to the licensee’s petition for a waiver or prohibitions as set forth in Section .030 and Section .040 of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction punishable by a fine of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) together with all costs and assessments.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 - 54
2.90.060 No Waiver
The prohibitions and limitations set forth in Section .020 (E) and (F) shall not be waiveable.
2.90.070 Severability
If any provision of this chapter is deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 1
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:
3.04 Local Improvements
3.08 Sales and Use Tax
3.09 Additional Sales and Use Tax
3.14 Special Excise Tax - Lodging
3.20 Gambling Activities Tax
3.22 Real Estate Excise Tax
3.24 Check and Warrant Issuance
3.28 Checks and Drafts
3.30 Reimbursement Agreements
3.35 Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services
3.40 Ephrata Transportation Benefit District
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 2
Chapter 3.04
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
3.04.010 Guaranty fund created.
3.04.020 Tax levy for fund maintenance.
3.04.030 Warrants on fund.
3.04.040 Defaulted bonds, interest coupons, warrants.
3.04.050 Penalty for delinquent assessments.
3.04.060 Foreclosure date for delinquent assessments.
3.04.010 Guaranty fund created. There is created in the office of the city treasurer a special fund, established by RCW 35 .54.010, to be known as the "local improvement guaranty fund," for the purpose of guaranteeing, to the extent and in the manner provided by these statutes, the payment of local improvement bonds and warrants. (Ord. 228 §1, 1947).
3.04.020 Tax levy for fund maintenance. In order to maintain the fund and to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, there shall be levied each year by the city council in its annual tax levies upon all the city property subject to taxation, a tax sufficient to meet the financial requirements thereof, provided that the sums so levied in any year shall not be more than sufficient to pay the outstanding warrants on this fund and to establish therein a balance, the combined levy for which in any one year shall not exceed five percent of the outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed. There shall be paid into the fund the interest received from bank deposits or any investment made of the moneys of the fund, as well as any surplus remaining in any local improvement fund guaranteed hereunder and lawfully applicable thereto. (Ord. 228 §2, 1947).
3.04.030 Warrants on fund. In order further to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, the city clerk is authorized from time to time to draw and deliver, and the city treasurer is authorized to honor and pay, warrants drawing interest at a rate not to exceed six percent, drawn on the local improvement guaranty fund for the purposes hereinabove contemplated; provided that such warrants shall at no time exceed five percent of the outstanding bond obligations guaranteed by the fund. Warrants on the local improvement guaranty fund shall be numbered serially in order of their issuance. (Ord. 228 §3, 1947).
3.04.040 Defaulted bonds, interest coupons, warrants. No preference shall exist among the issues of bonds or warrants guaranteed by this fund, but defaulted interest coupons, bonds and warrants shall be purchased out of the fund in the order of their presentation. Whenever any defaulted interest coupons, bonds or warrants
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 3
shall be presented to the city treasurer for purchase, if the outstanding warrants against the local improvement guaranty fund (including the amount of the coupons, bonds or warrants so presented) do not then exceed five percent of the outstanding bond obligations guaranteed by the fund, the city treasurer shall examine the coupons, bonds or warrants and, if satisfied that they are guaranteed by the fund, he shall receive and keep the coupons, bonds or warrants and issue his receipt therefor in their holder together with a voucher upon the local improvement guaranty fund in the amount thereof. Upon presentation of the receipt and voucher to the city clerk, the clerk shall issue to the holder his warrant upon the local improvement guaranty fund in the amount of the voucher. Warrants so issued shall be paid by the city treasurer from the local improvement guarantee fund in the order of their serial numbers.
If, at the time any defaulted interest coupons, bonds or warrants are presented for purchase, the warrants upon the local improvement guaranty fund then outstanding (including the amount of the coupons, bonds or warrants so presented) shall exceed five percent of the outstanding bond obligation guaranteed by the fund, the city treasurer shall examine the coupons, bonds and warrants and, if satisfied that they are guaranteed by the fund, he shall issue to the holder a presentation certificate describing the coupons, bonds or warrants and showing the date and time of the day when the same are presented for purchase and the name and address of the holder thereof. The presentation certificate shall be issued and numbered serially in the order of the presentation for purchase of defaulted interest coupons, bonds or warrants by the respective holders thereof. Whenever the amount of the outstanding warrants against the local improvement guarantee fund shall be retired in an amount sufficient to authorize the issuance of a warrant upon the fund for the purchase of the coupons, bonds or warrants described in any presentation certificate, it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to notify the holder of such presentation certificates by mail at the address stated herein, and upon presentation to him of the certificate, together with the coupons, bonds or warrants described therein, the city treasurer shall receive and keep the coupons, bonds or warrants and issue his receipts therefor together with his voucher upon the local improvement guaranty fund covering them. Upon presentation of the receipt and voucher to the city clerk, the holder shall be entitled to receive a warrant upon the local improvement guaranty fund as above provided. The warrants shall be issued in the order of the serial numbers of the presentation certificates issued by the city treasurer, and shall be paid by him from the local improvement guaranty fund in the order of their serial numbers. (Ord. 228 §4, 1947).
3.04.050 Penalty for delinquent assessments. In the event that any installment of any local improvement district assessment shall not be paid when due, the entire assessment shall become due and payable and delinquent on the date the installment should have been paid.
A penalty of five percent of all delinquent local improvement district assessments or installments of the city heretofore or hereafter levied is fixed and charged. Such penalty shall become due on the date of delinquency of any such assessment
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 4
or installment thereof, shall be added to the same, shall be included in and become a part of the assessment lien, and shall be collected by the city in the same manner as all local improvement district assessments or installments thereof. (Ord. 516 (part), 1955).
3.04.060 Foreclosure date for delinquent assessments. Foreclosure of delinquent local improvement assessments or installments shall be commenced on or before June 1 of each year. (Ord. 613 §1, 1959).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 5
Chapter 3.08
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:
3.08.010 Statement of purpose.
3.08.020 Definitions.
3.08.030 Imposition of tax.
3.08.040 Rate.
3.08.050 Administration and collection.
3.08.060 Records.
3.08.070 Contract for administration.
3.08.080 Penalties.
3.08.010 Statement of purpose. Because of the ever increasing costs of providing basic services to the citizens of the city, and because of the discontinuance of grants from the state of Washington to local governments, and because of the large decrease in the population of the 1970 United States Census, resulting in a serious decrease of other revenues from the state of Washington, the city council deems it necessary and mandatory that additional revenues be obtained to continue the present level of services by the city and thus imposes a sales and use tax within the city limits to obtain such additional revenues. (Ord. 795 §1, 1970).
3.08.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter:
(a) "City" means the city of Ephrata;
(b) "Person" is defined by RCW 82.04.030;
(c) "Taxable event" is defined by RCW 82.14.020;
(d) The meanings ascribed to words and phrases in RCW 82.04 and 82.12, as now or hereafter amended, insofar as applicable, shall have full force and effect with respect to taxes imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 795 §2, 1970).
3.08.030 Imposition of tax. There is imposed a sales or use tax, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to RCW 82.08 and 82.12. (Ord. 795 §3, 1970).
3.08.040 Rate. The rate of the tax imposed by Section 3.08.030 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Grant County, the rate of tax imposed by this chapter shall be .425 percent. (Ord. 795 §4, 1970).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 6
3.08.050 Administration and collection. The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. (Ord. 795 §5, 1970).
3.08.060 Records. The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82 .32.330. (Ord. 795 §6, 1970).
3.08.070 Contract for administration. The mayor and clerk of the city are authorized to execute a contract with the Washington State Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 795 §7, 1970).
3.08.080 Penalties. Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 795 §8, 1970).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 7
Chapter 3.09
ADDITIONAL SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:
3.09.010 Imposition of sales--Use tax.
3.09.020 Rate of tax imposed.
3.09.030 Administration and collection of tax.
3.09.040 Consent to inspection of records.
3.09.050 Authorizing execution of contract for administration.
3.09.060 Effective date.
3.09.070 Special initiative procedure.
3.09.080 Penalties.
3.09.010 Imposition of sales--Use tax. There is hereby imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, as authorized by RCW 82.14.020 (2), upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.13.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.12. (Ord. 1067 §1, 1983).
3.09.020 Rate of tax imposed. The rate of the tax imposed by Section 3.09.010 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Grant County under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at the rate equal to or greater than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive fifteen percent of the tax imposed by Section 3.09.010; provided, further, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Grant County under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at a rate which is less than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive from the tax imposed by Section 3.09.010 that amount of revenues equal to fifteen percent of the rate of the tax imposed by the county under Section 17 (2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session. (Ord. 1067 §2, 1983).
3.09.030 Administration and collection of tax. The administration and collection of the tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. (Ord. 1067 §3, 1983).
3.09.040 Consent to inspection of records. The city hereby consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 1067 §4, 1983).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 8
3.09.050 Authorizing execution of contract for administration. The mayor and clerk are hereby authorized to enter into a contract with the Department of Revenue for administration of this tax. (Ord. 1067 §5, 1983).
3.09.060 Effective date. This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1983. (Ord. 1067 §9, 1983).
3.09.070 Special initiative procedure.
(A) Ordinance 1067, as codified in this chapter, shall be subject to a special initiative procedure which shall subject the said ordinance to approval or rejection by the voters.
(B) The number of registered voters needed to sign any such petition for initiative shall be fifteen percent of the total number of persons listed as registered voters within the city on the day of the last preceding general municipal election.
(C) If a special initiative petition is filed with the city council, the operation of the ordinance codified herein shall not be suspended pending city council or voter approval of the special initiative, and tax imposed in said Ordinance 1067 shall be collected until each special initiative is approved by the city council or the majority of the registered voters of the city.
(D) The procedure for the special initiative upon petition contained in 35.11.100 of the Revised Code of Washington shall apply to any such special initiative petitions. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2, 3, 4, 1982: Ord. 1067 §6, 1982).
3.09.080 Penalties. Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1067 §7, 1982).
Chapter 3.14
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 9
SPECIAL EXCISE TAX
Sections:
3.14.010 Imposition of Special Excise Tax
3.14.020 Definitions
3.14.030 Addition to License Fee
3.14.040 Establishment of Special Fund\
3.14.050 Administration and Collection of Tax
3.14.060 Penalty
3.14.070 Effect of Partial Invalidity
3.14.080 Effective Date of Tax
3.14.010 Imposition of Special Excise Tax. There is levied a special excise tax of four percent (4%) on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Chapter 82.08 RCW. The tax imposed under Chapter 82.08 RCW applies to the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same.
3.14.020 Definitions. The definitions of “selling price,” ”seller,” ”buyer,” “consumer,” and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, and subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax levied in this chapter.
3.14.030 Addition to License Fee. The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any other tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city, provided, the first two percent (2%) of the tax shall be deducted from the amount of the tax the seller would otherwise be required to collect and pay to the Department of Revenue under chapter 82.08 RCW.
3.14.040 Establishment of Special Fund. There is created a special fund to be known as the “Tourism Enhancement Fund.” All taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purposes of paying all or any part of the cost of tourist promotion, acquisition of tourism-related facilities, or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for any other uses as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, as now or hereinafter amended.
3.14.050 Administration and Collection of Tax. For the purpose of the tax levied in this chapter.
The Department of Revenue is designated as the agent of the city for the purposes of collection and administration of the tax.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 10
The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and in Chapter 82.32 RCW shall apply to administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue.
All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of Chapter 82.08 RCW are adopted by reference.
The Department of Revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize such forms and reporting procedures as the Department may deem necessary and appropriate.
3.14.060 Penalty. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to the following penalties as they are defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code:
Violation Penalty
Failure to pay or report special excise tax (1.04.030) C-1
3.14.070 Effect of Partial Invalidity. The invalidity of any article, subsection, provision, clause or portion of this chapter or of the statutes adopted by reference herein, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall not affect the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances, and all other articles, sections, subsections, provisions, clauses, or portions of this chapter or the statutes adopted by reference herein not expressly held to be invalid, shall continue in full force and effect.
3.14.080 Effective Date of Tax. The effective date of the tax herein imposed shall be April 1, 2001.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 11
Chapter 3.20
GAMBLING ACTIVITIES TAX
Sections:
3.20.010 Definitions.
3.20.020 Imposed--Amounts.
3.20.030 Computation and payment.
3.20.040 Administration and collection.
3.20.050 Use of collection revenue.
3.20.060 Method of payment.
3.20.070 Nonpayment--Penalty fee.
3.20.080 Notice of intent.
3.20.090 Records required.
3.20.100 Overpayment or underpayment of tax.
3.20.110 Failure to make return.
3.20.120 Applicability.
3.20.130 Unpaid taxes, penalties and fees.
3.20.140 Limitations on right to recovery.
3.20.150 Violation--Penalty.
3.20.010 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used shall have the same meaning as under Chapter 218, Laws of 1973, 1st Ex. Sess. and RCW Chapter 9.46, each as amended, and under the rules of the Washington State Gambling Commission, WAC Chapter 230, unless otherwise specifically provided or the context in which they are used in this chapter clearly indicates that they be given some other meaning. (Ord. 1047 §1, 1981).
3.20.020 Imposed--Amounts. There is levied a tax upon all persons, associations, and organizations who conduct or operate gambling activities within the city and who have been duly licensed by the Washington State Gambling Commission, which tax shall be paid on the following gambling activities in the following respective amounts:
(1) Bingo and Raffle Games. Any bingo or raffle activity, a tax computed at the rate of ten percent of the difference between the gross revenue received from the conduct of such activity and the amount paid for or as prizes in the conduct of such activity; provided, however, that no tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on bingo or raffles when such activity or any combination thereof is conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020(3), which organization has no paid operating or management personnel and has gross income from bingo or raffles, or any combination thereof, not exceeding five thousand dollars per year less the amount paid for as prizes;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 12
and provided further, that activities carried out by public or private schools or by organizations sponsored by or related to public or private schools, including parent organizations and student body organizations, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter when the proceeds of such activities are applied for the benefit of any such school or school-sponsored or school-related organization; and provided further, that any deviation from exemption restrictions enumerated in this subsection shall subject such organization to the requirements of this chapter to the same extent if such exemption had not been granted, including required payment within ten days after written demand of the city clerk of any taxes formerly granted exemption under this subsection.
(2) Amusement Games. Any amusement game, a tax computed at two percent of the gross revenue less the amount paid for as prizes; provided, however, that no tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on amusement game when such activity is conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020(3), which organization has no paid operating or management personnel and has gross income from amusement games not exceeding five thousand dollars per year less the amount paid for as prizes; and provided further, that activities carried out by public or private schools, or by organizations sponsored by or related to public or private schools, including parent organizations and student body organizations, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter when the proceeds of such activities are applied for the benefit of any such school or school-sponsored or school-related organization; and provided further, that any deviation from exemption restrictions enumerated in this subsection shall subject such organization to the requirements of this chapter to the same extent as if such exemption had not been granted, including required payment within ten days after written demand of the finance director of any taxes formerly granted exemption under this subsection.
(3) Punchboard or Pull-tab. Any punchboard or pull-tab, a tax computed at the rate of one and one-half percent of the gross receipts, less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes received from the conduct of such activity, provided the game is for bona-fide charitable or nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 05-04, 2005).
(4) Punchboard or Pull-tab. Any punchboard or pull-tab, a tax computed at the rate of one and one-half percent of the gross receipts received from the conduct of such activity for all other establishments not exempted by 3.20.20(3). (Ord 05-04, 2005).
(5) Card Games. Any card game, a tax computed at the rate of ten percent of the gross income received from the conduct of such activity. (Ord. 1125 §1, 1985: Ord. 1062 §1, 1982; Ord. 1047 §2, 1981).
3.20.030 Computation and payment. Each of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the basis of activity during each calendar quarter year. They shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and the remittance,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 13
together with return forms, shall be made to the city of Ephrata, Washington. This shall be done on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax is accrued; that is, on January 31st, April 3Oth, July 31st, and October 31st of each year. The following exceptions to this payment schedule shall be allowed or required:
(1) Whenever any person, association, or organization taxable under this chapter conducting or operating a taxable activity on a regular basis discontinues operation for a period of more than four consecutive weeks, or quits business, sells out, or otherwise disposes of the business, or terminates the business, any tax due shall become payable, and such taxpayer shall within ten days make a return and pay the tax.
(2) Whenever it appears to the city clerk that the collection of takes from any person, association, or organization may be in jeopardy, the city clerk, after not less than fifteen days' notice to the taxpayer, may require the taxpayer to remit taxes any returns at whatever intervals the clerk deems appropriate under the circumstances.
(3) Whenever reports required by the state Gambling Commission under the provisions of RCW Chapter 9.46 are required on less than a quarterly basis, any person, association, or organization taxable under this chapter shall report to the city on the same basis. (Ord. 1047 §3, 1981).
3.20.040 Administration and collection.
(a) Administration and collection of the various taxes imposed in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city clerk. Remittance Of the amount due shall be accompanied by a completed return form prescribed and provided by the city clerk. The taxpayer shall be required to swear and affirm that the information given in the return is true, accurate, and complete. The city clerk is authorized, but not required, to mail to taxpayers the necessary forms. Failure of the taxpayers to receive such a form shall not excuse them from making the return and timely paying all taxes due. The city clerk shall make forms available to the public in reasonable numbers in his office during regular business hours.
(b) In addition to the return form, a copy of the taxpayer's quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission required by WAC 230-08 for the period in which the tax accrued shall accompany remittance of the tax. (Ord. 1047 §4, 1981).
3.20.050 Use of collection revenue. Any revenue collected from such tax shall be used primarily by the city for the purpose of the enforcement of the provisions of RCW Chapter 9.46, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission, and this chapter. (Ord. 1047 §15, 1981).
3.20.060 Method of payment. Taxes payable shall be remitted to the city clerk on or before the time required by bank draft, certified check, cashier's check, personal check,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 14
money order, or in cash. If payment is made by draft or check, the tax shall not be deemed paid until the draft or check is honored in the usual course of business, nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the city clerk be an acquittance or discharge of the tax unless the taxes due are paid in full. The return and a copy of the quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after notation by that office upon the return of the amount actually received from the taxpayer. (Ord. 1047 §5, 1981).
3.20.070 Nonpayment--Penalty fee.
(a) If full payment of any tax or fee due is not received by the city clerk on or before the date due, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee as follows:
(1) One to ten days late, six percent of tax due;
(2) Eleven to twenty days late, eight percent of tax due;
(3) Twenty-one to thirty-one days late, ten percent of tax due;
(4) Thirty-two to sixty days late, twelve percent of tax due; but in no event shall the penalty amount be less than five dollars. In addition to this penalty, the city clerk may charge the taxpayer interest of one percent of all taxes and fees due for each thirty-day period or portion thereof that the amounts are past due.
(b) Failure to make payment in full of all tax amounts, and penalties, within sixty days following the day the tax amount initially became due shall be both a civil and criminal penalty of this section. (Ord. 1047 §6, 1981).
3.20.080 Notice of intent.
(a) In order that the city may identify those persons who are subject to taxation under these provisions, each person, association, or organization shall file with the city clerk a form "Declaration of Intent" to conduct an activity taxable as provided in this chapter. The declaration of intent shall be a form to be prescribed by the city clerk and shall be submitted with a copy of the license issued by the Washington State Gambling Commission.
The filing shall be made not later than ten days prior to conducting or operating a taxable activity or twenty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter if the activity is being conducted prior to its adoption. No fee shall be charged for such filing, which is not for the purpose of regulation of this activity.
(b) Failure to timely file shall not excuse any person, association, or organization from any tax liability. (Ord. 1047 §7, 1981).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 15
3.20.090 Records required.
(a) Each person, association, or organization engaging in an activity taxable under these provisions shall maintain records respecting that activity which truly, completely, and accurately disclose all information necessary to determine the tax liability during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than three years. In addition, all information and items required by the Washington State Gambling Commission under WAC 230-08, and the United States Internal Revenue Service respecting taxation, shall be kept and maintained for the periods required by those agencies.
(b) All books, records, and other items required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be subject to and immediately available for inspection and audit at any reasonable time with reasonable notice. Inspection shall be made upon demand by the city clerk or his designee, at the place where such records are kept, for the purpose of enforcing these provisions.
(c) Where the taxpayer does not keep all of the books, records, or items required in this jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall either:
(1) Produce all of the required books, records, or items within the city for such inspection within seven days following a request of the city clerk; or
(2) Bear the actual cost of the inspection by the city clerk or his designee, at the location at which such books, records, or items are located; provided, that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall pay in advance to the city clerk the estimated costs thereof, including but not limited to round-trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. The actual amount due, or to be refunded, for expenses shall be determined following the examination of the records. (Ord. 1047 §8, 1981).
3.20.100 Overpayment or underpayment of tax. If upon application by a taxpayer for a refund or an audit of his records, or upon any examination of the returns or records by the city clerk, it is determined that within the immediate past three years:
(1) A tax or other fee has been paid in excess of that properly due, the total excess paid over all amounts due to the city within such period shall be credited to the taxpayer's account or shall be credited to the taxpayer at the taxpayer's option. No refund or credit shall be allowed with respect to any excess amounts paid more than three years before the date of such application or examination.
(2) A tax or other fee has been paid which is less than properly due, or no tax or other fee has been paid, the city clerk shall mail a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, including the tax amount or penalty assessment and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 16
fees, and it shall be a separate, additional violation of the provisions of this section, both civil and criminal, if the taxpayer fails to make payment in full within ten calendar days of mailing. (Ord. 1047 §9, 1981).
3.20.110 Failure to make return. If any taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make and file his return as and when required under these provisions, the city clerk is authorized to determine the amount of tax payable, together with any penalty and/or interest assessed. The taxpayer shall then be notified by mail of the amount which shall become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 1047 §10, 1981).
3.20.120 Applicability. The tax levied under this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1047 §11, 1981).
3.20.130 Unpaid taxes, penalties and fees. Any tax due and unpaid under these provisions and all penalties or fees shall constitute a debt to the city of Ephrata, a municipal corporation, and may be collected by court proceedings the same as any other debt in like amount, but shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 1047 §12, 1981).
3.20.140 Limitations on right to recovery. The right of recovery by the city from the taxpayer for any tax provided under this chapter shall be outlawed after the expiration of three calendar years from the date that tax became due. The right of recovery against the city because of overpayment of tax by any taxpayer shall be outlawed after the expiration of three calendar years from the date such payment was made. (Ord. 1047 §13 1981).
3.20.150 Violation--Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars. (Ord. 1047 §14, 1981).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 17
Chapter 3.22
REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX
Sections:
3.22.010 Imposition of real estate excise tax--Statutory authority.
3.22.020 Rate of tax impose.
3.22.030 Payment and collection of tax.
3.22.040 Distribution and disposition of tax proceeds.
3.22.010 Imposition of Real Estate Excise Tax. There is hereby imposed a real estate excise tax as authorized by RCW 82.46.010(1), upon every taxable event as defined in RCW 82.46.010(3), occurring within the City of Ephrata. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under RCW Chapter 82.45.
3.22.020 Rate of Tax Imposed. The rate of tax imposed by Section 3.27.010 of this ordinance shall be 1/4 of one percent of the selling price of the real estate sold.
3.22.021 Additional Rate of Tax Imposed: In accordance with RCW 82.46.035, and in addition to the excise tax on the sale of real property imposed by Sections 3.22.010 and 3.22.020, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property located within the official boundary of the City of Ephrata at the rate of one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the selling price to be collected by the County as prescribed in RCW 82.46.060. Proceeds from this additional tax shall be deposited in a separate account in the City’s Capital Improvements Fund and expended as authorized by law under RCW 82.46.030(5) and RCW 82.46.035.
3.22.030 Payment and Collection of Tax. The payment and collection of the tax imposed by this ordinance shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.060 and RCW 82.46.030(1).
3.22.040 Distribution and Disposition of Tax Proceeds. The distribution and disposition of tax proceeds collected as a result of the imposition of the tax by this ordinance shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.030(2). (Ord. 88-11 §1(part), 1988).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 18
Chapter 3.24
CHECK AND WARRANT ISSUANCE
Sections:
3.24.010 Authority
3.24.020 Issuance of Checks and Warrants
3.24.030 Designation of Qualified Public Depository
3.24.010 Authority. RCW 35A.40.020 provides that a city may adopt a policy for the payment of claims or other obligations of the city, which are payable out of solvent funds, either by warrant or check. (Ord. 88-17 §1, 1988).
3.24.020 Issuance of Checks and Warrants. Checks shall be issued to pay the claims and/or obligations of the city when the applicable fund is solvent, provided, that when the applicable fund is insolvent at the time payment is ordered, a warrant shall be issued. (Ord. 88-17 §1, 1988).
3.24.030 Designation of Qualified Public Depository. By a separate resolution the City Council shall designate a qualified public depository whereon the checks are to be drawn and designating the officers authorized or required to sign the checks. (Ord. 88-17 §1, 1988).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 19
Chapter 3.28
CHECKS AND DRAFTS
Sections:
3.28.010 Dishonored Checks and Drafts
3.28.020 Assessment in Addition to Other Fees
3.28.030 Service or Handling Fee Charge on Utility Accounts
3.28.040 Refusal of Checks or Drafts
3.28.050 Remedy Not Exclusive
3.28.010 Dishonored Checks and Drafts. A service or handling fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed against any person giving the City of Ephrata what is commonly known as an "NSF" check or draft or giving the City of Ephrata either a check or a draft drawn on an account which is closed. An "NSF" check or draft is a check or draft dishonored by the bank or other financial institution upon which it is drawn because the account contains insufficient funds to cover the check or draft or because the account is closed.
3.28.020 Assessment in Addition to Other Fees. The service or handling charge set forth in Section 3.28.010 shall be in addition to all other fees, penalties, and charges that accrue, including interest at the maximum lawful rate, until payment is made in cash.
3.28.030 Service or Handling Fee Charge on Utility Accounts. Any service or handling fee set forth in Section 3.28.010 which is assessed as a result of the receipt of an "NSF" check or draft for payment of a utility account may be added as administrative charge to that utility account.
3.28.040 Refusal of Checks or Drafts. Any department of the City of Ephrata may refuse to accept checks or drafts from any persons who have previously given "NSF" checks or drafts, or checks or drafts which are drawn on accounts which are closed in payment for city services, fines, or penalties.
3.28.050 Remedy Not Exclusive. Imposition of the service or handling fee set forth in Section 3.28.010 shall not preclude the city from pursing other remedies available to the city including but not limited to those available under RCW Title 62A and RCW Title 9 and/or 9A as a result of the issuance of the "NSF" check or draft. (Ord. 91-28, 1991)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 20
Chapter 3.30
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:
3.30.010 Application authorized – Purpose – Term.
3.30.020 Rights and nonliability of city.
3.30.030 Application requirements.
3.30.040 Eligibility of applicants.
3.30.050 Procedures for reimbursement agreements.
3.30.090 Enforcement Responsibility and Future Services.
3.30.100 Relief–Similar Facilities.
3.30.110 Severability.
3.30.010 Application authorized – Purpose – Term.
Any developer utilizing private funds to install infrastructure (street, water, or sewer (sanitary and/or storm) improvements and appurtenances may apply to the city to establish a latecomer agreement for recovery of a prorated share of the cost of constructing said public improvement from other properties that will later derive a benefit from said improvements. This chapter is intended to apply to all street system improvements and all utility system improvements where the construction of such improvements are the result of a City ordinance or ordinances that require such improvements as a prerequisite to property development. No reimbursement agreement/latecomers’ agreement shall extend from a period longer than 15 years from the date of final acceptance by the city unless a longer period is allowed pursuant to RCW 35.72.020 or 35.91.020. The city council shall have discretion to authorize or not to authorize latecomer agreements on a case by case basis and to determine the length of the term of any latecomer agreement.
3.30.020 Rights and nonliability of city.
The city has discretion and reserves the right to refuse to enter into any latecomer agreement or to reject any application therefor. All applications for latecomers’ agreements shall be made on the basis that the applicant releases and waives any claims for any liability of the city in establishment and enforcement of latecomer agreements. The city shall not be responsible for locating any beneficiary or survivor entitled to benefits by or through latecomer agreements.
3.30.030 Application requirements.
All applications for latecomer agreements shall be on forms approved and established by the city and reviewed and approved by the city attorney. Applicants for latecomer agreements shall comply with the following procedures as a prerequisite to a latecomer agreement with the city:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 21
1. The owner desiring to contract with the city shall notify the city administrator, in writing, at least 30 days prior to construction of the facilities of the owner’s request to enter into a latecomer agreement with the city.
2. The notice shall contain the following information:
a. The description of the facilities to be installed;
b. The description of the area where the facilities are to be installed and a map showing the location thereof;
c. The cost estimate of the facilities.
3. The owner shall submit the final construction costs to the city administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of final approval for the construction by the city. The matter shall then be submitted to the city council which shall determine whether or not to enter into a latecomer agreement with the owner. If the project is approved for a latecomer agreement by the city council, the city shall have 90 days thereafter to finalize the agreement. In the event the owner fails to comply with the time limitations set forth in this chapter, then and in that event, the owner shall have waived the owner’s right to enter into a latecomer agreement with the city.
4. In addition to the amounts agreed to be collected by the city, the city shall charge a sum equal to 15 percent of the agreed amount to defray the cost of labor, bookkeeping and accounting.
5. The ownership of all water and sewer main lines installed on private property shall be conveyed to the city and the owner shall grant the city an easement therefor. All deeds and easements for said main line shall be submitted to the city within 60 days of the completion of construction. The ownership of all other improvements under the latecomer’s agreement shall be conveyed to the city by appropriate deed and/or conveyance document within 60 days of completion of construction.
3.30.040 Eligibility of applicants.
In order to be eligible for processing of latecomer agreements, applicants for latecomer agreements shall be in compliance with all city ordinances, rules, and regulations.
3.30.050 Procedures for reimbursement agreements.
A. If a reimbursement agreement is requested, the property owner shall submit project plans and a site plan, map or diagram of the proposed benefitted area prepared by a licensed professional engineer, ownership reports on properties within the proposed benefitted areas, a cost estimate for the project based upon the plans of a licensed civil engineer from which reimbursable costs shall be estimated, and such other information as the city may require.
B. Property owners requesting a reimbursement agreement shall submit, along with the application, a nonrefundable payment in the amount of $1,500.00 to be applied to the city’s legal, engineering and administrative costs (including but not limited to staff time, and costs for title reports, appraisers, or other costs) associated with preparing the reimbursement agreement, which costs shall be included as reimbursable costs in the reimbursement agreement; provided, that whenever city engineering, legal, and administrative costs exceed the payment required herein, the city shall not process the application until such costs have been paid in full.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 22
C. The city administrator will formulate an assessment reimbursement area (benefit area) based upon a determination of which parcels did not contribute to the original cost of such infrastructure improvement and which connect to or specially benefit from such infrastructure.
D. The city administrator based on information submitted by the owner will estimate pro rata share of costs. The city administrator may require engineering costs or construction bids to be provided.
E. The city administrator, in the city administrator’s discretion, may utilize the application fee to pay the costs of an appraiser to be retained by the city to assist the city administrator in formulating an assessment reimbursement area.
F. The preliminary determination of area boundaries and assessments, along with a description of the property owner’s rights and options, shall be forwarded by first class mail to the property owners of record as shown on the records of the Grant County assessor within the proposed assessment area. A hearing shall be held before the city council, notice of which shall be given to all affected property owners at least 20 days in advance of the council meeting. At the hearing, the city council determines whether to accept, reject, or modify the proposed reimbursement agreement. If the city council accepts, it shall establish the reimbursement area; provided, that the city council may only increase the reimbursement area upon new notice to the owners of the affected property. Improvements constructed subsequent to preliminary approval and prior to the final council action on a proposed agreement are done at the owner’s or developer’s own risk. The approval of a preliminary latecomer’s agreement does not create or vest any right to a final latecomer’s agreement.
G. Prior to commencing construction of the project, the owner shall submit a construction bid on forms provided by the public works department based upon city approved plans to the city. Upon completion of the project, a reasonable pro rata share of project costs shall be established by the city, which shall then notify owners of the benefitted properties of the amount of reimbursement connection charges against their property and the date the reimbursement agreement shall be presented to the city council for public hearing. On the date scheduled, the city council shall hear from affected parties and thereafter set the terms of the reimbursement agreement and maximum amount and terms of reimbursement from affected properties. The decision of the city council shall be final and determinative.
H. The latecomer agreements must be recorded in the Grant County auditor’s office within 30 days of the final execution of the agreement. It shall be the sole responsibility of the latecomer applicant to record said agreement.
I. Once recorded, the latecomer agreement shall be binding on owners of record within the assessment area who are not party to the agreement.
J. The latecomer applicant shall be solely responsible for keeping the city informed of their correct mailing address and contact information by providing the city with written notice thereof at least every two years following execution of the latecomer agreement.
3.30.090 Enforcement Responsibility and Future Services.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the latecomer’s agreement to monitor, enforce and notify the city of any connections to improvements which come within the terms of the latecomer’s agreement. The city will use it best efforts to
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 23
collect latecomer’s fees but will not accrue any liability for failure to collect fees due. The city has no obligation to provide notice of the latecomer’s agreement to any party other than as provided in this chapter. Neither preliminary nor final approval of a latecomer’s agreement shall be construed to vest or grant the right to the extension or allocation of water and/or sewer to properties affected by the latecomer’s agreement.
3.30.100 Relief–Similar Facilities.
The city, through its designated agency, may relieve a parcel of a latecomer’s fee if the property has a benefit from either (but not both) of two similar facilities. Relief shall be based upon sound engineering and policy justifications as to which facility(ies) benefit and/or are utilized by the parcel. Absent such justifications, the city shall give the applicant the choice of facilities to utilize. The assessment due shall be that associated with the utilized facility.
3.30.110 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause phrase, or word of this chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or work of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-04, 2011)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 24
Chapter 3.35
FEE SCHEDULE AND CHARGES FOR CITY SERVICES
Sections:
3.35.010 Adoption of Fee Schedule
3.35.020 Previously adopted or enacted fees
3.35.010 Adoption of Fee Schedule. The attached fee schedule, identified as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect until subsequently repealed or amended by the City Council.
3.35.020 Previously adopted or enacted fees. The mandates of this chapter and Exhibit A shall not preclude the collection of fees previously adopted or enacted by the City which may have been inadvertently omitted. Previously enacted or adopted fees may be collected at the rate indicated in the adopting document.
(Ord 11-11, 2011)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 25
CITY OF EPHRATA FEE SCHEDULE EXHIBIT A (EMC 3.35) Ord. 11-11, 11-20, 12-12, 12-15, 12-21, 12-23, 13-19, 14-11, Ord 14-19, Ord 15-21, Ord. 16-22, Ord. 17-12, Ord 18-03, Ord 18-24, Ord 19-09 Code Reference DESCRIPTION FEE CIVIL PENALTY CODE PUBLIC RECORDS FEE SCHEDULE
Paper Copies
.15 cents a page
*Two-sided document equals 2 pages
Scanned Copies or use of agency equipment for scanning
.10 cents a page
Records uploaded to email, cloud-based storage, CD/DVD, or flash drive
.05 cents each per every 4 electronic files or attachments
Records Transmitted in electronic format or for use of agency equipment to send records electronically
.10 cents a gigabyte
Digital Storage Media Device (CD/DVD, flash drive)
Actual Cost of Device
Arch 24’ x 36’ map
Envelope
$3.50 / map
Actual Cost
Postage
Container + Actual Cost
Customized Service Charge
When the request would require the use of IT expertise to prepare data compilations or when such customized access service are not used by the agency for other business purpose, the agency may charge the actual cost. The agency must notify the requestor that it will be doing a customized service and can require a 10 percent deposit per RCW 42.56.120(4).
The City of Ephrata has a five dollar ($5.00) de minimis for each records request. Anything over ($5.00) five dollars, the requestor is required to pay.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 26
PUBLIC SAFETY FEES
1.12.010
Assessment For Filing the Cause
$ 57.80
1.12.010
Assessment for Service of Subpoenas – each
$ 57.80
1.12.010
Assessment for Service of Arrest Warrants - each
$ 57.80
2.56.010
Local Record Check (person w/no record) + clearance letter for visa/passport - per name
Free
2.56.010
Fingerprint card for (applicants of real estate/naturalization etc.) Ephrata residents
$6.05 first card $2.75/ea add'l card
2.56.030
Serving Arrest Warrant
$ 57.80
2.56.030
Mileage to service Arrest Warrant
IRS Mileage
6.22.060
False Alarm - 3rd response within 6 months
$ 86.50
6.22.065
False Fire Alarm - 3rd response within 6 months
$ 287.80
6.22.065
False Fire Alarm - Failure to notify Fire Dept of testing system - First Response
$ 115.50
6.22.065
False Fire Alarm - Failure to notify Fire Dept of testing system - Second Response
$ 230.40
10.10.060
Police Administrative Processing Fee - Confiscation of motorized foot scooter
$ 57.80
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 27
Code ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
FEE
Penalty
8.05.040
Dog License - Neutered/Spayed
$ 11.30
8.05.040
Dog License - Unneutered/Unspayed
$ 33.60
8.05.040
Dog License - Seeing Eye/Government Police Dog
Free
8.05.040
Dog License – Replacement
$ 2.50
8.05.050
Rabies control/electronic chip - failure to comply
$ 610.00
C-01
8.05.060
Potentially Dangerous Dog - Running at Large 1st offense
$ 250.00
C-05
8.05.060
Potentially Dangerous Dog - Running at Large 2nd offense
$ 610.00
C-01
8.05.060
Potentially Dangerous Dog - Running at Large 3rd offense (dog destroyed) $ 610.00 C-01
8.05.071
Dangerous Dog - Failure to Comply
$ 610.00
C-01
8.05.080
Impound Fees - 1st offense
$ 11.85
8.05.080
Impound Fees - 2nd offense
$ 23.25
8.05.080
Impound Fees - All subsequent offenses
$ 40.20
8.05.080
Boarding Fee - per Day
$ 11.85
8.05.200
No License on Dog - 1st offense
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
No License on Dog - all subsequent offenses in 12 mo
$ 65.00
C-14
8.05.200
Failure to Confine Biting Animal - 1st offense
$ 160.00
C-07
8.05.200
Failure to Confine Biting Animal - All subsequent offenses
$ 312.00
C-04
8.05.200
Failure to Produce Rabid Animal
$ 610.00
C-01
8.05.200
Dog Running at Large - 1st offense
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Dog Running at Large - 2nd offense
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Dog Running at Large - All subsequent offenses
$ 160.00
C-07
8.05.200
Failure to control Animal by Leash or Device
$ 51.00
C-17
8.05.200
Keeping Vicious Animal - 1st offense
$ 160.00
C-07
8.05.200
Keeping Vicious Animal - All subsequent offenses
$ 312.00
C-04
8.05.200
Barking Dog - 1st offense
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Barking Dog - 2nd offense
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Barking Dog - All subsequent offenses
$ 160.00
C-07
8.05.200
Livestock Running at Large - 1st offense
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Livestock Running at Large - All subsequent offenses
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Guard Dog in Violation of Conditions - 1st offense
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Guard Dog in Violation of Conditions - All subsequent offenses
$ 312.00
C-04
8.05.200
Failure to Confine Female Dog in Heat - 1st offense
$ 60.00
C-15
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 28
8.05.200
Failure to Confine Female Dog in Heat - All subsequent offenses
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Obstructing Animal Control Officer/Police Officer
$ 312.00
C-04
8.05.200
Failure to Provide Evidence of Rabies Vaccination
$ 51.00
C-17
8.05.200
Household Pet Violations
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Failure to Posses Equipment to Collect Feces
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Failure to Collect Feces
$ 72.00
C-13
8.05.200
Livestock on Sidewalks, Parks or Walkways - 1st offense
$ 60.00
C-15
8.05.200
Livestock on Sidewalks, Parks or Walkways - 2nd offense
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Livestock on Sidewalks, Parks or Walkways - 3rd offense
$ 160.00
C-07
8.05.200
Dogs in City Cemetery - 1st offense
$ 33.00
C-18
8.05.200
Dogs in City Cemetery - 2nd offense
$ 60.00
C-15
8.05.200
Dogs in City Cemetery - All subsequent offenses
$ 80.00
C-12
8.05.200
Vicious Animal Running at Large - 1st offense
$ 250.00
C-05
8.05.200
Vicious Animal Running at Large - 2nd offense
$ 610.00
C-01
8.05.200
Vicious Animal Running at Large - 3rd offense (animal destroyed) $ 610.00 C-11
Dangerous Dog w/out tag
Criminal
Failure to Control Dangerous Dog
Criminal
Dangerous Dog
Criminal
Cruelty to Animals
Criminal
Confine Animal w/o Food or Water
Criminal
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 29
PARKING INFRACTIONS
Code Reference
DESCRIPTION
FINE
CIVIL PENALTY CODE
EMC Penalty Code
10.55.020 Statue adopted by reference
RCW 46.61.570 "Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places-reserving portion of highway prohibited" and RCW 46.61.575 "Additional parking regulations" violations
$55.00
C-16
10.55.210 (3)
10.55.070
Parking in Alleys, Parks, Playgrounds and City Property
$55.00
C-16
10.55.210 (3)
10.55.090
Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited:
(a) displaying vehicle for sale/advertising
$33.00
C-18
10.55.210 (d)
(b) washing/greasing/repair exclude emergency
$33.00
C-18
10.55.210 (d)
( c) selling/displaying for sale goods, wares, food w/o permit
$33.00
C-18
10.55.210 (d)
10.55.110
Violations
(1) Allow/permit any vehicle to be parked in violation of this chapter
$22.00
C-19
10.55.210(4)
(2)Park any vehicle outside of designated parking area
$22.00
C-19
10.55.210(4)
10.55.130
Handicapped Parking Violation
$72.00
C-13
10.55.135
Parking in a Fire Lane Violation
$72.00
C-13
10.55.190
Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets:
(a) 15 minute parking on posted streets
$22.00 - 1st infraction
C-19
10.55.210 (b)(1)
$33.00 - 2nd infraction in 12 hour period
C-18
$60.00 –
3rd infraction
C-15
(b) 30 minute parking on posted streets
$22.00 - 1st infraction
C-19
10.55.210 (b)(1)
$33.00 - 2nd infraction in 12 hour period
C-18
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 30
$60.00 –
3rd infraction
C-15
( c) One hour parking on posted streets
$22.00 - 1st infraction
C-19
10.55.210 (b)(1)
$33.00 - 2nd infraction in 12 hour period
C-18
$60.00 –
3rd infraction
C-15
(d) Two hour parking on posted streets
$22.00 - 1st infraction
C-19
10.55.210 (b)(1)
$33.00 - 2nd infraction in 12 hour period
C-18
$60.00 –
3rd infraction
C-15
(f) 120 hour parking on any street/alley
$55.00
C-16
10.55.210 (b)(2)
(Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord. 13-19, 2013; Ord 14-11, 2014; Ord. 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016; Ord. 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-02, 2019; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 31
FEE SCHEDULE - BUILDING PERMITS Code Reference DESCRIPTION FEE BUILDING FEES FOR MANUFACTURED/REMODELS ONLY
16.04.025
Total Valuation
$1.00 to $1,400
$57.80
$1,401 to $2,000
$57.80 for the first $1,400 plus $3.50 for each additional $100, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000
$2,001 to $25,000
$78.80 for the first $2,000 plus $16.15 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00
$25,001 to $50,000
$450.25 for the first $25,000 plus $11.70 for each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000
$50,001 to $100,000
$724.75 for the first $50,000 plus $8.10 for each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000
$100,001 to $500,000
$1,147.75 for the first $100,000 plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000
$500,001 to $1,000,000
$3,747.75 for the first $500,000 plus $5.50 for each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000
$1,000,001 and up
$6,497.75 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4.25 for each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof
BUILDING FEES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
NEW CONSTRUCTION
PER INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL BUILDING VALUATION TABLE
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 32
PLUMBING PERMITS
PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
16.04.025
PERMIT ISSUANCE
FEE
For issuing each permit
$ 27.60
For issuing each supplemental permit
$ 14.00
UNIT FEE SCHEDULE
Each fixture on one trap or a set of fixtures on one trap (including water, drainage piping and backflow protection therefore)
$ 9.90
Each building sewer and each trailer park sewer
$ 21.10
Rainwater systems - per drain (inside building)
$ 9.90
Each cesspool (where permitted)
$ 34.75
Each private sewage disposal system
$ 55.20
Each water heater and/or vent
$ 9.90
Each gas-piping system of one to five outlets
$ 7.10
Each additional gas piping system outlet, per outlet
$ 1.95
Each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor including its trap and vent, except kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps
$ 9.90
Each installation, alteration or repair of water piping and/or water treatment equipment, each fixture
$ 9.90
Each repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture
$ 9.90
Each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter including backflow protection devices therefore
$ 9.90
Atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not included in item 12:
1 to 5
$ 7.10
Over 5 each
$ 1.95
Each backflow protective device other than atmospheric type vacuum breakers:
2 inch diameter and smaller
$ 9.90
over 2 inch diameter
$ 21.10
Each gray water system
$ 55.30
Initial installation and testing for a reclaimed water system
$ 40.55
Each annual cross-connection testing of a reclaimed water system (excluding initial test)
$ 40.55
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 33
MECHANICAL PERMITS
MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
16.04.025
PERMIT ISSUANCE
FEE
For the issuance of each permit
$ 32.90
For the issuance of each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not expired, been canceled or finaled
$ 10.45
UNIT FEE SCHEDULE
Furnaces:
Installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, up to and including 100,000 But/h (29.3 kW)
$ 20.85
Installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance over 100,000 Btu/h (29.3kW)
$ 25.40
Installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including vent
$ 20.85
Installation or relocation of each suspended heater recessed wall heater or floor-mounted unit heater
$ 20.85
Appliance Vents:
Installation, relocation or replacement of each appliance vent installed and not included in an appliance permit
$ 10.45
Repairs or Additions:
Repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling, absorption or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls regulated by the Mechanical Code
$ 19.20
Boilers, Compressors and Absorption Systems
Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor to and including three horsepower (10.6kW), or for each absorption system to and including 100,000 Btu/h (29.3kW)
$ 20.60
Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over three horsepower (10.6kW) to and including 15 horsepower (52.7kW), or for each absorption system over 100,000 Btu/h (29.3kW) to and including 500,000 Btu/h (146.6kW)
$ 37.80
Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 15 horsepower (52.7kW) to and including 15 horsepower (105.5kW) to and including 1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1kW)
$ 51.75
Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 30 horsepower (105.5kW) to and including 50 horsepower (175.kW), or for each absorption system over 1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1kW) to and including 1,750,000 Btu/h (512.9kW)
$ 76.90
Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 50 horsepower (176kW), or for each absorption system over
$ 128.35
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 34
1,750,000 Btu/h (512.9kW)
Air Handlers:
Each air-handling unit to and including 10,000 cubic feet per minute (4720 L/s), including ducts attached thereto
$ 15.10
Each air-handling unit exceeding 10,000 cfm (4720 L/s)
$ 25.15
NOTE: This fee does not apply to an air-handling unit which is a portion of a factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or absorption unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in the Mechanical Code.
Evaporative Coolers:
Each evaporative cooler other than portable type
$ 15.10
Ventilation and Exhaust:
Each ventilation fan connected to a single duct
$ 10.45
Each ventilation system which is not a portion of heating or air-conditioning system authorized by a permit
$ 15.10
Installation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust, including the ducts for such hood
$ 15.10
Incinerators:
Installation or relocation of each domestic-type incinerator
$ 25.40
Installation or relocation of each commercial or industrial-type incinerator
$ 20.25
Miscellaneous:
Each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Mechanical Code but not classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is listed in this table
$ 15.10
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 35
MISCELLANEOUS PERMIT FEES
Code Reference DESCRIPTION FEE
16.04.025
Fence Permit
$ 11.85
Swimming Pool Permit
$ 172.85
Permit for wood, gas or other fuel burning appliance
$ 29.30
Re-Roof Permit
$ 58.05
Sign Permit - valuation up to and including $500
$ 29.30
Sign Permit - More than $500 to and including $1,000
$ 58.05
Sign Permit - each additional $1,000, or fraction
$ 11.85
Hot Tub Permit
$ 58.05
16.20.010
Permit to move/relocate any structure in or from City limits residential bldgs under 200 sq ft or commercial bldgs under 120 sq ft
$ 17.50
Placement Permits for residential bldgs under 200 sq ft/commercial bldgs under 120 sq ft
$ 29.30
21.02.040
Street and Utility Construction Permits
2.5% of the cost of all construction being inspected, but not less than $38.00
19.11.050-19.11.090
Development Permit Fees
2.5% of the project costs but not less than $38.00
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 36
INSPECTION FEES
Code Reference DESCRIPTION FEE
16.04.025
Inspections outside of normal business hours - per hour (minimum two hours)
$69.50 per hour
Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 305.8
$69.50 per hour
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum 1/2 hour)
$69.50 per hour
Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans (minimum 1/2 hour)
$69.50 per hour
Plan Review Fee
65% on major projects/ 25% on minor projects
per contract
For use of outside consultants for inspections
$69.50 per hour as per contract with outside consultant
16.20.030
Performance Bond/Deposit to clean up property
$119.40
(Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord 13-19, 2013; Ord 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016; Ord. 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-03, 2018; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 37
WATER RATES CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION Monthly Fee - Inside City Limits Monthly Fee - Within UGA
1. Residential
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$51.55 per living unit
$61.50 per living unit
2" Meter
$61.50 per living unit
$74.70 per living unit
3" Meter
$74.70 per living unit
$92.60 per living unit
4" Meter
$92.60 per living unit
$122.30 per living unit
6" Meter
$129.90 per living unit
$161.30 per living unit
8" Meter or larger
$169.20 per living unit
$210.60 per living unit
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per living unit
$7.95 per living unit
Water Charge
$.83/1,000 gallons
$.98/1,000 gallons
2. Multi Family
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$51.55 per living unit
$61.50 per living unit
2" Meter
$61.50 per living unit
$74.70 per living unit
3" Meter
$74.70 per living unit
$92.60 per living unit
4" Meter
$92.60 per living unit
$122.30 per living unit
6" Meter
$129.90 per living unit
$161.30 per living unit
8" Meter or larger
$172.55 per living unit
$210.60 per living unit
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per living unit
$7.95 per living unit
Water Charge
$.71/1,000 gallons
$.83/1,000 gallons
3. Commercial
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$69.80 per unit
$82.65 per unit
2" Meter
$84.65 per unit
$103.90 per unit
3" Meter
$105.85 per unit
$130.20 per unit
4" Meter
$141.45 per unit
$175.10 per unit
6" Meter
$189.05 per unit
$235.00per unit
8" Meter or larger
$248.80 per unit
$309.70 per unit
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 38
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per unit
$7.95 per unit
Water Charge
$.91/1,000 gallons
$1.06/1,000 gallons
4. Irrigation
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$47.30 per meter
$55.55 per meter
2" Meter
$58.20 per meter
$70.80 per meter
3" Meter
$73.45 per meter
$90.55 per meter
4" Meter
$98.55 per meter
$123.35 per meter
6" Meter
$134.20 per meter
$166.60 per meter
8" Meter or larger
$177.55 per meter
$220.80 per meter
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per meter
$7.95 per meter
Water Charge
$1.19/1,000 gallons
$1.19/1,000 gallons
5. Industrial
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$117.70 per meter
$162.60 per meter
2" Meter
$137.20 per meter
$190.70 per meter
3" Meter
$166.60 per meter
$233.75 per meter
4" Meter
$205.60 per meter
$290.20 per meter
6" Meter
$283.90 per meter
$403.25 per meter
8" Meter or larger
$371.50 per meter
$531.15 per meter
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per meter
$7.95 per meter
Water Charges
$.71/1,000 gallons
$1.06/1,000 gallons
6. Reclaimed
13.04.110
1" Meter (equal or less than)
$31.40 per meter
$37.35 per meter
2" Meter
$37.35 per meter
$45.30 per meter
3" Meter
$52.30 per meter
$57.30 per meter
4" Meter
$59.50 per meter
$74.05 per meter
6" Meter
$78.70 per meter
$97.95 per meter
8" Meter or larger
$118.35 per meter
$125.90 per meter
Water Charge
$.56/1,000 gallons
$.71/1,000 gallons
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 39
Water Charge - from pumping station
$1.12/1,000 gallons
Construction Water
13.04.180
Water at building site
$3.45/1000 gallons
$3.45/1000 gallons
Water from City Shop
$3.45/1000; $8.65 minimum charge
$3.45/1000; $8.65 minimum charge
Hydrant Meter Fee
$6.15/day + $3.40/1000;
$9.55 minimum charge
$6.15/day + $3.40/1000;
$9.55 minimum charge
Flushing & Disinfection Fee
$15.30/1000'
Other Fees
13.04.007 e
Late Fee
$ 15.30
$ 15.30
Returned Check Fee
$ 29.80
$ 29.80
Tamper Fine
$ 124.40
$ 124.40
13.04.010(a)
Tapping Fee
1” & 2” included in connection fee
+2” up to & including 8”
+8” up to & including 12”
$ N/C
$568.70
$854.15
$ N/C
$568.70
$854.15
13.04.050
COLLECTION FEE
$ 46.10
$ 46.10
13.04.140
13.04.190
13.04.110 B
Inactive Fee
$ 7.95
$ 7.95
13.04.110 D
Fee for each hotel/motel room
$ 12.55
$ 12.55
13.04.150
Meter Test Deposit
$ 46.10
$ 46.10
(Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord 13-19, 2013; Ord 14-11, 2014; Ord 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016; Ord 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 40
SEWER RATES CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION Monthly Fee- Inside City Limits Monthly Fee - Within UGA
Residential
13.08.080
Single Family & Duplexes
$41.05 per living unit
$46.20 per living unit
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per connection
$7.95 per connection
Septic Systems
$0.00 per month
Commercial:
13.08.080
Commercial Business
$41.05 per ERU
$46.20 per ERU
Inactive Fee
$7.95 per connection
$7.95 per connection
Other Fees
13.08.075
Effluent disposal fee at WWTP
$180.00 for up to 2500 gallons
$180.00 for up to 2500 gallons WATER CONNECTION FEES CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION FEE - Inside City Limits FEE - Within UGA Reclaimed Water Connection Fee
13.04.112 (f)
1"
$ 2,274.00
$ 3,938.00
$ -
2"
$ 4,092.00
$ 7,120.00
$ 909.00
3"
$ 5,302.00
$ 10,604.00
$ 1,325.00
4"
$ 6,818.00
$ 13,633.00
$ 1,706.00
6"
$ 10,604.00
$ 21,205.00
$ 2,652.00
8"
$ 13,633.00
$ 27,265.00
$ 3,409.00
10"
$ 18,177.00
$ 36,352.00
$ 4,545.00
12" or larger
$ 24,235.00
$ 48,468.00
$ 6,059.00
SEWER CONNECTION FEES
CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION FEE - Inside City Limits FEE - Within UGA
13.08.050 (d)
Size of Service
4" or less
$ 864.00
$ 1,724.00
6"
$ 2,588.00
$ 5,172.00
8" or larger
$ 5,167.00
$ 10,347.00
(Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord 13-19, 2013; Ord 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016; Ord 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 41
GARBAGE RATES
CODE REFERENCE
DESCRIPTION
FEE
All Classes
65 Gallon Cart 1x/month
$9.80
per month
65 Gallon Cart 1st & 3rd week only
$13.60
per month
65 Gallon Cart
$22.45
per month
65 Gallon Cart w/drive-in service
$29.05
per month
6.08.090
95 Gallon Cart
$28.50
per month
95 Gallon Cart w/drive-in service
$35.80
per month
Extras (Bag, box or can up to 33 gallons at time of scheduled pickup)
$2.55
Each
Return Trip
$5.80
Each
Carry Out Service (1st 25 feet)
$2.40 per trip or $9.75 per month for every 25 feet
Carry In Service (1st 25 feet)
$2.40 per trip or $9.75 per month for every 25 feet
OTHER GARBAGE FEES:
Toter Damage
$ 83.55
Tire disposal Fee
$ 3.90/tire
Dumpster Locking Device
$ 83.55
Misc container Repair
$ 197.60
Tractor/Semi Truck Tires
$ 46.40/tire
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 42
GARBAGE RATES - COMMERCIAL & OTHER CONTAINERS CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION MONTHLY FEES
DUMPSTERS
1X/WK
2X/WK
06.08.090
1 YD
$60.70
$ 121.40
2 YD
$102.90
$ 205.80
3 YD
$165.75
$ 331.50
4 YD
$198.50
$ 397.00
6 YD
$228.05
$ 456.10
8 YD
$261.80
$ 523.60
DESCRIPTION RATES
06.08.090
Return Trip
¼ of dumpster monthly fee
Extra Service
¼ of dumpster monthly fee
Delivery Fee on temporary
containers (>3 months)
$43.80
Call back fee
$139.90/hr billed in ¼ hour increments
Drive In Service beyond 125 Feet
$7.65
Per Month
Extra Yards
$15.40
Per Yard
DROPBOX DESCRIPTION RATES
06.08.090
20 yd Dropbox - Service
$351.60
Per Dump
20 yd Dropbox - Rent
$194.75
Per Month
40 yd Dropbox - Service
$504.30
Per Dump
40 yd Dropbox - Rent
$313.65
Per Month
Delivery Fee
$102.50
1x Only all sizes
Extra Tons
$49.20
Per Ton
Monthly rental, service, repairs, cleaning and daily charges will be determined according to
available contract rates.
COMPACTORS DESCRIPTION RATES
06.08.090
20 yd Compactor
$527.00
Per Dump
30 yd Compactor
$789.00
Per Dump
40 yd Compactor
$1,053.00
Per Dump
Turn around Fee
$171.00
per round trip
Monthly rental, service, repairs, cleaning and daily charges will be determined according to
available contract rates. (Ord 11-11, 2011; Ord 11-20, 2011; Ord 12-12, 2012; Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord 13-19, 2013, Ord 14-11, 2014; Ord 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016; Ord 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 43
CEMETERY RATES CODE REFERENCE DESCRIPTION RESIDENT NON-RESIDENT
14.20.020
ADULT SPACES
Space
$634.00
$930.00
Care
283.00
382.00
Burial Service
1,199.00
1,607.00
TOTAL
2,116.00
2,919.00
INFANT SPACES
Space
$318.00
$423.00
Care
283.00
382.00
Burial Service
634.00
847.00
TOTAL
1,235.00
1,652.00
CREMAINS SPACES
Space
$423.00
$573.00
Care
283.00
382.00
Burial Service
634.00
847.00
TOTAL
1,340.00
1,802.00
COLUMBARIUM
Space
$354.00
$481.00
Care
283.00
382.00
Burial Service
283.00
382.00
TOTAL
920.00
1,245.00
OTHER FEES
Saturday, Sunday burials
$589.00
$796.00
Holiday or Holiday Weekend Burials
$737.00
$991.00
City Liner (plus tax)
$650.00
$882.00
Additional Engraving Fee on Columbarium
$62.00
$79.00
Exhumation Cost
$1,031.00
Cremains Exhumation
$148.00
Double Headstone Removal Fee
$113.00
Headstone Set/Re-Set Fee
$442.00
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 44
PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
Code Reference
Description
Fee
17.01.035
Zoning Text Amendment
$765.00
17.01.035
Zoning Map Amendment
$546.00
20.04.220
Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment
$765.00
17.02.090
Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment
$546.00
19.12.100 (2)
Variance
$1,092.00
19.12.100 (2)
Conditional Use Permit
$1,310.00
17.01.035
Planned Unit Development
$656.00
17.01.035
Planned Unit Development Final
$164.00
17.01.035
Accessory Dwelling Unit
$67.00
17.01.035
Short Plat Type I (1-4 lots)
$328.00
17.01.035
Short Plat Type I Final Plat
$110.00
17.01.035
Short Plat Type II (5-9 lots)
$382.00
18.04.520
Short Plat Type II Final Plat
$110.00
17.01.035
Short Plat Alteration/Amendment
$328.00
18.04.630
Preliminary Plat
$600.00
18.04.720
Final Plat
$164.00
17.01.035
Plat Alteration/Amendment
$436.00
17.01.035
Preliminary Plat Extension
$67.00
17.01.035
Binding Site Plan
$1,310.00
18.04.810
Binding Site Plan Final
$138.00
17.01.035
Lot Line Adjustment
$67.00
17.01.035
SEPA Review
$328.00
20.04.220
SEPA Review with concurrent project review
$328.00
SEPA DS/EIS
$1,092.00
19.09.042(E)
Administrative Variances
$110.00
Annexations
$302.00
Vacations
$103.00
(Ord 12-15, 2012; Ord 12-23, 2012; Ord 13-19, 2013; Ord 14-19, 2014; Ord 15-21, 2015; Ord 16-22, 2016; Ord 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-09, 2019)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 45
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL RATES
CODE REFERENCE
DESCRIPTION
RESIDENT NON RESIDENT
5.04.030 A.
Daily Pass – Prices Include Tax
5 years and under
Free
6-17 year old
$9.75
18 years old and older
$11.00
60 years and older
$9.75
Lap Swim
$5.25
5.04.030 D.
Punch Card – Prices Include Tax
Punch Card for 10 entries, any age
$54.00
5.04.030 B.
Season Pass – Prices Include Tax
Individual Child (6-17 years old) and Seniors
$81.25
$105.50
Individual Adult (18 years old and older)
$99.25
$129.00
Family Pass up to five (5) family members
$189.25
$246.00
5.04.040
Additional family members after five (5)
$18.75
$24.25
5.04.030 E.
Facility Rental – prices include Tax
Private Rental – not during public access hours
regardless of number of patrons
$333.25/Hour
$433/Hour
Groups during normal public hours regardless of number of patrons
$125.25/Hour
$162.75/Hour
Swim Lessons
Regular Lesson
$44.75
$58.00
Semi-Private Lesson
$67.25
$87.25
Private Lesson
$110.50
$143.75
(Ord 16-22, 2016; Ord 17-12, 2017; Ord 18-03, 2018; Ord 18-24, 2018; Ord 19-02, 2019;
Ord 19-09, 2019)
Chapter 3.40
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 46
EPHRATA TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT
Sections:
3.40.010 Transportation Benefit District Established.
3.40.015 Assumption of Transportation Benefit District
3.40.020 Governing Board.
3.40.040 Powers of the Ephrata Transportation Benefit District.
3.40.050 Establishment of Revenue Sources.
3.40.060 Transportation Improvements Funded.
3.40.080 Liberal construction
3.40.090 Severability
3.40.010 Transportation Benefit District Established. There is created a transportation benefit district to be known as the Ephrata Transportation Benefit District or “District” with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the city as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations.
3.40.015 Assumption of Transportation Benefit District. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City of Ephrata assumes all of the rights, powers, immunities, functions, and obligations of the Ephrata Benefit District previously established in this chapter, and the City of Ephrata is hereby vested with each and every right, power, immunity, function, and obligation granted to or possessed by the Ephrata Transportation Benefit District under Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter, and/or any other applicable law as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The rights, powers, functions and obligations previously exercised and/or performed by the governing body of the Ephrata Transportation District pursuant to EMC 3.40.020 are hereby assumed by and transferred to the City of Ephrata city council.
3.40.020 Governing Board
(A) The Ephrata City Council shall have the authority to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW and this chapter.
(B) The City shall implement the material change policy previously adopted by the Ephrata Transportation Benefit District to address major plan changes that affect project delivery or the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1).
(C) The City shall issue an annual report, pursuant to the requirements of RCW 36.73.160 (2)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 47
3.40.040 Powers of the City
The City shall possess all of the powers of a Transportation Benefit District authorized pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW.
3.40.050 Establishment of Revenue Sources
The City shall have the authority to establish fees and other revenue sources consistent with Chapter 36.73 RCW, including without limitation the power:
(A) To impose and collect a sales and use tax as provided in RCW 36.73.040(3)(a) and RCW 82.14.0455, only if approved by City voters pursuant to RCW 36.73.065.
(B) To impose and collect a motor vehicle license fee as provided in RCW 36.73.040(3)(b) and RCW 82.80.140 for the purposes set forth in this chapter and as may be subsequently authorized according to law.
(C) To impose and collect ad valorem property taxes authorized by RCW 36.73.060, only if approved by City voters pursuant to RCW36.73.065.
(D) To issue general obligation bonds and revenue bonds as provided in RCW 36.73.070.
3.40.060 Transportation improvements funded.
The revenues generated by exercise of the powers granted in EMC 3.40.050 and Chapter 36.73 RCW shall be used for transportation improvements that preserve, maintain and operate existing infrastructure of the City consistent with the requirements of Chapter 36.73 RCW. Expenditures of such revenues shall preserve, maintain and operate the City’s previous investments in transportation infrastructure, reduce the risk of transportation facility failure, improve safety, or reduce congestion. In addition to the foregoing, the funds generated may be used for any purpose allowed by law including to make transportation improvements that are consistent with existing state, regional, and local transportation plans and necessitated by existing or reasonably foreseeable congestion levels pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW. The transportation improvements funded by this Chapter shall be made in an effort to reduce the risk of transportation facility failure and improve safety, decrease travel time, increase daily and peak period trip capacity, improve safety, continue the cost-effectiveness of the City’s infrastructure investments, and continue the optimal performance of the transportation system. Any change or expansion of these authorized purposes shall be undertaken only after notice, hearing and adoption of an authorizing ordinance in accordance with RCW 36.73.050(b)(2) or a vote of the people pursuant to RCW 36.73.065(c).
3.40.080 Liberal construction
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 - 48
This chapter is to be liberally construed to accomplish the purpose of establishing a transportation benefit district with the broadest possible authority under Chapter 36.73 RCW as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
3.40.090 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, phrase, or word of this chapter
should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall no affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, phrase or work of this chapter. (Ord. 18-02, 2018; Ord. 18-08, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 1
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter:
5.03 Business Licenses
5.04 Municipal Swimming Pool
5.05 Admission Tax
5.08 Utility Occupational Tax
5.10 Special Events
5.24 Pool Halls
5.28 Pool, Billiard, Shuffleboard Tables, Electronic or Video Games
5.44 Charitable Solicitations
5.48 Pawnbrokers and Pawnshops
5.50 Street Displays and Sales
5.60 Telecommunication Use Fees
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 2
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 3
Chapter 5.03
BUSINESS LICENSES
Sections:
5.03.010 Statutory authority.
5.03.020 Definitions.
5.03.030 License--Required.
5.03.040 Exemptions.
5.03.050 License - Application.
5.03.060 License--Contents.
5.03.070 Application for new business.
5.03.080 Location change.
5.03.090 Term of license.
5.03.110 Fee schedule.
5.03.120 Payment of fee--Time limit.
5.03.130 Disposition of moneys.
5.03.150 Collection of fees by court action.
5.03.160 Loudspeakers and Sound-amplifying Devices.
5.03.170 Enforcement.
5.03.180 Consent to Inspections and Searches.
5.03.190 Denial or Revocation of License.
5.03.200 Appeal of Denial or Revocation.
5.03.210 Violation - Penalty.
5.03.010 Statutory authority. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the authority and power of the City to license, for the purposes of regulation and revenue, all and every kind of business authorized by law and transacted and carried on within the corporate limits of the City, as provided by law.
5.03.020 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section:
(1) “Business, trade or profession” means any activity or venture carried on for profit or held out as a service for fees whether paid in cash or by means of barter or trade.
(2) “Engaging in Business”
a) The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.
b) This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 4
activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business: in subsection (1). If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.
c) Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.
i. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible property or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.
ii. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office place of business or other establishment in the City.
iii. Soliciting sales.
iv. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
v. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
vi. Installing, constructing or supervising installation or construction of, real or tangible property.
vii. Soliciting, negotiating or approving franchise, license or other similar agreements.
viii. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
ix. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.
x. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.
xi. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers veterinarians.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 5
xii. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.
xiii. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf or for customers or potential customers.
xiv. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.
xv. In-store socking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.
xvi. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
xvii. Engaging in cryptocurrency or virtual currency mining including the operation of specialized computer equipment for the primary purpose of compiling, verifying, or adding to a decentralized public ledger utilizing block chain verification in exchange for a reward.
d) If a person or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license.
i. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer
ii. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
iii. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.
iv. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.
v. Attending, but not participating gin a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events”. Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
vi. Conducting advertising through the mail.
vii. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.
e) A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 6
license, provided that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (d)
The city expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.
(Ord 18-18, 2018)
(3) “Peddler” means any person whether a resident of the City of Ephrata, or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter. However, persons who regularly exhibit samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only shall not be defined as a peddler. The word “peddler” shall include the words “hawker” and “huckster”.
(4) “Person” means the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, co-partnership, joint venture or society or any other organization.
(5) “Transient merchant”, “itinerant merchant” or “itinerant vendor” means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling or delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in the furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any street, alley, lot, yard or any other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 7
location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
(6) “Transient business” or “itinerant business” means a business operated by a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor.
(7) “Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization” means any tax exempt nonprofit corporation, association, corporation, or organization recognized by the State of Washington and Federal Government. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.030 License--Required. It is unlawful for any person, company, association, corporation, or partnership to engage in any kind of business, trade or profession authorized by law within the City, without first obtaining a license as provided for by this chapter. This shall include all peddlers, hawkers, solicitors and itinerant merchants or vendors. Exempt persons or entities, including but not limited to bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations, shall be issued a no fee Nonprofit license by the State of Washington Business Licensing Service in coordination with the City Clerk or his/her designee if they meet the exemption provisions of this chapter. Exempt persons or entities shall not conduct any business activity until such a license has been issued. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.040 Exemptions. A fee as provided for in this chapter shall not be required in the following situations.
(a) A person selling products, fruits or crops actually produced by the seller.
(b) A person making casual or isolated sales of goods or merchandise not in the course of a business at a flea market, rummage sale, yard sale, garage sale, farmer’s market, bazaar or like sale when such sales, markets or bazaars are conducted on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday or any City recognized holiday and provided also, that such flea markets, bazaars or the like shall be licensed by the City of Ephrata for operation at the particular location indicated on that license.
(c) Sales conducted by bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations.
(d) Sales conducted by students of public or private primary and secondary schools. (Ord. 01-12).
(e) For purposes of the license by this chapter, any person or businesses whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than $5,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the city, shall submit a business license registration to the City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 8
Clerk or designee. The threshold does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.
(Ord 05-12, 2005) (Ord 08-05, 2005) (Ord 13-08, 2013) (Ord 18-18, 2018)
5.03.050 License - Application. Applicants for licenses under this chapter, whether a person, firm, partnership, limited liability company or corporation, shall file an application with the State of Washington Business Licensing Service (BLS) in coordination with the City Clerk or his/her disignee showing:
(a) The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the City of Ephrata; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons if it is not the same as the local address; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated and the name of the registered agent for service of process;
(b) The place or places in the City of Ephrata where it is proposed to carry on applicant’s business;
(c) Proof of the tax identification number of the business and a showing that provision has been made to report all sales within the city to the account of the city with the state department of revenue.
(d) Additional information may be required to include a scaled floor plan (1/4 inch - 1 foot) of the proposed business space with each room or area designated for the proposed space with the square footage of each room or area and a notation as to the total square footage of the entire building or business space. A parking plan may also be required; showing the (when applicable) number of off-street parking spaces, disabled parking spaces, and any entry ramps or other parking/access features. (Ord 05-12, 2005)(Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.060 License - Contents. All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the State of Washington Business Licensing Service (BLS) in cooperation with the City of Ephrata upon paying to the State the proper license fee as provided in this chapter. All licenses shall bear the name of the licensee and shall designate the nature of the business, trade or profession operated by the licensee. The licenses shall also designate the location where the business, trade or profession is carried on and the date of expiration of the license. Each licensee shall conspicuously post such license in his place of business or office, and shall produce such license
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 9
for inspection if required to do so by any customer, police officer or authorized city official. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.070 Application for new business. If the licensee is a new business operating in one or more fixed locations, prior to the issuance of the business license, the City Clerk or his/her disignee shall submit the application therefore to the Fire Chief, the Building Official, and the Community Development Director for approval of the location where the licensee is to carry on the business, trade or profession, and the business license shall be issued only if the location is in compliance with building codes, fire codes, and zoning regulations of the city as those codes relate to application. If the licensee is a new business operating as a peddler or transient or itinerant merchant, prior to the issuance of the business license, the City Clerk or his/her disignee shall submit the application therefore to the Community Development Director for approval of the area or locations where the licensee is to carry on the business, trade or profession, and the business license shall be issued only if the location is in compliance with zoning regulations of the City as those codes relate to application. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.080 Location change. If the existing licensee desires to change the location of the business, trade or profession from the location designated on the business license, application must be made to the State of Washington Business Licensing Service in coordination with the City Clerk or his/her designee prior to the change in location and the City Clerk or his/her disignee shall, prior to the issuance of a new business license, submit the application therefore to the Fire Chief, the Building Official, and the Community Development Director for approval of the new location where the licensee is to carry on the business, trade or profession, and the business license shall be issued only if the location is in compliance with building codes, fire codes and zoning regulations of the City as those codes relate to the application to change location. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.090 Term of license. All business licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed annually and have an expiration date as determined by the State of Washington Business Licensing Service. The license term or expiration date will be coordinated with the terms or expiration dates of all other licenses required by the State. Fees may be pro-rated depending on the BLS expiration date. License renewals shall be issued by the State Business Licensing Service in cooperation with the City upon receipt from the business of a request for renewal of business license in the form prescribed by the State Business Licensing Service, providing that no change in ownership, character of business or location is indicated. If such change is indicated, a new application shall be submitted and fees paid. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 10
5.03.110 Fee schedule. The business license fee schedule is fixed in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00), per year plus any BLS handling fees, payable in advance, for each business, trade or profession, conducted or carried on within the corporate limits of the City. If more than one business is conducted on a single premises, a separate license shall be required for each separate business conducted, operated, engaged in or practiced. Proration may occur depending on the BLS expiration date. (Ord 13-18, 2013)
New Applications. Any applicant for a new business license, or any change in ownership, character, and/or management that requires a new application to the State of Washington BLS and City, shall be charged a fee of eighty ($80.00) dollars plus any applicable BLS processing fees, in addition to the business license fee. Small businesses exempt from the business license fee under Section 5.03.040 (e) shall be subject to the application fee plus any applicable BLS processing fees. (Ord 05-12, 2005)(Ord 13-08, 2013)(Ord 18-18, 2018)(Ord 18-20, 2018)
5.03.120 Payment of fee--Time limit.
(a) All persons, partnerships, companies, associations or corporations who are engaged in business or in practice of their trades or professions must renew their license by the expiration date. In the event the license is not so procured the following penalties shall apply in addition to any civil penalties for violations of the municipal code in addition to any Business Licensing Service penalties:
(1) If the license fee is not paid within 30 days of the expiration date, the owner/operator(s) shall be subject to a C-16 penalty;
(2) If the license fee is not paid within 90 days of the expiration date, the owner/operator(s) shall be subject to a C-12 penalty.
(3) If the license fee and any associated penalties are not paid within 120 days of the expiration date, the owner/operator(s) shall be subject to a C-1 penalty for each week that the business continues to operate. (Ord 05-12, 2005)
(b) All persons, partnerships, companies, associations or corporations who commence business or practice of their trades or professions in the city after January 1, 1979, shall, prior to the commencement of business, procure their license to operate and if the license to operate is not procured prior to the commencement of business, then the penalties provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall apply and be imposed using the date the business began operation as January 1 for purposes of computing time limits and dates for the imposition of penalties. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 11
5.03.130 Disposition of money. All funds received by the City under the terms of this chapter shall be paid into the Current Expense Fund of the City and budgeted annually for any municipal purpose, as required by law.
5.03.150 Collection of fees by court action. In addition to any other penalties or remedies, the City shall have the power to institute suit or action in the Municipal Department of the District Court for the purpose of collecting any license fees that are due and payable. In any action upon a civil infraction for failure to obtain a business license, the City shall be deemed to have requested as a portion of its relief that the court require the defendant to obtain a business license as one of the terms of the penalty in addition to any other penalties to be imposed. If the defendant is found to have committed the infraction, the court shall order the defendant to obtain a business license as one of the penalties to be imposed. The cost of that license shall include all penalties as provided herein for obtaining a business license 90 days after the expiration of license. (Ord 13-08, 2013)
5.03.160 Loudspeakers and Sound-amplifying Devices. No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the City where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced there from capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
5.03.170 Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Police Officers or Code Enforcement Official of the City of Ephrata to examine the places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be personnel. Any employee of the City authorized to enforce this chapter or any state law or rule applicable to any entity subject to this chapter shall have enforcement powers.
5.03.180 Consent to Inspections and Searches. Every person who obtains a business license hereunder agrees to subject their place of business whether it be a building, room, cart, stand, vehicle or stock of merchandise to inspection by City, County and Health District and state officials with jurisdiction to enforce, health, safety, occupational and tax laws.
5.03.190 Denial or Revocation of license.
(a) The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be denied or revoked by the Clerk of the City of Ephrata, after notice to the licensee and an
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 12
opportunity for the licensee to respond, for any of the following causes: (Ord 08-05, 2005)
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
(2) Felony conviction, within the last 10-years, that directly relates to the specific trade, occupation, vocation, or business for which the license is sought.
(3) Operation of a place of business in violation of the provision of the zoning regulations of the City, or lack of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Any violation of this chapter.
(5) When reasonably necessary in the interest of protection of the public health safety, peace, or welfare, to include, but not limited to, when a licensed holder is conducting business in a facility without public utilities such as water service, sewer service, or refuse collection service.
(6) An applicant or licensee who has suffered a civil judgment based upon fraud, misrepresentation, or violation of the Washington Consumer Protection Act.
(7) Failure to operate the business or activity in accordance with any federal, state, or local law or regulation.
(8) The license is being used for a purpose different from that for which it was issued. (Ord 05-12, 2005)
(9) Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in any unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(10) Failure of the licensee, or any other person occupying the location where the licensee operates, to pay, submit or provide before the established due date or delinquency any payment, report or submittal required by the code or any other law applicable to the licensee. The items to be provided include but are not limited to license fees, permit fees, tax reports and tax payments.
(b) Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 13
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such mailing is conclusive proof of delivery of the notice of the hearing.
5.03.200 Appeal of Denial or Revocation. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk in regard to the denial of application for license or in connection with the revocation of a license as provided for in this chapter, shall have the right to appeal under the provisions set forth in Sections 1.22.110-140 of this code.
5.03.210 Violation - Penalty.
(a) Any person operating a business, trade or profession without a license as required herein shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall be subject to payment of a C-1 penalty together with all penalties and assessments for each violation. Each separate day of operation without a business license is deemed a separate violation. This penalty is in addition to any other remedies available to the city under this code.
(Ord. 98-17, 1998) (Ord 13-08, 2013)(Ord 18-18, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 14
CHAPTER 5.04
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
Sections:
5.04.010 Statement of Purpose
5.04.020 Pool Rules
5.04.030 Pool Admission
5.04.040 Family Pass
5.04.050 Non-Resident
5.04.060 Seniors
5.04.010 Statement of Purpose: The City of Ephrata owns and operates a Municipal Swimming Pool and therefore needs to establish Rules and Regulations and from time to time to review rates for usage.
5.04.020 Pool Rules: The rules for usage of the Municipal Pool are to be posted within the Pool Area.
5.04.030 Pool Admission: Type of Admission.
A. Daily Pass – Prices include tax and are as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services”
(Ord. 06-02, 2006; Ord. 08-11, 2008; Ord. 14-14, 2014; Ord. 15-13, 2015;
Ord 16-01, 2016; Ord. 16-22, 2016)
B. Season Pass – Resident prices include tax and are as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services”
(Ord. 08-11, 2008; Ord. 11-01, 2011; Ord. 16-22, 2016)
C. Season Pass - Non-Resident - Additional Fee prices include tax and are as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services”.
(Ord. 08-11, 2008; Ord 16-22, 2016)
D. Punch Card – Price includes tax and are as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services”.
(Ord 12-06, 2012; Ord 15-13, 2015; Ord. 16-22, 2016)
E. Facility Rental Rate prices include tax and are as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services”
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 15
Rental must be preauthorized by the Recreation Department at least 24 hours prior to event date to receive rate.
(Ord. 11-08, 2011; Ord. 16-22, 2016)
F. The Ephrata-based Swimming team shall pay for the full hourly rate of one lifeguard for the hours that the Ephrata-based swimming team use the Splash Zone facility. This amount, rounded to the nearest hour, shall be billed to the Ephrata-based swimming team at the end of the swimming season. If the Mayor so directs, the City may accept payment from the Ephrata-based swimming team in the form of a capital improvement of general use and value to Splash Zone. Any such capital improvements shall have the value established and approved by the Mayor, upon his inspection as is necessary, before it is accepted in lieu of payment. All applicable warrantees shall be provided and transferred to the City. Such capital improvement shall be completed and/or transferred to the City during the same budget year as when payment is due. (Ord. 06-15, 2006)
G. Education Discount.
When utilized for educational purposes, as determined by the City Administrator or their designee, the fees may be discounted by up to 50% of the standard Pool Admission Rate or Facility Rental rate. An “Educational Purpose” shall meet the criteria of: 1) being produced with the purpose of educating the participants and/or 2) the event is educational in nature. (Ord. 11-08, 2011)
H. Early Sales Discount.
Season Passes, purchased prior to last Friday of April each year, shall be discounted 10%, not including the non-resident fee, from the total cost, rounded to the nearest dollar. (Ord. 06-02, 2006) (Ord. 06-15, 2006)
I. Promotional Admission Rates.
During the months of August and September, the Administration is authorized to lower the Daily Pass rate for promotional purposes. The rate shall not be less than $1.00 for any age; and may be for the entire day, or a portion of a day. (Ord 11-09, 2011; Ord 16-01, 2016)
5.04.040 Family pass rates are good for up to five (5) family members. There will be an additional fee as established in Chapter 3.35 “Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services” for each additional family member after 5. For purposes of qualifying for a “Family Pass” a family shall consist of people living under the same roof for ¼ of the calendar year or be claimed by the primary pass holder on their income tax. Nannies and/or babysitters may be included on a Family Pass so long as the nannie or babysitter lives in the house or works in the house for at least 8-hours each day during the summer swimming season. (Ord.11-08, 2011; Ord. 16-22,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 16
2016)
5.04.050 Non-Resident. A person residing outside of the city limits and does not own taxable property within the incorporated area of the City of Ephrata.
(Ord. 17-06, 2017)
5.04.060 Seniors – 60 years and older.
(Ord 08-11, 2008)
(Ord. 96-37, 1996)(Ord. 02-04, 2002)(Ord. 03-13, 2003)(Ord. 05-07, 2005)(Ord. 06-02, 2006)(Ord. 06-15, 2006, Ord 08-11, 2008; Ord. 11-01, 2011; Ord. 11-08, 2011; Ord. 14-02, 2014; Ord 15-13, 2015; Ord 16-01, 2016; Ord. 16-22, 2016)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 17
CHAPTER 5.05
ADMISSION TAX
Sections:
5.05.010 Tax Imposed
5.05.020 Exemptions
5.05.030 Collection and Remittance of Tax
5.05.040 Records
5.05.050 Remittance
5.05.060 Civil Penalty
5.05.010 Tax Imposed
There is a tax levied and imposed upon every person who pays an admission charge to any place according to the following scale based on Gross Revenues from Admissions:
$0-1,000,000: 0.5% and exemption from 5.05.040
$1,000,000 and above: 2.0%
5.05.020 Exemptions
The following are exempt from this tax: All public and private educational institutions and their events, and all non-profit, tax-exempt organizations as defined by Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the IRS Code, as it may be amended, and their events. Further, any and all activities and events which are held no more than once during any calendar year; such as festivals, fairs, theaters, circus’, shows, exhibitions, entertainments, concerts, events, amusements, or any similar occurrences.
5.05.030 Collection and Remittance of Tax
Every person receiving payment for admissions on which a tax is levied under this chapter shall be deemed to hold the tax in trust until the same is paid over to the City Clerk. If the person responsible fails to remit the tax to the City, they shall be personally liable for the amount of such tax. The tax imposed under this chapter shall be reported and remitted to the City each and every quarter. This tax shall be paid to the City no later than the end of the month following the end of each quarter.
5.05.040 Records
Everyone liable for the collection and payment of the admissions tax shall keep and preserve for five (5) years all books and records relevant to the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 18
collection and payment of the admissions tax and such books and records shall be open for examination and audit at all reasonable times by the City or its duly authorized agent, provided that the gross revenues from admissions exceed $1,000,000 annually.
5.05.050 Remittance
If full payment of the tax is not received by the City Clerk on or before the last day of the month following the end of the quarter, the following penalties shall apply:
Greater than 30-days: An additional 5% of the tax due to the City.
31-60 days late: An additional 10% of the tax due to the City
More than 60-days: An additional 20% of the tax due to the City of Ephrata. The City may also apply interest to the total amount due, at the maximum rate allowed by law.
5.05.060 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable, as defined in Chapter 1.04 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
(Ord. 07-01, 2007)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 19
CHAPTER 5.08
UTILITY OCCUPATIONAL TAX
Sections:
5.08.010 Imposed.
5.08.020 Exercise of revenue licensing powers.
5.08.030 Definitions.
5.08.040 Occupation license required.
5.08.050 License tax year.
5.08.060 Occupations subject to tax.
5.08.070 Exceptions and deductions.
5.08.080 Payment of taxes.
5.08.090 Sale or transfer of business.
5.08.100 Record keeping.
5.08.110 Auditing procedure.
5.08.120 Overpayment or underpayment of tax.
5.08.125 Consent to inspections.
5.08.130 Remedy for nonpayment.
5.08.140 Appeals to city council.
5.08.150 Licenses--Posting.
5.08.160 False returns.
5.08.170 Annexations.
5.08.180 Rules and regulations.
5.08.185 Consent to Inspections.
5.08.190 Violation--Penalty.
5.08.010 Imposed. There is established and imposed a utility occupational tax in the city of Ephrata on the terms and conditions stated in this chapter. (Ord. 1046 §2, 1981).
5.08.020 Exercise of revenue licensing powers. Provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. (Ord. 1046 §3, 1981).
5.08.030 Definitions. In construing the provisions of this chapter, save when otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions shall be applied:
(1) "Competitive telephone service" means the providing by any person of telephone equipment, apparatus, or service, other than toll service, which is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 20
(2) "Gross operating income" means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property or service, installation fees, and receipts by reason of the investment of capital in the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees or other emoluments, however, designated (excluding receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of notes, bonds, mortgages, or other evidences of indebtedness, or stock and the like) and without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest or discount paid or any expense whatsoever.
(3) "Person" or "persons" means person of either sex, firms, copartnership, corporations and other associations of natural person, whether acting by themselves or by servants, agents or employees.
(4) "Taxpayer" means any person liable for the license fee or tax imposed by this chapter.
(5) "Tax year" or "taxable year" means the year commencing January first and ending on the last day of December of the same year, or in lieu thereof, the taxpayer's fiscal year when permission is obtained from the city clerk to use the same as the tax period.
(6) "Telephone" means every primary station and shall exclude extensions.
(7) "Telephone business" means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data, or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line, or channel, or similar communication or transmission system. It includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. The term does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, nor the providing of cable television service. (Ord. 1046 §4, 1981).
5.08.040 Occupation business license endorsement required.
(a) After January 1, 1982, no person shall engage in or carry on any business, occupation, act, or privilege for which a tax is imposed by this chapter without first having obtained, and being the holder of, a business license which carries an endorsement such person may do so, to be known as an occupation business license endorsement. Each such person shall promptly apply to the city clerk for such license endorsement
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 21
upon such forms as the clerk prescribes, giving such information as the clerk deems reasonably necessary to enable the clerk's office to administer and enforce this chapter, and, upon acceptance of such application by the clerk, the clerk shall thereupon issue such license endorsement to the applicant. Such occupation business license endorsement shall be personal and nontransferable and shall be valid as long as the licensee continues in the business and complies with this chapter. (Ord. 95-2, 1995)
(b) Any person engaged in, or carrying on, more than one such business, occupation, act, or privilege shall pay the license tax so imposed upon each of the same.
(c) Any taxpayer who engages in, or carries on, any business subject to tax under this chapter without having his occupation business license endorsement to do so, is deemed to be in violation of this chapter for each day during which the business is so engaged in or carried on, and any taxpayer who fails or refuses to pay the license fee or tax or any part thereof on or before the date due shall be deemed to be operating without having his business license endorsement to do so. (Ord. 1046 §5, 1981).
(d) All references in this chapter to an occupation license shall be deemed to be a reference to the occupation business license endorsement provided for in this section. (Ord. 95-2, 1995).
5.08.050 License tax year. All occupation licenses and the fee or tax imposed as the result of holding an occupation license shall be for the year commencing January 1st and ending the last day of December of the last year; provided, however, that if the taxpayer transacting his business keeps the books reflecting the same for a fiscal year not based on the calendar year, he may, with the consent of the city clerk, obtain his license for a period of his current fiscal year, which shall be deemed his tax year, and pay the fee or tax computed upon his gross income made during his fiscal year covering his accounting period as shown by the method of keeping the books of the business. (Ord. 1046 §6, 1981).
5.08.060 Occupations subject to tax. From and after January 1, 1983, there is levied upon, and there shall be collected from, every person engaged in carrying on the following businesses for hire or for the sale of a commodity, or service within or partly within the corporate limits of the city, the tax for the privilege of so doing business as hereinafter defined, as follows:
(1) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 22
furnishing, delivering, or distributing any telephone business within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to six percent of the total gross operating income. "Gross operating income," for this purpose, shall not include charges which are passed on to the subscribers by a telephone company pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to compensate for the cost of the company of the tax imposed by this chapter;
(2) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, delivering, or distributing electric light and power or electrical energy within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to six percent of the total gross operating income;
(3) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing water for domestic or industrial consumption within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to twenty percent of the total gross operating income; (Ord. 05-21, 2005; Ord. 09-14, 2009)
(4) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing sewer facilities and/or service for domestic or industrial use within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to twenty percent of the total gross operating income; (Ord. 05-21, 2005; Ord. 09-14, 2009)
(5) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing of natural, manufactured, or mixed gas for residential, commercial, domestic, or industrial consumption within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to six percent of the total gross operating income;
(6) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing sanitation or garbage facilities and/or service for domestic or industrial use within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to twenty (20) percent of the total gross operating income; (Ord. 16-23, 2016)
(7) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of furnishing a cable subscription system for television signal distribution within the city, there shall be levied a tax equal to three (3%) percent of the total gross operating income. It is not the intent of this section to classify the business as a public utility. (Ord. 1074, 1982) (Ord. 1046, 1981)(Ord. 12-04, 2012)
(8) Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of furnishing competitive telephone service, including but not limited to cellular telephone service within the city there shall be levied a tax equal to 8% of the total gross operating income. (Ord. 95-2, 1995)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 23
5.08.070 Exceptions and deductions.
(a) In computing the tax, there shall be deducted from the gross operating income the following items:
(1) The amount of credit losses and uncollectibles actually sustained by the taxpayer;
(2) Amounts derived from interstate or foreign commerce or from any business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States or the state of Washington;
(3) Amounts derived by the taxpayer from the city of Ephrata.
(b) Any person subject to payments of a license fee or tax under the provisions of any ordinance of the city, other than this chapter, on account of engaging in any activity for which he is liable to tax under this chapter, may deduct the amount of such fee or tax imposed by this chapter on account of such activity except when the taxes imposed in this chapter are paid by the customer, but such person shall nevertheless, in the manner provided for in this chapter, apply for and procure an occupation license. (Ord. 1046 §8, 1981).
5.08.080 Payment of taxes. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in monthly installments and remittance shall be made on or before the thirtieth day of the month next succeeding. The first payment made under this chapter shall be made by April 30, 1982, for the three-month period ending March 1982, and monthly thereafter. On or before the due date, the taxpayer shall file with the city clerk a written return, upon such form and setting forth such information as the clerk reasonably requires, together with the payment of the amount of the tax. (Ord. 1058 §1, 1982) (Ord. 1046 §9, 1981).
5.08.090 Sale or transfer of business. Upon the sale or transfer during any tax year of a business on account of which a fee or tax is required, the purchaser or transferee shall, if the fee or tax has not been paid in full for the year, be responsible for its payment for that portion of the year during which he carried on such business. (Ord. 1046 §10, 1981).
5.08.100 Record keeping.
(a) It shall be the duty of each taxpayer taxed upon his gross income to keep and enter in a proper book or set of books or records an account which shall accurately reflect the amount of his gross income, which account shall always be open to the inspection of the city clerk or his duly authorized agent, and from which the officer or his agent may verify the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 24
return made by the taxpayer.
(b) The applications, statements or returns made to the city clerk pursuant to this chapter shall not be made public nor shall they be subject to the inspection of any person except the mayor, the city attorney, the city clerk or his authorized agent, and members of the city council. (Ord. 1046 §11, 1981).
5.08.110 Auditing procedure. Upon the failure or refusal of the taxpayer to furnish the information called for by the city clerk or if the books and records of the taxpayer are complicated, or do not readily disclose the information required for making a complete or satisfactory return without the assistance of a skilled accountant, then the city clerk may in his discretion employ a skilled accountant, and such clerical assistance as is necessary, to make an audit of the books and records of the taxpayer and such expenses shall be collected from the taxpayer in the manner provided for the collection of the license or tax. (Ord. 1046 §12, 1981).
5.08.120 Overpayment or underpayment of tax. If the city clerk, upon investigation or upon checking returns, finds that the fee or tax paid is more than the amount required of the taxpayer, he shall, upon request of the taxpayer, refund the amount overpaid by warrant upon the general fund, or credit the amount against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer under this chapter. If the city clerk finds that the fee or tax paid is less than required, he shall send a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, who shall within ten days of the receipt of the statement pay the amount shown thereon. (Ord. 1046 §13, 1981).
5.08.130 Remedy for nonpayment. If any taxpayer fails to apply for a license or make his return, or to pay the fee or tax therefor, or the cost of any audit required by the city clerk or any part thereof within thirty days after the same has become due, the city clerk shall ascertain the amount of the fee or tax or installment thereof and/or cost of audit due, and shall add to such amount a penalty of twelve percent of the amount, and shall notify such taxpayer therefor, who shall be liable therefor in any suit or action by the city for collection thereof. The city clerk shall also notify the city attorney in writing of the name of such delinquent taxpayer and the amount due from him, and the city attorney shall with the assistance of the city clerk collect the same by any appropriate means or by any suit or action in the name of the city of Ephrata. (Ord. 1046 §14, 1981).
5.08.140 Appeals to city council. All taxpayers aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax found by the city clerk to be required under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the city council from such finding by filing a written
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 25
notice of appeal with the city clerk within five days from the time such taxpayer was given notice of such amount. The clerk shall, as soon as practicable, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, which time shall be not later than the next scheduled regular council meeting more than six days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and he shall cause a notice of the time and place thereof to be delivered or mailed to the appellant. At such hearing, the taxpayer shall be entitled to be heard and to introduce evidence in his own behalf. The city council shall thereupon ascertain the correct amount of the fee or tax by resolution and the city clerk shall immediately notify the appellant thereof, which amount, together with costs of appeal, if appellant is unsuccessful therein, must be paid within three days after such notice is given. (Ord. 1046 §15, 1981).
5.08.150 Licenses--Posting.
(a) All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be kept posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place in his principal place of business in the city.
(b) No persons to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall suffer or allow any other person chargeable with a separate license to operate under or display such license. (Ord. 1046 §16, 1981).
5.08.160 False returns. It is unlawful for any person liable to tax under this chapter to fail or refuse to make application for return for license or to pay the fee or tax or installment thereof when due; or for any person to make any false or fraudulent application or return or any false statement or representation, in, or in connection with, any such application or return; or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade payment of the fee or tax, or any part thereof; or for any person to fail to appear, and/or testify in response to subpoena issued pursuant hereto, or to testify falsely upon an investigation of the correctness of a return, or upon the hearing of any appeal; or in any manner to hinder or delay the city or any of its officers or auditors in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1046 §17, 1981).
5.08.170 Annexations. Whenever the boundaries of the city are extended by annexation, all persons subject to this chapter shall be provided copies of all annexation ordinances by the city. (Ord. 1046 §18, 1981).
5.08.180 Rules and regulations. The city clerk is authorized to adopt, publish, and enforce, from time to time, such rules and regulations for the proper administration of this chapter as shall be necessary, and it shall be a violation of this chapter to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 26
regulation lawfully promulgated under this chapter. (Ord. 1046 §20, 1981).
5.08.185 Consent to inspections. Every person holding an occupation business license endorsement who operates within the City and who has any building, places of business, vehicle, conveyance or apparatus used within the City in connection with that business on a regular or occasional basis, agrees to submit upon reasonable notice from the City to inspections of such building, place of business, vehicle, conveyance or apparatus for insurance of compliance with health, safety, and zoning codes. Failure to submit to such an inspection upon reasonable notice shall be cause for revocation of that person’s business license, including the occupation business license endorsement. Any person whose business license is revoked for failure to permit such an inspection may appeal such revocation to the City Clerk within ten days and upon the filing of a written request for an appeal hearing. The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at City Hall allowing the appellant an opportunity to provide any evidence the Clerk deems relevant to the issue. City inspectors may be required to provide evidence to the Clerk. At the conclusion of the hearing the Clerk shall either sustain the license revocation or reinstate the license. (Ord. 95-2, 1995)
5.08.190 Violation--Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as defined in Chapter 1.04 by a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars together with all penalties and assessments imposed by law for each such violation. (Ord. 1046 §21, 1981) (Ord 95-2, 1995)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 27
CHAPTER 5.10
SPECIAL EVENTS
Sections:
5.10.010 Purpose and policy.
5.10.020 Intent.
5.10.030 Definitions.
5.10.040 Exemptions.
5.10.050 Administration.
5.10.060 Permit required.
5.10.070 Permit fee and deposit.
5.10.080 Exemptions from permit fee.
5.10.090 Permit application.
5.10.100 Permit requirements.
5.10.110 Permit conditions.
5.10.120 Denial of application.
5.10.130 Indemnification.
5.10.140 Insurance required.
5.10.150 Revocation or suspension.
5.10.160 Appeal procedure.
5.10.170 Penalty for violation.
5.10.180 Severability.
5.10.010 Purpose and policy. Special events are of infrequent occurrence and temporary nature and may be associated with promotions, holidays, festivals, and the like. Special events shall be allowed by a special events permit granted by the City Administrator or designated appointee.
5.10.020 Intent. It is the specific intent to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter upon the applicant or sponsor, and nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the applicant or sponsor to comply with the provisions stated herein.
5.10.030 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases used herein are as follows:
“Applicant” shall mean any person or organization who seeks a special
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 28
event permit to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter.
“Athletic event” shall mean an occasion in which a group of persons collect to engage in or watch a sport or form of exercise on private or public property and/or on a city street, sidewalk, alley, or other street right-of-way, which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws or controls. Athletic events include, but are not limited to, bicycle and foot races.
“Block party” shall mean a festive gathering on a street which may or may not require the closure of a street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic, and/or use of the street for the festivity including barbecues, picnics, music or games.
“Expressive Activity” means conduct, the sole or principal object of which is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of opinion, views or ideas. Expressive Activity includes, but is not limited to, public oratory and the distribution of literature. (Ord 14-06, 2014)
“Permit application fee” shall mean the fee to be paid by the special event permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the city clerk. Such fee shall be set by the city council.
“Permittee” shall mean any person or organization who has been issued a special events permit by the City Administrator or appointed designee. The permittee shall have authority, subject to approval by the city, to determine participation in commercial activities during a special event.
“Refundable deposit” shall mean the amount of money required of a permittee by the public works department in order to assure adequate cleanup of the special event site. The deposit shall be returned to the permittee upon the completion of the event and approval of the public works department.
“Special Event” means:
(a) Any organized formation, parade, procession, demonstration or assembly which may include persons, animals, vehicles, or any combination thereof, which is to assemble or travel in unison on any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way owned or controlled by the City which
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 29
does not comply with applicable traffic regulations, laws or controls; or
(b) Any organized assemblage of seventy-five (75) or more persons at any public place, property, or facility, which is to gather for a common purpose under the direction or control of a person.
(c) Examples of special events include, but are not limited to, concerts, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, street fairs, community events, on the water activities (such as boat races), mass participation sports (such as marathons and other running events), athletic or sporting events, and community celebrations and observances conducted on public property or public rights of way. (Ord 14-06, 2014)
“Special events permit” shall mean the permit issued by the City Administrator or appointed designee after the applicant has met all applicable reviews and requirements set forth in this chapter.
5.10.040 Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(a) Funeral processions;
(b) Groups required by law to be so assembled;
(c) Pedestrian processions along a route that is restricted to sidewalks and crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls;
(d) Expressive activities. If practicable, the organizers should give notice to the City at least four (4) hours prior to the event informing the City of the date and time of the event and provide an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating. (Ord 14-06, 2014)
(e) Activities of state and federal governmental agencies, including military units, which are performed within the scope of such agency’s duties and functions.
5.10.050 Administration. The City Administrator or designated appointee shall, after consultation with appropriate departments and agencies, have discretionary authority regarding special event permits. The City Administrator or designated appointee may approve, modify, or condition
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 30
an application for a special events permit, in accordance with the principles this Chapter.
5.10.060 Permit required.
(a) Any person desiring to conduct or sponsor a Special Event on public property, and/or which will necessitate the use of the public right-of-way, shall first obtain a special events permit.
(b) Any event subject to the provisions of this Chapter that is staged without complying with all conditions of this Chapter shall be subject to closure by the City Police Department. (Ord 14-06, 2014)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 31
5.10.070 Permit fee and deposit. The fee for issuance of a special events permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. A clean-up deposit is required for applicants or sponsoring organizations of special events involving the sale of food or beverages for immediate consumption, the erection of structures, the use of horses or other animals, other than dogs and cats, or the use of fireworks or other incendiary devices, in an amount reasonably anticipated to be incurred in removing debris or litter caused by such special event, as determined by the City Administrator or designee. The clean-up deposit may be returned after the special event if the applicant or sponsoring organization cleans and restores the area used for the permitted event to the same condition as existed prior to the event. If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or restored, the clean-up deposit shall be applied toward the city’s costs in cleaning up the permitted area. There may be requirements for police officers to control traffic, provide security, and protect people and property. Public works may have costs for placing barricades, roadway preparation, and clean-up.
5.10.080 Exemptions from permit fee.
No fee shall apply to a block party and fees may be waived for special events sponsored by nonprofit agencies and which further the goals and objectives of the city. (Ord 14-06, 2014)
5.10.090 Permit application.
(a) Any person wishing to sponsor a special event shall apply for a special event permit by filing an application with the city clerk at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date on which the event is to begin to occur.
(b) If required by the Administration, the permittee shall provide the city with proof of commercial general liability insurance generally in the amount of one-million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limits per occurrence, two-million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate, and an endorsement naming the city of Ephrata as an additional insured must be provided at the time of application. Upon determination by the Administration and the city’s Risk Manager, higher limits may be required for certain events.
(c) The City Administrator or designated appointee shall issue the special event permit once the application has been approved after review of appropriate agencies to include police, fire, public works, building and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 32
planning, and others as determined by the City Administrator or designated appointee, and the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(d) The City Administrator or designated appointee shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application based on the recommendations of city departments involved in the review process.
5.10.100 Permit requirements.
(a) Special event uses are to be temporary and approved for a particular zoning district by the planning/building director.
(b) Temporary signage and temporary structures will be allowed subject to provisions of this code pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion of the planning/building director.
(c) Requests for temporary parking facilities for special events and street closures for special events shall be subject to provisions of this code pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion of the police chief. Street closures for any portion of a state highway or right of way (such as Basin Street) shall be subject to state requirements and approvals.
(d) Requests for fire and emergency medical services shall be subject to requirements and interpretive authority and discretion of the city’s fire department and the city’s emergency medical service provider, A.M.R. (Ord 11-06, 2011)
(e) Requests for police services shall be subject to provisions of this code pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion of the police chief.
(f) Expenses for fire, police, medical services, parks, and public works crews needed for coverage and cleanup at the special event shall be prepaid and the responsibility of the permittee, even if the permit fee has been waived. If the actual cost for city services and equipment on the date(s) of the event is greater than the estimated cost, the applicant/sponsor will be billed for the difference.
(g) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities shall, as required by applicable statutes and the Grant County Health District, be provided or made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 33
5.10.110 Permit conditions. The City Administrator or designated appointee may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning time, place, and manner of the event; and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property and the control of traffic.
5.10.120 Denial of application. A special event permit may be denied based upon a determination that:
(a) The event would endanger public safety or health;
(b) The proposed event would seriously inconvenience or impair the general public’s use of public property, services or facilities;
(c) The event would unreasonably infringe upon the rights of abutting properties;
(d) The event would conflict with another proximate event or interfere with construction or maintenance work in the immediate vicinity;
(e) There is not sufficient qualified safety personnel or other necessary city staff to accommodate the event;
(f) The applicant failed to complete the application form after being notified of the additional information or documents required;
(g) Information contained in the application of supplemental information requested from the applicant is found to be false in any material detail;
(h) The applicant cannot meet, or is unwilling to meet, all of the requirements of this chapter or any special conditions imposed by any of the reviewing agencies;
(i) Other issues in the public interest were identified by the Mayor, City Council, City Administrator, or designated appointee;
(j) Failure to prepay expenses, fees, charges, deposits, insurance or bonds;
(k) The proposed event is scheduled to occur at a route or location adjacent to a school or class during a time when such school or class is in
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 34
session, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class;
(l) The purpose of the proposed event is to incite crime or the overthrow of the government by force or the event would engage in or encourage participants to engage in illegal acts; or
(m) The primary purpose of the special event is for advertising products, goods or events that are for private profit, and the special event is primarily for private profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the special event.
5.10.130 Indemnification.
(a) Prior to the issuance of the special event permit, the applicant must agree to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in repairing damage to city property occurring in connection with the permitted event.
(b) In consideration of being permitted to produce this special event or activity or use of any city property or facilities in connection with this activity, the applicant (“indemnitor”) agrees to the following:
1. The indemnitor hereby agrees to release, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Ephrata from any and all liability, claims, demands, causes of action, charges, expenses, and attorney fees (including attorney fees to establish the City’s right to indemnity or incurred on appeal) resulting from involvement in this event whether caused by any negligent act or omission of the city or otherwise. This agreement shall not apply to any liability resulting from the sole negligence of the city.
2. The indemnitor agrees to reimburse the City for any loss, theft of, or damage to City property, equipment and/or facilities.
3. The indemnitor agrees to comply with all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and requirements including, but not limited to, not admitting more attendees than designated by Fire Department as safe for the particular event or facility.
4. The indemnitor expressly agrees that this release and hold
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 35
harmless agreement is intended to be as broad and inclusive as permitted by Washington law and that if any portion thereof is held invalid, notwithstanding, the balance shall continue in full legal force and effect.
5. Falsification and/or misrepresentation in completing this application may result in rate adjustment or event cancellation. Changes to the detailed program require immediate notification to city.
(c) The City Administrator or designated appointee has the authority to require a refundable deposit as suggested by the public works department, in accordance with the principles this Chapter, for reimbursement of the costs for cleanup services.
5.10.140 Insurance required.
(a) As required by the City Administrator or designated appointee, the permittee shall provide the city with proof of commercial general liability insurance generally in the amount of at least one-million dollars ($1,000,000) (combined single limits per occurrence), two-million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate, and an endorsement naming the city of Ephrata as an additional insured must be provided. Upon determination by the Administration and the city’s Risk Manager, higher limits may be required for certain events.
(b) Certificates of insurance shall be submitted to the city for approval directly from the insuring agency via postal mail, fax or email. . The insurance policy shall be written on an occurrence basis, shall name the city as an additional insured, shall be written for a period not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the event and extending for a period not less than twenty-four (24) hours following the completion of the event, and shall contain a provision prohibiting cancellation of the policy except upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the city. Acceptability of insurance is subject to approval by the city’s risk administrator. (Ord 11-06, 2011)
5.10.150 Revocation or suspension.
(a) A special events permit issued under this chapter shall be temporary, shall vest no permanent rights in the applicant, and may be immediately revoked or suspended by the City Administrator or designated appointee if:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 36
(1) The applicant has made a misstatement of material fact in the information supplied; the applicant has failed to fulfill a term or condition of the permit in a timely manner; or the check submitted by the applicant in payment of the fee for a permit has been dishonored;
(2) The applicant requests the cancellation of the permit or cancels the event;
(3) The activity endangers or threatens persons or property, or otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of persons or property;
(4) The activity conducted is in violation of any of the terms or conditions of the special events permit;
(5) An emergency or supervening occurrence requires the cancellation or termination of the event in order to protect the public health or safety;
(6) Fails to prepay expenses.
(b) The city shall refund the permit fee in the event of a revocation caused by an emergency or supervening occurrence; the city shall refund the balance of the fee, less the actual costs incurred if the cancellation occurs at the request of an applicant who is in compliance with this chapter.
(c) If any event, use or occupancy for which the permit has been revoked is not immediately discontinued, the City Administrator or his designee may remove any structure or obstruction, or cause to be made, without obligation to do so, such repairs upon the structure or obstruction as may be necessary to render the same secure and safe, or adjourn any special event.
The cost and expense of such removal, repair or adjournment shall be assessed against the permittee, including all professional fees associated with enforcement of the collection of the same.
5.10.160 Appeal procedure. The applicant shall have the right to appeal a denial of a special event permit, or a condition imposed thereby, including the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 37
amount of fees or clean-up deposits imposed or a determination that the applicant’s certificate of insurance does not comply with the city’s requirements. A written notice of appeal shall be filed within five (5) days from the date of the denial or conditional approval. The written notice of appeal shall set forth the specific grounds for the appeal and attach any relevant documents for consideration. The city council shall hear the appeal on the record provided from the designated city official and upon public comment given at the scheduled hearing before the council. The hearing shall be scheduled no later than ten (10) days after receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final.
If there is insufficient time for a timely appeal to be heard by the city council prior to the date on which the event is scheduled, the applicant may, at the applicant’s option, request that the City Administrator hear the appeal. The City Administrator shall hold a hearing no later than five business days after the filing of the appeal and shall render a decision no later than one business day after the hearing on the appeal is closed. If the appeal is requested and heard before the City Administrator, the City Administrator’s decision shall be final.
5.10.170 Penalty for violation. Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation that violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be subject to a C-1 fine. Each day or portion of a day in which a violation is committed constitutes a separate offense.
5.10.180 Severability. If any part, provision or section of this chapter is held to be void or unconstitutional, all other parts not expressly so held shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 07-03, 2007) (Ord. 07-04, 2007)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 38
Chapter 5.24
POOL HALLS
Sections:
5.24.010 Liquor sale, consumption restrictions.
5.24.020 Minors prohibited.
5.24.030 Permitting gambling prohibited.
5.24.040 Gambling prohibited.
5.24.050 Obstruction of view of interior prohibited.
5.24.060 Private, closed room prohibited.
5.24.010 Liquor sale, consumption restrictions.
(a) No retail liquor licensee shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, serve or allow to be consumed upon the licensed premises any liquor from the licensed premises in any manner whatsoever:
(1) Upon the day of any general, special or primary election of any state, county, or municipal officers within the state, district, county or city in which such election is held, and before the polls have closed (except general or special elections of any diking district, drainage district, diking and drainage district, irrigation district or any other district election when such elections are held on an isolated date and the ownership of property is a prerequisite to voting at such elections) ;
(2) Between the hours of two a.m. and two p.m. on Sunday;
(3) Between the hours of ten p.m. on Sunday and six a.m. the following Monday; nor
(4) Between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. on any weekday.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of (a) (2), (3) and (4) of this section, on December 31 the hour of opening shall not be earlier than six a.m., except on Sunday when it shall not be earlier than two p.m., and the hour of closing next following shall not be later than three a.m. New Year's Day. (Ord. 737 §2, 1967: Ord. 31 §1, 1911).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 39
5.24.020 Minors prohibited. Every person who shall admit to, or allow to remain in any public pool or billiard hall, owned, kept or managed by him, in whole or in part any persons under the age of twenty-one years; or who shall permit any such person to play any game of chance or skill in any such place, or any place adjacent thereto; or who shall sell, or give, or permit to be sold or given in such place, to any person under the age of twenty-one, any intoxicating liquor, cigar, cigarette, cigarette paper, or wrapper; or who shall give, sell or permit to be given or sold in such place to any person under the age of twenty-one years any tobacco in any form, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §2, 1911).
5.24.030 Permitting gambling prohibited. Every person, whether as owner, manager or agent, who permits any person or persons whomsoever, to play any game of chance, played with cards, dice or other device, whereby any money or property, or any representation of either, may be bet, wagered or hazarded upon any chance or contingent event in any public pool or billiard hall within the city limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §3, 1911).
5.24.040 Gambling prohibited. Every person who shall bet, wager or hazard any money or property or any representation of either upon any game, scheme or device, opened, conducted or carried on in violation of Section 5.24.030 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §4, 1911).
5.24.050 Obstruction of view of interior prohibited. Every person, being the owner, manager, agent, or employee of any public pool or billiard hall, who shall obstruct the view of the inside thereof from the outside by means of any screen, shade or partition or any other device, at any time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §5, 1911).
5.24.060 Private, closed room prohibited. Every person being the owner, manager, agent or employee of any public pool or billiard hall who shall erect, keep, have or maintain, any private or closed box or room, within the hall or adjacent thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §6, 1911).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 40
Chapter 5.28
POOL, BILLIARD AND SHUFFLEBOARD TABLES,
AND ELECTRONIC OR VIDEO GAMES
Sections:
5.28.010 License required.
5.28.020 Application--Issuance of license.
5.28.030 Fees.
5.28.040 Revocation of license.
5.28.050 Penalty for violation.
5.28.010 License required. It is unlawful for any person, partnership, association or club to operate or permit the operation, in the city of Ephrata, of any pool table, billiard table, shuffleboard table, or other table or game where a charge is made for the use thereof, including electronic or so called "video" games, without first securing a license in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 1057 §1, 1982: Ord. 832 §1, 1972).
5.28.020 Application--Issuance of license. Any person desiring to install or operate or permit any such tables or games, shall make application to the city clerk stating the number of each tables and games and the place where the same are to be operated, and deposit with the clerk the necessary sum for such license. The city clerk shall thereupon refer the license application to the chief of police who shall determine if the types of tables and/or games sought to be licensed comply with the requirements of the statutes of the state of Washington, and if he finds such compliance, he shall thereupon approve the issuance of the license. The city clerk shall thereafter issue such license. (Ord. 832, 1972).
5.28.030 Fees. There shall be a monthly fee for each month, to be charged as follows:
Each billiard or pool table............ $1.00
Each shuffleboard or bowling table .... 2.50
Any pin or ball operated game or other
such game not covered above............ 5.00
Electronic or "video" games............ 2.50
(Ord. 1057 §2, 1982: Ord. 832 §3, 1972).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 41
5.28.040 Revocation of license. The license granted under this chapter shall be revoked in the event the holder thereof is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any provision of the statutes of the state of Washington relating to the use of such tables and/or games, or a violation of any law regulating gambling in this state. (Ord. 832 §4, 1972).
5.28.050 Penalty for violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days; and each day shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 832 §5, 1972)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 42
Chapter 5.44
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Sections:
5.44.010 Definitions.
5.44.020 Permit--Required--Exemptions.
5.44.030 Permit--Application--Contents.
5.44.040 Permit--Application--Investigation.
5.44.050 Permit--Granting.
5.44.060 Permit--Fee.
5.44.070 Permit--Form--Duration.
5.44.080 Permit--Nontransferable--Refund.
5.44.090 Solicitors--Credentials.
5.44.100 Written receipts required.
5.44.110 Denial of application--Hearing.
5.44.120 Revocation of permits--Hearing.
5.44.130 Permit--Suspension or revocation--Notice to chief of police.
5.44.140 Record keeping.
5.44.150 Permit holder's report.
5.44.160 Religious solicitations--Generally.
5.44.170 Religious solicitations--Investigation.
5.44.180 Misrepresentation prohibited.
5.44.190 Violation--Penalty.
5.44.010 Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
(1) "Charitable" means the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.
(2) "Contributions" mans the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
(3) "Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 43
religious denomination, society, organization or league and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof.
(4) "Promoter" means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, organize a campaign of solicitation.
(5) "Religious" and "religion" as used in this chapter shall not mean the work "charitable" as defined in this chapter, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.
(6) "Solicit" and "solicitation" means the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this section. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing moneys credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as defined in this section:
(A) Any oral or written request;
(B) The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication;
(C) The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith;
(D) The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 44
whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated by any charitable or religious purpose. A "solicitation" as defined in this subsection shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. (Ord. 977 §1, 1978).
5.44.020 Permit--Required--Exemptions. No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within the city of Ephrata without a permit from the city clerk-treasurer authorizing such solicitations; provided, however, that the pro- visions of this section shall not apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person, nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes, and holding a valid letter from the United States Internal Revenue Service certifying that such person is exempt from the payment of income taxes under Section 503(c) of the Internal Revenue code or any other applicable section; which organization has a slate of officers comprised of residents of the city of Ephrata and is regularly conducting its activities and meetings within the corporate limits of the city of Ephrata. (Ord. 977 §2, 1978).
5.44.030 Permit--Application--Contents. An application for a permit to solicit as provided by Section 5.44.020 of this Chapter shall be made to the city clerk-treasurer upon forms provided by the city of Ephrata. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the clerk-treasurer at least fifteen days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the clerk-treasurer may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than fifteen days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:
(1) The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit;
(2) If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 45
applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant's records;
(3) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;
(4) A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited;
(5) The names and addresses of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed;
(6) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;
(7) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations;
(8) The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation;
(9) The estimated cost of the solicitation;
(10) The amount of wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;
(11) A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, said statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof;
(12) A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city;
(13) A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed twenty-five percent of the total amount to be raised;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 46
(14) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city of Ephrata, or by any department or officer thereof;
(15) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the clerk-treasurer in order for the clerk-treasurer to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not economical to, the public welfare. If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the clerk-treasurer in writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change. (Ord. 977 §3, 1978).
5.44.040 Permit--Application--Investigation. The clerk- treasurer shall examine all applications filed under Section 5.44.030 of this chapter and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the clerk-treasurer shall deem necessary in order for him to perform his duties under this chapter. Upon request by the clerk-treasurer, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the clerk-treasurer, or any person designated in writing by the clerk-treasurer as his representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. (Ord. 977 §4, 1978).
5.44.050 Permit--Granting. The clerk-treasurer shall issue the permit provided for in Section 5.44.020 of this chapter whenever he shall find the following facts to exist;
(1) That all of the statements made in the application are true;
(2) That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that every member, managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation for honesty and integrity;
(3) That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons;
(4) That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 47
(5) That the solicitation will not be a fraud on the public;
(6) That the solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted primarily for private profit;
(7) That the cost of raising the funds will be reasonable. Any such cost in excess of twenty-five percent of the amount collected shall be considered to be unreasonable unless special facts are presented showing that peculiar reasons make a cost higher than twenty-five percent reasonable in the particular case. The clerk-treasurer shall file in his office for public inspection, and shall serve upon the applicant by registered mail, a written statement of his finding of facts and his decision upon each application. (Ord. 977 §5, 1978).
5.44.060 Permit--Fee. Before a permit is issued there shall be paid to the clerk-treasurer of the city of Ephrata the sum of ten dollars as a permit fee and the sum of one dollar for each facsimile copy of the permit that is desired. (Ord. 977 §6, 1978).
5.44.070 Permit--Form--Duration. Permits issued under this chapter shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city of Ephrata or by any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the clerk-treasurer. No permit may grant the right to solicit longer than ninety days from its date, but the clerk-treasurer may extent any permit for not more than ninety additional days upon a showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to extend the original ninety-day period for such additional days. (Ord. 977 §7, 1978).
5.44.080 Permit--Nontransferable--Return. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the clerk-treasurer within two days of its date of expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof. (Ord. 977 §8, 1978).
5.44.090 Solicitors--Credentials. All persons to whom permits have been issued under this chapter shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such solicitation. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit holder, the date, a statement describing said holder's charitable activity, a description of the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 48
permit holder or of the holder's chief executive officer, and the name, address, age, sex and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued and the specific period of time during which said solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. A copy of such credentials must be filed with the clerk-treasurer at the time the application for a permit is filed and must be approved by the clerk-treasurer as conforming to the requirements of this section before such permit is issued. No Person shall solicit under any permit granted under this chapter without the credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of the permit in his possession. Said credentials and said facsimile copy of the permit must be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited and to any police officer of the city of Ephrata. No agent or solicitor shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose for any person in the city of Ephrata unless such person has been granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 977 §9, 1978).
5.44.100 Written receipts required. Any person receiving money or anything having a value of one dollar or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under this chapter shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received; provided however, that this section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the written approval of the clerk-treasurer where it is impractical to determine the amount of such contributions. (Ord. 977 §19, 1978).
5.44.110 Denial of application--Hearing. Within five days after receiving notification by registered mail that his application for a permit to solicit under this chapter has been denied, any applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application before the city council, together with written exceptions to the findings of face upon which the clerk-treasurer based his denial of the application. Upon the filing of such a request, the city council shall fix a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held within five days after the request is filed. At the hearing the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may, in the discretion of the city council, be allowed to participate in the past and present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusions of the hearing the city council shall render a written report either granting or denying the application for a permit. In this report the council shall state the facts upon which its decision is based, and its ruling upon any exceptions filed to the clerk-treasurer's
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 49
original findings of fact upon the application. This report shall be filed in the clerk-treasurer's office for public inspection and a copy shall be served by registered mail upon the applicant and all parties to the hearing. (Ord. 977 §11, 1978).
5.44.120 Revocation of permits--Hearing. Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the clerk-treasurer has knowledge, that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or that any promoter, agent or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the clerk-treasurer shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder written notice by registered, special delivery mail of a hearing to be held within two days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the clerk-treasurer has acted in suspending the permit. At the hearing the permit holder, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the clerk-treasurer based the suspension of the permit, and any other facts which may aid the city council in determining whether this chapter has been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. If, after such hearing, the council finds that this chapter has been violated, or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, it shall within two days after the hearing file in the clerk-treasurer's office for public inspection and serve upon the permit holders and all interested persons participating in the hearing, a written statement of the facts upon which the council bases such finding shall immediately revoke the permit. If, after such hearing the council finds that the ordinance has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, it shall within two days after the hearing give to the permit holder a written statement canceling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed. (Ord. 977 §12, 1978).
5.44.130 Permit--Suspension or revocation--Notice to chief of police. The chief of police shall be notified forth-with by the clerk-treasurer of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this chapter.(Ord. 977 §13, 1978).
5.44.140 Record keeping. No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations to it and all disbursements are entered upon the books or records of such person's treasurer or other financial officer. (Ord. 977 §14, 1978).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 50
5.44.150 Permit holder's report. It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this chapter to furnish to the clerk-treasurer within thirty days after the solicitation has been completed, a detailed report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation, and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. This report shall be available for public inspection at the clerk-treasurer's office at any reasonable time; provided, however, that the clerk-treasurer may extend the time for the filing of the report required by this section for an additional period of thirty days upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the permit holder. The permit holder shall make available to the clerk-treasurer, or to any person designated in writing by the clerk-treasurer, as the clerk-treasurer's representative for such purpose, all books, records, and papers whereby the accuracy of the report required by this section may be checked. (Ord. 977 §14, 1978).
5.44.160 Religious solicitations--Generally.
(a) No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within the city of Ephrata without a certificate from the clerk-treasurer. Application for a certificate shall be made to the clerk-treasurer upon forms provided by the city of Ephrata. Such application shall be sworn to, or affirmed, and shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:
(1) The name and address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit;
(2) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant's records;
(3) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;
(4) A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 51
(5) The name and address of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed;
(6) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;
(7) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations;
(8) The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation;
(9) The estimated cost of the solicitation;
(10) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations and the names and addresses of all such persons;
(11) A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for religious purposes by the applicant, said statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it and final distribution thereof;
(12) A full statement of the character and extent of the religious work being done by the applicant within the city of Ephrata;
(13) A statement to the effect that it a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city of Ephrata or by any department or officer thereof;
(14) Such other information as may be submitted to the clerk-treasurer in order for the clerk to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation.
(b) If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any certificate granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the clerk-treasurer in writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 52
(c) Upon receipt of such application, the clerk-treasurer shall forthwith issue the applicant a certificate of registration. The certificate shall remain in force and effect for a period of six months after the issuance thereof, and shall be renewed upon the expiration of this period upon the filing of a new application as provided for in this section. Certificates of registration shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the certificate, the date issued and a statement that the certificate does not constitute on endorsement by the city of Ephrata, or by any of its departments or officers, of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All persons to whom certificates of registration have been issued shall furnish credentials to conform to the requirements specified for credentials in Section 5.44.090 of this chapter, and a copy of such credentials shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer at the time of the filing of the application for a certificate.
No person shall solicit for any religious cause without having such credentials in his possession, together with a copy of the certificate of registration under which the solicitation is being conducted, and such person shall, upon demand, present these credentials and this copy of the certificate to any person solicited or to any police officer of the city of Ephrata; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without re-enumeration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person; nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes, and holding a valid letter from the United States Internal Revenue Service certifying that such person is exempt from the payment of income taxes under Section 5038 of the Internal Revenue Code or any other applicable section; which organization has a slate of officers comprised of residents of the city of Ephrata and is regularly conducting its activities and meetings within the corporate limits of the city of Ephrata. (Ord. 977 §15, 1978).
5.44.170 Religious solicitations--Investigation. The clerk-treasurer is authorized to investigate the affairs of any person soliciting for religious purposes under a certificate issued under Section 5.44.160 and the affairs of any person
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 53
exempted from the requirement of a certificate under Section 5.44.020 or exempted under Section 5.44.160 and make public his written findings in order that the public may be fully informed as to the affairs of any of said persons. Said persons shall make available to the clerk-treasurer, or to any representative designated by the clerk-treasurer in writing for such specific purpose all books, records, or other information reasonably necessary to enable the clerk-treasurer to fully and fairly inform the public of all facts necessary to a full understanding by the public of the work and methods of operation or such persons; provided, that five days before the public release of any findings under this section, the clerk-treasurer must first serve a copy of said findings upon the person investigated and at the time of the release of his findings he must release a copy of any written statement said person may file with the clerk-treasurer in explanation, denial or confirmation of such findings. (Ord. 977 §17, 1978).
5.44.180 Misrepresentation prohibited. No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city of Ephrata, or in any application or report filed under this chapter. (Ord. 977 §18, 1978).
5.44.190 Violation--Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or filing, or causing to be filed, an application for a permit or certificate under this chapter containing false or fraudulent misstatements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars nor more than three hundred dollars, or shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty days, or may be punished by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 977 §19, 1978).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 54
Chapter 5.48
PAWNBROKERS AND PAWNSHOPS
Sections:
5.48.010 License required--Fee.
5.48.020 Pawnbroker defined.
5.48.030 Application for license.
5.48.040 Records.
5.48.050 Transcript of record furnished to police.
5.48.060 Inspection of records.
5.48.070 When goods are not to be removed from pawnshop.
5.48.080 Closing hours.
5.48.090 Rates of interest and sale.
5.48.100 Violation declared misdemeanor.
5.48.010 License required--Fee. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker or conduct a pawnshop without a pawnbroker's license. The license shall be for a period of one year and the fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars. (Ord. 1025 §1, 1980).
5.48.020 Pawnbroker defined. Every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges, deposits or conditional sales of personal property, shall be deemed to be a "pawnbroker." (Ord. 1025 §2, 1980).
5.48.030 Application for license. Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be in writing filed with the city council on forms furnished by the chief of police and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The application shall be referred to the police department for recommendation. If the city council approves the application it may by motion direct the issuance of the license by the city clerk. (Ord. 1025 §3, 1980).
5.48.040 Records.
(a) It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to maintain at his place of business a book or other permanent record, in which shall be legibly written, in the English language at the time of such loan, purchase or sale, a record thereof containing the following:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 55
(1) The date of the transaction;
(2) The name of the person or employee conducting the same;
(3) The name, age, street and house number, and the general description of the dress, complexion, color of hair and facial appearance of the person with whom the transaction is had;
(4) The name and street and house number of the owner of the property bought or received in pledge;
(5) The street and house number of the place from which the property bought or received in pledge was last removed;
(6) A description of the property bought or received in pledge, which, in the case of watches, shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case, and in case of jewelry shall contain a description of all letters and marks inscribed thereon;
(7) The price paid or the amount loaned;
(8) The name and street and house numbers of all persons acting as a witness to the transaction;
(9) The number of any pawn tickets issued therefor.
(b) Anyone who pledges, sells or consigns any property to or with a pawnshop or pawnbroker shall sign the records required to be kept by such dealer with this true name and shall include his correct residence address. (Ord. 1025 §4, 1980).
5.48.050 Transcript of record furnished to police. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker, before twelve noon of every business day, to report to the chief of police on blank form, to be furnished by the police department, a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions had on the preceding day. It shall also be the duty of any pawnbroker having good cause to believe any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen, to report such fact to the chief of police, together With the name of the owner, if known, and the date of and name of the person from whom the same was received by such pawnbroker. (Ord. 1025 §5, 1980).
5.48.060 Inspection of records. All books and other records of any pawnbroker relating to purchase, pledge, exchange, barter or receipt of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles or things of value shall, during normal business hours, be open for inspection by the chief of police, or any police officer or city detective detailed for that purpose, and all articles
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 56
or things received, purchased or left in pledge with the pawnbroker shall at all like times be open to a like inspection. (Ord. 1025 §6, 1980).
5.48.070 When goods are not to be removed from pawnshop. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to remove any goods, articles or thing purchased by him, in pledge, from his store or place of business until the expiration of four days after the receipt thereof shall have been reported to the chief of police as provided in this chapter, except when redeemed by the owner thereof. (Ord. 1025 §7, 1980).
5.48.080 Closing hours. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to conduct or carry on the business of pawnbroker, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, or to open, or keep open, his pawnshop for the transaction of any business whatsoever therein, during other than normal business hours. (Ord 1025 §8, 1980).
5.48.090 Rates of interest and sale. All pawnbrokers may charge and receive interest and fees in accordance with RCW 19.60.060. (Ord. 1025 §9, 1980).
5.48.100 Violation declared misdemeanor. Every pawnbroker and every clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker is guilty of a misdemeanor, who does any of the following:
(a) Fails to make an entry of any material matter in his records; or
(b) Makes any false entry therein; or
(c) Falsifies, obliterates, destroys or removes from his place of business any book or record relating to his business; or
(d) Refuses to allow the city attorney or any peace officer to inspect his records, or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business; or
(e) Knowingly reports any material matter falsely to the chief of police; or
(f) Having forms provided therefor, fails before noon of each day to furnish the chief of police with a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions had on the previous day, it being the intent of this section that Saturday's business may be reported on Monday; or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 57
(g) Fails to report forthwith to the chief of police the possession of any property which he may have good cause to believe has been lost or stolen, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when, and the name of the person from whom the same was received by him; or
(h) Removes or allows to be removed from his place of business, except upon redemption by the owner thereof, any property received, before four business days have elapsed since the receipt thereof was reported to the chief of police; or
(i) Receives any property from any person under the age of eighteen years, any common drunkard, any habitual user of narcotic drugs, any habitual criminal, any person in an intoxicated condition, any known thief or receiver of any stolen property, or any known associate of such thief or receiver of stolen property, whether such person is acting in his own behalf or as the agent of another; or
(j) Violates any other provision of this chapter; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1025 '10, 1980).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 58
Chapter 5.50
STREET DISPLAYS AND SALES
Sections:
5.50.010 Purpose
5.50.020 Definitions
5.50.030 License Required
5.50.040 Permit Application Procedure
5.50.050 License Regulations
5.50.060 Business Regulations
5.50.070 Permit Re-Registration
5.50.080 Permit Revocation
5.50.090 Exemptions
5.50.100 City Not Liable
5.50.110 Appeals
5.50.120 Decisions Final
5.50.130 Violations/Penalties
5.50.140 Severability
5.50.010 Purpose: Recently, the use of sidewalks and streets for business purposes, including but not limited to displays of merchandise, food and beverage sales, other retail activities, and other business uses, has increased. This has added interest and color to the downtown street scene, increased the general clutter on certain city streets and sidewalks; and created more crowded conditions for businesses, pedestrians, and vehicle travelers. It is anticipated that such use will likely increase as other vendors seek to sell to the large number of pedestrians on certain sidewalks, particularly during the summer months.
The primary purposes of streets and sidewalks are for use and efficient movement of pedestrians and vehicles. Use of streets and sidewalks for business activity is secondary, and should be restricted to areas regulated in such a way that safety and convenience of pedestrians and vehicles are maintained; and so that the aesthetic appeal of the city to its residents and visitors is preserved.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 59
It is also finding of the City Council that only a limited number and type of street merchants can be accommodated and still adequately provide for the primary purpose of use of the streets and sidewalks for circulation. to assure that undue congestion does not occur, street vending should be limited to simple goods such as appropriate merchandise of foods and beverages to be consumed immediately to reduce the time expected to be spent at the point of sale.
The City Council reserves to its own discretion adoption of regulations governing private use of the public right-of-way.
This ordinance seeks to accomplish these and other public purposes, and is in furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the community.
5.50.020 Definitions: Throughout the Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Abutting Property Owner means the owner of the building or lot immediately fronting the proposed location of a vending cart, sign or temporary stand.
B. Temporary Stand means any tables, chairs, or combination thereof, or any booth, tent, trailer, storeroom, street or sidewalk stand, temporary and/or open lunch counter, sandwich counter or soft drink and/or portable food containers, or other temporary place for the sale of goods, beverages, or consumption or the sale of any wares or merchandise of any kind and located upon or operated from alleyways, street, or sidewalk easements, public streets or sidewalks, or any other public space, or located directly adjacent to a public right-of-way or sidewalk could occur.
C. Vending Cart is a movable cart or vehicle that is operated from a fixed location from which food, flowers, merchandise and/or non-alcoholic beverages are offered or provided, or offered for sale or sold, to the public with or without charge.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 60
D. Street Vendor means any person, and their principals and agents, who engage or conduct in the City of Ephrata either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business for the purpose of selling, renting or soliciting offers for the sale of beverages, remedies, food, wares, merchandise or products of any kind whatsoever, and who, for the purposes of carrying on such business, use or occupy any temporary stand, vending cart or take-out window on any public street, alley or sidewalk, or any part thereof, or on private property adjacent to a public way or sidewalk where direct access to the business from a public right-of-way or sidewalk could occur, for the purpose of exhibition and sale or rental of such food, beverages, services, goods, wares, merchandise or products.
E. Person includes any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity.
F. Merchandise Displayer means any person owning or operating a business of any kind which display goods, ware or merchandise on a public sidewalk, street or alley or on private property adjacent to a public way or sidewalk where direct access from a public right-of-way or sidewalk could
occur.
G. Display Vendor means any person owning or operating a business of any kind which display goods, ware or merchandise on private property adjacent to a public way or sidewalk where direct access from a public right-of-way or sidewalk could occur.
H. Street Vendor License means the license provided by this Ordinance.
I. Hawking is loud, repeated oral solicitation of business by the Vendor or Displayer or their agents, employees or contractors.
J. Director means the Community Development Director of the city, or his or her designee.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 61
K. Take-Out Window means any window or opening into a structure through which products of any kind are offered for sale directly to persons passing by on the sidewalk or public way.
L. Sidewalk Sign means any sandwich board, sign or device for the holding of advertising information which is placed upon a city sidewalk, street or alley for any purpose other than regulation of traffic or pedestrian by or with the permission of the city.
5.50.030 License Required:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a street vendor or operate a temporary stand or take-out window adjacent to public right-of-way unless that person or his/her employees shall have first received a street vendor license. A street vendor license shall not be required in order to display merchandise on a public sidewalk if the display is by the abutting permanent business and conforms in all respect to the restrictions set forth in Section .060 of this Chapter. A street vendor license shall not be required for vending activities located on private property where the vending cart, temporary stand, take-out window or merchandise display is set back from the public way or sidewalk by six (6) feet or more.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or use sidewalk sign upon any public sidewalk or adjacent to public right-of-way unless that person or his/her employees shall have first received a street sign license. A street sign license shall be required in order to place a sidewalk sign on a public sidewalk if the sign is placed by the abutting permanent business and conforms in all respect to the restrictions set forth in Section .060 of this Chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vending cart, temporary stand, take-out window or merchandise display set back from the public way or sidewalk six (6) feet or more unless that person or his/her employees shall have first received a display vendor license.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 62
(4) The operator of a business adjacent to any portion of sidewalk within the area covered by this Chapter shall have the first right to make application to place upon or adjacent to that portion of the sidewalk abutting the operator's business any of the devices provided for in this Chapter. If application is made to the city by other than the abutting business operator to locate a device allowed under this Chapter, the abutting operator shall have the opportunity to place a similar device upon the location prior to the city granting a license to any non-abutting business operator.
5.50.040 Permit Application Procedure: The following procedure shall be utilized in reviewing permit applications:
A. Application - Street Vendor. Any person desiring to obtain a street vendor license shall apply therefore to the city on forms provided by the city and such application shall set forth as to each principal street vendor applicant the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the principal applicant and principal operator, if different.
2. The nature or character of the food, merchandise, beverages, or flowers to offered or displayed by the applicant.
3. Name, address and both home and business telephone numbers of the individual acting as manager or operator for the principal applicant.
4. The address of the abutting building of the proposed street or sidewalks location of the business.
5. The name, address and telephone number of the abutting property owner of the proposed street or sidewalk location.
6. The length of time during which it is proposed that the business or display will be conducted.
7. The proposed hours of operation or display.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 63
8. The maximum number of persons proposed to work at the location at any given time.
9. Washington State Retail Sales Tax number of the street vendor.
10. City of Ephrata Business License number of the street vendor.
11. A drawing or set of specifications for any vending cart to be used which is of sufficient detail to allow the Director to determine that the cart will be structurally sound and safe.
12. Written response or comments on a form provided by the city to the proposed vending site from the abutting property owner.
13. The application shall be signed by the applicant and if the applicant is not the actual street vendor, the applicant shall verify his or her authority to act as agent from the street vendor.
B. Application - Street Sign. Any person desiring to obtain a street sign license shall apply therefor to the city on forms provided by the city and such application shall set forth the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The nature or character of the sign proposed to be displayed by the applicant including the size, type of construction, proposed permanent wording, colors and proposed days and hours of placement.
3. The address of the abutting building of the proposed street or sidewalk location of the business.
4. The name, address and telephone number of the abutting property owner of the proposed street or sidewalk location.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 64
5. Washington State Retail Sales Tax number of the applicant, if any.
6. City of Ephrata Business License number of the applicant.
7. A drawing or set of specifications for the street sign to be used which is of sufficient detail to allow the Director to determine that the sign will be structurally sound and safe and in conformity with the area proposed for the location of the street sign.
8. Written response or comments on a form provided by the city to the proposed street sign from the abutting property owner.
9. The application shall be signed by the applicant and if the applicant is not the actual street sign owner, the applicant shall verify his or her authority to act as agent from the street sign owner.
C. Application - Display Vendor. Any person desiring to obtain a display vendor license shall apply therefor to the city on forms provided by the city and such application shall set forth as to each principal applicant the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the principal applicant and principal operator, if different.
2. The nature or character of the food, merchandise, beverages, or flowers to be offered or displayed by the applicant.
3. Name, address and both home and business telephone numbers of the individual acting as manager or operator for the principal applicant.
4. The address of the adjacent building of the proposed display location of the business.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 65
5. The name, address and telephone number of the adjacent property owner of the proposed display location.
6. The length of time during which it is proposed that the business or display will be conducted.
7. The proposed hours of operation or display.
8. The maximum number of persons proposed to work at the location at any given time.
9. Washington State Retail Sales Tax number of the display vendor.
10. City of Ephrata Business License number of the display vendor.
11. A drawing or set of specifications for any display to be used which is of sufficient detail to allow the Director to determine that the display will be structurally sound and safe.
12. Written response or comments on a form provided by the city to the proposed vending site from the adjacent property owner.
13. The application shall be signed by the applicant and if the applicant is not the actual display vendor, the applicant shall verify his or her authority to act as agent from the display vendor.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 66
D. Application Fee.
(1) The completed application shall be filed with the Director with a non-refundable application fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00), except that those applicants who are operators of a business located adjacent to the location where the street device is intended to be located and who have in place a valid business license shall not be required to pay such application fee. The Director shall not accept any application which appears incomplete or is not accompanied by the required fee. (Ord 93-27, 1993)
E. Application Review. The application, together with any additional information deemed relevant by the Director, shall be reviewed by the Director to determine whether the proposed business, sign or display shall be permitted at the proposed location. This determination shall be made within 14 days of the receipt of a complete application. In making his/her determination the director shall apply the following standards:
1. That the application and proposed sign, display or business are in conformity with this Chapter.
2. That the applicant and principals have conformed to this Chapter and other applicable regulations when previously operating vending carts, placing signs or operating displays.
3. When the abutting owner or tenant has submitted to the Director written objection to the retail stand site, the Director shall give due consideration to the impact that the sign, cart or display would have on the abutting property owner's business and duty to maintain the sidewalk area.
4. That any proposed vending cart, sign or display will structurally sound and safe for its proposed use.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 67
5. That the colors proposed for the vending facilities, sign or display are consistent with the color guidelines adopted by the Community Development Director unless the colors proposed have been separately approved by the Community Development Director.
6. That the proposed business or sign will be compatible with surrounding activities including nearby businesses.
7. That the proposed business or sign and its location will not intrude into the sidewalk pedestrian zone and will not unreasonably interfere with use of the street or sidewalk right-of-way by pedestrians or vehicles.
8. Each retail stand shall be limited to one assigned location. In the event that two or more applications for the same location are received, the general location standards of this Chapter shall be used to determine which application, if approved, shall be assigned the location.
9. No retail stand shall be placed within two hundred feet of any public or private school, park or playground, except when the entity having jurisdiction and control of such facility states in writing that it has no objection the placement of such retail stand within two hundred feet.
F. Application Approval:
1. The Director shall approve the application if the requirements of this Chapter have been met. However, the Director may specify reasonable conditions of approval to insure compatibility of the proposed business including hours of operation.
2. If the requirements of this Chapter have not been met, the application shall be denied in writing addressed to the applicant, setting forth the reason for denial.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 68
3. If an existing license is outstanding for the proposed location, a new application shall not be approved unless the previous licensee terminates his/her license.
G. License Issuance. Upon approval of the application a license will be issued to the applicant after the applicant has submitted to the Director the following:
1. A copy of an approved sign permit, if applicable.
2. A copy of any applicable Health District permit.
3. A copy of any applicable city business license or temporary business license.
4. Proof of liability insurance naming the City of Ephrata as additional insured in amount and policy provisions as approved by the City Clerk. Execution, in such form and substance as is acceptable to the city, of a hold harmless and indemnification agreement by which the licensee agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents, employees, and contractors from and against any and all liability arising out of the conduct and operation of the licensee's business or placement of the licensee's sign.
5. Payment of a non-refundable license fee in the amount specified in subsection D.
Upon receipt of the above, the license shall be issued, which shall contain such restrictions and conditions as contained in, and necessary to, properly administer the terms of this Chapter.
H. License Term. Each license shall be for a term not to exceed one (1) year, commencing on January 1 of the calendar year in which the license is issued, and terminating on December 31st of that year, unless otherwise revoked pursuant to this Chapter.
5.50.050 License Regulations: the following regulations shall apply for all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 69
A. Nontransferability. No license hereunder may be transferred or assigned to any other person.
B. Display of License Required. The license shall be prominently displayed at all times on the vending cart. The license shall be exhibited to any police officer of to the Director or his/her designee upon his/her request.
C. Compliance With Other Laws and Permits. The license shall at all times comply with all laws, regulations and permits applicable to the licensee's business, provided, however, that no off-street parking requirements shall exist or be imposed for any operation or that part thereof being conducted solely under a license issued under this Chapter.
5.50.060 License Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to all street vendor license holders and merchandise displayers and their agents, employees and contractors, and to the conduct, operation and location of the business:
A. Maintenance of Required Permits. All required licenses and permits issued by the City of Ephrata must be displayed in a prominent, visible manner. Street vendor operations must have a permit from the Grant County Health Department, when required, and must comply with all applicable Health Department Requirements.
B. Area Restrictions.
(1) If the location is a public sidewalk, a minimum sidewalk clearance of (5) feet shall be maintained. Such clear area shall be continuous and shall maintain a five foot open space for pedestrian travel. The Director shall attach sufficient conditions to any license issued pursuant to this Chapter to insure safe pedestrian travel through and by any device allowed under this Chapter. Failure to maintain such clear corridor of travel shall subject the license holder to a civil penalty of up to $1000.00 for each violation of this provision.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 70
(2) Vending carts, street signs and merchandise displays on public sidewalks shall be placed more than five (5) feet from the adjacent building face or right-of-way limit. If located on a street, the business shall be oriented and operated to sidewalk traffic and not to vehicle traffic.
(3) No street vending cart, street sign or merchandise display upon a public sidewalk shall be permitted nor shall any permit be issued for any area within the city other than the area defined as the entirety of Basin Street beginning at the intersection of Second Avenue SW and Basin Street and extending through the intersection of Second Avenue NW and Basin Street including all four corners of all intersecting streets for a distance of approximately 20 feet from the point of intersection with Basin Street on Second Avenue NW, First Avenue NW, Division Street, First Avenue SW and Second Avenue SW and C Street beginning at the intersection of Division Avenue W and C Street and extending through the intersection of First Avenue NW and C Street and extending through the intersection of First Avenue NW and Alder Street NW and extending through the intersection of Alder Street NW and Division Avenue W and extending through the intersection of Division Avenue W and C Street NW including all four corners of all intersecting streets for a distance of approximately 20 feet from the point of intersection with Division Avenue or First Avenue NW except by resolution of the City Council.
(4) Merchandise displays located off public sidewalks and upon private property adjoining public right-of-way shall not be permitted nor shall any permit be issued for any area within the city other than Basin Street Southwest, both sides, except by resolution of the City Council.
C. Assigned Location. The street vendor shall at all times locate and operate the business together with the vending cart in the assigned location. Mobile vending is not permitted except by special resolution of the city council defining when and where such mobile vending may occur.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 71
D. Size. The maximum permissible size for any vending cart shall be three (3) feet wide by five (5) feet long by five (5) feet high, except that incidental accessories may be attached or placed within eighteen (18) inches of the ends of the cart where approved by the Director. A canopy or umbrella may be included with the stand which may not exceed a diameter of seven feet six inches. The canopy or umbrella shall be of vinyl, canvas or similar durable material. Any part of such umbrella or canopy must have a minimum of seven feet of vertical clearance to the sidewalk and must not extend more that two feet from the edge of the cart in any direction. Take-out windows shall not exceed the maximum length for vending carts allowed under these regulations.
Street signs shall be of a maximum width not to exceed thirty-two inches, a maximum height not to exceed forty-eight inches, and a maximum length not to exceed thirty-six inches.
E. Goods. Food, non-alcoholic beverages, and flowers are the only goods permitted to be offered, displayed or sold from vending carts except by special resolution of the city council. Merchandise displayers who are operating without use of a vending cart or temporary stand may display merchandise which is also on display within the permanent, abutting building. No other goods, merchandise or services of any kind are permitted.
F. Self-Contained. Each street vendor's stand shall be a self-contained unit; PROVIDED, however, that self-contained electrical power generators are not permitted. Street signs are not allowed to be lighted or energized with electricity in any way. utility service connections are not permitted, except that electrical service connections may be permitted when provided by the adjacent property owner and when the following requirements are met for carts, stands and displays located off the public sidewalk and upon parking lots or other places:
1. Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying on the sidewalk.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 72
2. The outlet location must be placed outside the walkways which are accessible to public and private use.
3. Length of electrical hook-up must be within 15 feet of the stand.
4. No extension cords will be allowed.
5. The hook-up must be permanently wired to the cart, stand or display and meet National electrical Code requirements as to type, size, and grounding, terminating in an approved outside weatherproof GFCI (ground fault circuit interrupting) type receptacle.
6. Each cart, stand or display shall require an electrical permit unless previously UL approved, and require inspection prior to operation of the stand.
G. Removal of Carts, signs and Merchandise Each vending cart, each street sign and all displayed merchandise must be removed from the public right-of-way upon close of business each day. No retail stand shall be left unattended at any time.
H. Loud Noises/Sound Devices. Mechanical audio or noise-making devices, sound amplification or reproduction devices or hawking are not permitted.
I. False Statements If at any time it is found that any false statements were made in the application, any license hereunder may be revoked.
J. Obstruction of Right-of-Way no vending cart, temporary stand, take-out window or merchandise display shall be located or operated in a way which unreasonably obstructs pedestrian or vehicle traffic. No lines of persons or customers shall be permitted which reduce the required sidewalk clearance.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 73
K. Obedience to Police Orders. All persons conducting a retail stand business shall obey any order of a police officer to temporarily move such retail stand to avoid congestion or obstruction of the surrounding area for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
L. No Chaining. Retail stands shall not be located immediately next to or chained to street furniture or trees.
M. Fire Extinguisher Required. All street vendor's retail stands have one 2A10BC fire extinguisher mounted on the cart or in the display.
N. Intersection Restriction No retail stand shall be located within ten (10) feet of the intersection of the adjacent sidewalk with any other sidewalk.
O. Clean Up/Maintenance Each operator of a vending cart or merchandise display site must be kept clean and orderly at all times and pick up any refuse or debris and clean up liquid spillage deposited by any person within 25 feet of the vendor's business location. Additionally, all such persons shall provide a refuse container for litter disposal by customers or other persons, which container shall be of a design approved by the city and which must be removed each day, along with the stand. City litter receptacles may not be substituted for this purpose. Food product vendors shall also provide recycling facilities if recycling facilities if recyclable materials are sold from the vending cart or merchandise display.
P. Signs. All signs shall conform to provisions of the Ephrata Municipal Code and any license issued hereunder. The total sign area displayed on a vending cart shall not exceed six (6) square feet. No advertising shall be permitted of any business or establishment other than the business licensed to operate the vending cart. Signage for any street vendor licensed hereunder shall not be included in the allowable sign area of the abutting building.
Q. Parking Lot Locations. Any cart, merchandise display or take-out window located in a parking lot shall comply with the following minimum standards:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 74
1. The cart, display or window shall not block entrances and exists to the parking lot or fire exit doors of any buildings.
2. The cart, display or window shall only occur in parking lots containing more than 10 spaces.
3. No cart or display shall occur in parking spaces directly in front of entrances or windows of a building.
R. Annual Fee An annual fee in the amount of $100.00 shall be paid at the time of issuance of any license required by this Chapter, except as provided herein. If an application is approved or approved with conditions, the applicant shall pay an additional Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to complete the initial annual license fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) required of those wishing to act as a street vendor, operate a temporary stand, operate a take-out window, place a street sign or operate a display sales operation. If a take-out window or a street sign, temporary stand or street display is licensed to an existing permanent business for placement on the sidewalk abutting that business, no fee shall be required so long as a business license is maintained by the business. If a temporary stand, street sign or street display is licensed to an existing permanent business for placement on or off a public sidewalk not abutting or adjacent to that business, no annual fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for each year following the first year of operation so long as a business license is maintained. (Ord 93-27, 1993).
5.50.070 Permit Re-Registration: Whenever a licensed vendor ceases doing business in the City for a period of thirty (30) days or more, prior to resumption of business, the vendor shall register by notifying the Director in writing. Any such re-registration shall not be valid beyond the term of the original license.
5.50.080 Permit Revocation: A license may be summarily revoked
under the following conditions:
A. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this Chapter.
B. Failure to comply with the terms of the license.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 75
C. Misrepresentation of facts in the licensee's application for the license or any other necessary permit.
D. Creation of any unreasonable hazard to the public health or unreasonably interfering with park availability, vehicle or pedestrian access or travel.
E. Wherever a licensed vendor ceases doing business within the City for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or for any consecutive fourteen (14) day period between April 15 and October 15 of any calendar year.
F. As otherwise provided herein.
5.50.090 Exemptions: The following persons and activities shall be exempt from the licensing requirements under this Chapter:
A. Newspaper carriers and newspaper dispensing machines.
B. Non-profit civic, charitable, fraternal, religious and youth organizations, such as Little League, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and similarly situated non-profit organizations operating for short term special events or activities after notification of the Director.
C. Those community activities authorized and permitted by City Council resolution.
5.50.100 City Not Liable: Neither the City of Ephrata, nor its officers, agents, employees or contractors, shall be liable for any claim, loss, injury or damage to persons or property of whatsoever kind or nature, caused in whole or in part by or arising directly or indirectly out of the issuance of any license hereunder, or the placement of any street sign, or the conduct or operation of any such street vending business or merchandise display by any person.
5.50.110 Appeals: Any decision made by the Director hereunder may be appealed in writing by the aggrieved party to the City Council within fourteen (14) days following the date of the decision. Any and all such appeals shall be subject to the payment of a Fifty Dollar ($50.00) fee.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 76
5.50.120 Decisions Final: Any decision, finding, ruling, or order or determination of the Director or the City Council made pursuant to this title shall be final at the time a final order or decision is issued in written form, and no action to set aside or modify the same shall be brought in the Superior Court or other tribunal unless the action shall be filed within ten (10) days from the effective date of such decision, finding, or ruling, order or determination.
5.50.130 Violations/Penalties: Any person who is found to have violated any term or provision of this Chapter or of any permit hereunder shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall be liable for the payment of a civil penalty.
For the first such violation the civil penalty shall be in the amount of $200.00. For the second infraction by the same person within a period of two (2) years, the penalty shall be $400.00. Upon the third violation within a period of two (2) years, such violation shall constitute a C-1 penalty.
The city may seek injunctive relief to restrain any violations of the provisions of this Chapter. Violations of this Chapter, as determined by the Director shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Chapter as well as revocation of all business licenses issued to the violator by the city.
5.50.140 Severability: In the event any one or more of the provisions of this Chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or invalidate any other provision of this Chapter, but this Chapter shall be construed and enforced as if such invalid provision had not been contained therein; provided, that any provision which shall for any reason be held by reason of its extent to be invalid shall be deemed to be in effect to the extent permitted by law.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 77
Chapter 5.60
TELECOMMUNICATION USE FEES
Sections:
5.60.010 Findings
5.60.020 Chapter Supplemental
5.60.030 Application Fees
5.60.010 Findings. In furtherance of the provisions of the RCW Chapter 35.99 and Section 35A.21.245, Chapter 12.20 of this Code was adopted. This chapter provides for fees to be imposed and collected in connection with the operation of telecommunication systems, services and facilities within the city.
5.60.020 Chapter Supplemental.
A. The provisions of this chapter are supplemental to and not a replacement of other provisions of this Code. When required by this Code or any other applicable law or regulation, entities subject to the provisions of this chapter shall obtain all licenses and permits required by such other laws or regulations, including a city business license, and maintain those in a current status as a condition of being in compliance with this chapter and chapter 12.20.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 - 78
B. Every cable television service provider, whether they are required to obtain a franchise for the use of city rights-of-way or not, shall be required to remit the appropriate utility tax on all gross revenues. “Gross Revenues” means all amounts accrued by Grantee in whatever form and from all sources, from the operation of Grantee’s Cable System to provide Cable Service within the Franchise Area. “Gross Revenues” shall include, without limitation, all amounts for all Cable Services, including, but not limited to, basic, expanded basic, premium, and pay-per-view services, advertising sales and installation fees and charges. “Gross Revenues” shall also include any revenue received by any Affiliate of Grantee where such revenue in the ordinary course of business has been paid or should have been paid to Grantee from the operation of its Cable system to provide Cable Service within the Franchise Area. By way of illustration and not limitation, this definition would include revenue derived from the sale of Cable System advertising time by an Affiliate of Grantee. “Gross Revenues” shall not include bad debt, sales taxes, or other taxes which are collected by Grantee on behalf of, and for payment to, the local, state or federal government.
5.60.030 Application Fees. That the following fees for processing telecommunication right-of-way use authorization applications and renewals and facilities leases and renewals shall be deposited with the described application, lease or renewal. Such fees shall be used to cover the City’s costs related to staff, consultants or experts in the processing of the application, lease or renewal. Any unused portion of the fee shall be refunded to the applicant at the conclusion of the application, lease or renewal process. The following fees for processing telecommunication right-of-way use authorization applications and renewals and facilities leases and renewals are created:
Telecommunications license $1,000
Renewal of telecommunications license $ 500
Telecommunications franchise $3,000
Telecommunications franchise renewal $1,500
Cable franchise $4,000
Cable franchise renewal $2,000
(Ord. 01-08, 2001)(Ord. 06-29, 2006)
Page 1 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Title 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapters:
6.04 Waste Disposal Regulations
6.08 Garbage, Refuse
6.10 Solid Waste Policy
6.12 Litter Control Code
6.18 Noise Control
6.20 Noxious Weeds
6.21 Vegetation Control
6.22 Burglar and Fire Alarm Systems
6.30 Nuisances
Page 2 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.04
WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
Sections:
6.04.010 Garbage storage prohibited where.
6.04.020 Offensive sewer, privy, cesspool prohibited.
6.04.030 Privy, cesspool location restrictions.
6.04.040 Privy, cesspool construction requirements.
6.04.050 Garbage deposit in privy, cesspool prohibited.
6.04.060 Manure disposal requirements.
6.04.070 Deposit site designation.
6.04.080 Premises inspection.
6.04.090 Violation--Penalty.
6.04.010 Garbage storage prohibited where. It is unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any building or premises, within the incorporated limits of the city, to keep or permit to be kept in any building or upon any premises, or in or upon any areaway, alley, street or public place adjacent to any building or premises, any waste, animal or vegetable matter of any nature whatsoever; or to keep or permit to be kept in or upon any of the aforesaid places any dead animals, butcher's offal, fish or part of fish, ashes, swill, or any refuse matter from any restaurant, eating place, residence or place of business; or to keep or permit to be kept in or upon any of the aforesaid places any tin can or cans which have formerly contained any fruit, animal or vegetable matter of any nature whatsoever. (Ord. 17 §1, 1909).
6.04.020 Offensive sewer, privy, cesspool prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any building or premises within the incorporated limits of the city, to suffer, permit or allow any cellar vault, private drain, cesspool, privy or sewer, upon the premises to become nauseous, offensive or injurious to public health. (Ord. 17 §2, 1909).
6.04.030 Privy, cesspool location restrictions. It is unlawful for any person, persons, firm, association or corporation hereafter to construct within the city limits, any privy, vault or cesspool within twenty-five feet of any residence or any house or building used as such or within two feet of the line of any lot. (Ord. 42 (part), 1913: Ord. 17 §3, 1909).
6.04.040 Privy, cesspool construction requirements. All vaults, privies or cesspools hereafter constructed within the incorporated limits of the city shall be not less than six feet deep or less than four feet in diameter, if circular; or not less than twelve square feet in area if in any other form. All vaults, privies or cesspools which now exist or which shall hereafter be constructed in the city shall be closely boxed or walled at the top with the privy, vault or cesspool building. A ventilating pipe of wood or other material of not less than four inches in diameter shall extend from the top of the vault, privy or cesspool to two feet above the building, or case of a cesspool which is not covered by a building. The vent pipe shall extend at least twelve feet above the top of the cesspool. (Ord. 17 §4, 1909).
Page 3 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6.04.050 Garbage deposit in privy, cesspool prohibited. It is unlawful for any person or persons to throw or deposit in any privy, vault or cesspool, any garbage, cans, crockery, glassware, or any other rubbish of any nature whatsoever; and the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for its condition. No building shall be used as a dwelling unless the same is provided with a privy vault or is properly connected with a cesspool or sewer. (Ord. 17 §5, 1909).
6.04.060 Manure disposal requirements. No pile or deposit of manure or excrement shall be allowed to accumulate on any place within the incorporated limits of the city, unless it be protected in such a manner, as not to become a nuisance or deleterious to the public health and must be removed within twenty-four hours after the parties allowing the same to accumulate shall have received from the police chief notice to remove it. (Ord. 17 §6, 1909).
6.04.070 Deposit site designation. It shall be the duty of the city council to designate some suitable place in which any and all of the matter described in this chapter may be deposited and to have the matter destroyed by fire. (Ord. 17 §7, 1909).
6.04.080 Premises inspection. It shall be the duty of the police chief to, from time to time, inspect any and all of the places described in this chapter; and for this purpose he shall have the right to enter any and all places or premises within the incorporated limits of the city at any reasonable time. (Ord. 17 §8, 1909).
6.04.090 Violation--Penalty.
(a) Violations of Sections 6.04.010, 6.04.020, 6.04.030, 6.04.040, 6.04.050 and 6.04.060 of the Ephrata Municipal Code constitute a nuisance and constitute civil infractions.
(b) Each day the infraction continues to exist shall be an additional infraction.
(c)A C-20 penalty shall be levied against the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any building or premises maintained in violation of the code sections mentioned in subsection (a) for each civil infraction. (Ord. 12-11, 2012)
(d) Additionally, the court may require the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any building or premises maintained in violation of the code sections mentioned in subsection (a) reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city for abatement and removal of the nuisance. (Ord. 1163 §1, 1986).
Page 4 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.08
GARBAGE REFUSE
Sections:
6.08.005 Garbage Service
6.08.010 Definitions.
6.08.020 Collection, disposal required.
6.08.030 Creation of sanitation department.
6.08.040 Sanitation department fund.
6.08.050 Container regulations.
6.08.060 Burning.
6.08.065 Conditions for the issuance of a burning permit.
6.08.070 Pick up schedule.
6.08.080 Removal notice.
6.08.090 Rate schedule.
6.08.100 Delinquent charges, lien procedure.
6.08.110 Service suspension.
6.08.120 Unlawful materials in alleys.
6.08.130 Collection, biologic material
6.08.140 Sharp’s Waste Disposal
6.08.005 Application for service.
(a) It is the intent of the city that all utility deliveries, whether water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall be deliveries of services and/or utilities to the property served. All such delivery of utilities and/or services shall be a claim against the property and a claim against the owner of that property served/or furnished utilities and/or services. It shall be the responsibility of each property owner served by city utilities to determine the extent of utility services and deliveries being made and/or furnished to the owner's property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay all claims, charges, penalties and/or costs imposed by the city for the furnishing and/or delivery of utilities and/or services to the owner's property. The property owner's responsibility shall exist independent of any claim of lien the city may have or make pursuant to any statute, rule or regulation. The fact the owner has directed or allowed the billings for utilities furnished and/or services delivered to the owner's property to be delivered to a tenant or other third person does not in any way reduce or extinguish the property owner's responsibility for water, sewer and/or garbage billings, charges, costs or penalties imposed by the city. All delinquent charges for water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by law.
(b) All applications for garbage service shall be made by the property owner or someone acting on behalf of the owner of the property to be provided garbage service, unless the service is initiated or changed by the city in order to protect the public health, welfare and safety, and responsibility for billing payment shall be borne by the property owner. All charges for garbage service will be sent directly to the property address unless the property owner direct's otherwise, or in the event of a combined utility billing,
Page 5 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
the billing shall be sent to the address maintained by the city clerk for such combined billing.
(c) Upon a failure to pay the charges for garbage collection and/or disposal, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the real property furnished the service as provided by law. (Ord. 90-13, 1990)
6.08.010 Definitions.
(a) “Cart” means a refuse cart provided by the contractor for proper disposal of garbage. (Ord. 00-21, 2000)
(b) “Container” means a metal front, side or rear loading device with metal or plastic lids used to provide garbage service or cardboard recycling other than by a cart or carts.(Ord. 00-21, 2000)
(c)"Garbage, refuse and solid waste" mean all waste and discarded materials, including rubbish and debris, waste, discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, waste paper, cans, glass, ashes, offal and boxes.
(d) "Waste" does not include materials subject to manufacture into by-products.
(e) "Residence" means the place of dwelling of one head of family and his or her dependents.
(f) "Premises" means any dwellings, flats, apartments, rooming houses, hotels, clubs, restaurants, hospitals, schools, boardinghouses, eating places, shops, and places of business, or any other building or structure.
(g) "Person" means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
(h) Words herein used in the present tense include the future tense, and the singular include the plural and in the plural include the singular, and in the masculine include the feminine gender. (Ord. 463 §2, 1954; Ord 93-31, 1993; Ord 96-34, 1996)
6.08.020 Collection, disposal required.
(a) The maintenance of health and sanitation requires, and it is the intention hereof, to make the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and dead animals within the city compulsory and universal.
(b) All applications for residential garbage service shall be made by the owner or agent of the property being served and responsibility for billing payment shall be borne by the property owner. All charges for garbage service will be sent directly to the property owner's address.
(c)Application for industrial and commercial garbage service may be by the property owner, lessee or other consumer. Responsibility for billing payment shall be borne by the applicant for garbage service. (Ord. 1116 §1, 1984: Ord. 463 §1, 1954).
Page 6 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6.08.030 Creation of sanitation department. There is created within the city the sanitation department to operate a system for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and refuse in the city as a sanitation utility. (Ord. 463 §3, 1954) (Ord 93-31, 1993).
6.08.040 Sanitation department fund. There is established a sanitation department fund of the city. All receipts for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse and all receipts for the burning of garbage and dead animals and all moneys received by the sanitation department shall be deposited with the city and become a part of the sanitation department fund. The expense of establishing, conducting and operating the sanitation department shall be paid therefrom, and the city council may also provide for additional revenue to be paid into the fund from time to time from any available funds of the city, and checks may be drawn on the fund. (Ord. 1116 §2, 1984: Ord. 463 §4, 1954; Ord. 00-21, 2000)
6.08.050 Container regulations.
(a) It shall be the duty of every person in possession of or control of any premises at all times to keep or cause to be kept suitable carts or containers for the deposit of garbage and refuse; and to deposit or cause garbage and refuse to be deposited therein. (Ord. 00-21, 2000)
(b) The lids shall remain closed except when necessary to place garbage or refuse in carts or containers or to take it therefrom. When garbage and refuse are placed therein or taken therefrom, lids shall be closed by the person placing it therein or taking the same therefrom. Such carts or containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition, with the outside free of accumulated grease or decomposed material. (Ord. 90-8, 1990; Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord. 00-21, 2000)
(c) All carts and disposal devices used by the owners or occupants of property within the City for the disposal of garbage shall bear the address of the property served by such carts and other disposal devices in lettering that is plainly written, printed, painted, embossed, or stenciled in a contrasting color adjacent to such carts or device. The address of the served property shall be of sufficient size as to be readily seen by the collectors. If any property does not bear an address of sufficient legibility, size, color or location so as to allow the collector to readily see such address, the owner shall be required to provide such an address upon notification from the City. If such address information is not provided as required after notice from the city, the occupant of the property served shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall be subject to a C-19 penalty. (Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord 12-11, 2012)
(d) The carts provided to customers of the sanitation utility by the contractor are and shall remain the property of the contractor. Each person delivered or assigned one or more carts shall be responsible for the safe keeping of the carts entrusted to them. Any theft of a cart must be reported immediately upon discovery and the customer shall cooperate fully with the police department in the investigation of the theft. In the event any cart is damaged, the customer shall be responsible for damage to that cart, except any damage caused by the contractor during the collection process shall not be the responsibility of the customer. Any cart damage deemed by the city to be the responsibility of the customer shall cause a charge to the customer’s account for repair or
Page 7 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
replacement of the cart. The cost of any lost cart shall be charged against the customer’s utility bill. Any other use of the cart is prohibited and is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 00-21, 2000)
Any attempt to exchange, swap or trade carts between customers is prohibited. The customer remains responsible for the cart assigned to that customer. Any person found attempting to trade, swap or exchange carts among customers, including themselves, shall be deemed to have committed a violation of this chapter. (Ord 96-34, 1996)
(e) Containers provided for commercial service including cardboard recycling containers and serviced by the contractor require approval from the public works department prior to placement as to location, an area clean up plan to prevent the accumulation of spilled or escaping waste, security and access. Permanent placement shall require a building permit be issued to the occupant of the premises to be served. The installation of all accessory equipment and facilities such as concrete pads, electrical and mechanical connections and the like shall be the sole responsibility of the occupant of the premises to be served. Any installations shall be done in accordance with all applicable rules, regulations and statutes. It shall be the duty of the occupant of the premises to be served to obtain all necessary permits and inspections. Service will not be provided to any such service location until proof of compliance with all applicable rules, regulations, and statutes has been provided to the city. (Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord. 00-21,2000)
(f) Any request for a change in commercial service shall be made through the Public Works Department. If the public works department has no objections to the change requested, the city will relay such change request to the contractor servicing that account. If the public works department has an objection to the service change request, the public works director will attempt to resolve such objection with the customer. If an agreement cannot be reached, the determination of the public works director shall be conclusive. (Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord. 00-21,2000)
(g) Every cart, or bulk storage container on the day designated for collection, shall be kept in a place accessible to the collector of garbage and refuse. Where alley access is available, all carts or bulk storage containers shall be placed at the alley line. Where no alley access is available, all carts or bulk storage containers shall be placed at the curb line on the date designated for collection and on all other days shall be removed from street view. (Ord. 90-8, 1990; Ord 96-34, 1996)
(h) Bulk storage and collection of garbage and refuse will be made only in carts or containers contractor supplied and approved by the public works director. No garbage or refuse will be permitted to be left in any street or alley of the city, except in a suitable cart or container therefor. Bagged lawn clippings, foliage trimmings, debris or rubbish may be placed in carts or containers. (Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord. 00-21,2000; Ord. 12-11, 2012)
(i) All garbage, before deposited in the cart or container as herein provided; shall be drained of free water and wrapped in paper or other material in such a manner as to prevent, as nearly as possible, moisture from such garbage coming in contact with the sides or bottom of the container. (Ord 96-34, 1996)
Page 8 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(j) It shall be a violation of this chapter punishable by a C-16 civil penalty for any person to place un-bagged animal waste, decomposing meat, fish or vegetable matter in a garbage container for pickup by the garbage collector. (Ord. 96-34, 1996; Ord. 12-11, 2012)
(k) It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any dead animal or upon whose premises the same may be located, to cause the same to be removed and disposed of. (Ord 96-34, 1996)
(l) It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation in possession, charge or control of any premises to cause garbage and refuse to be placed in carts or containers for removal by the contractor. If any person, firm or corporation fails, refuses or neglects to place garbage or refuse in carts or containers for removal by the contractor, or allows garbage or refuse to accumulate or be left on any street or alley, it shall constitute, and is declared to be, a nuisance subject to correction and penalty as provided herein and in Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 6.30. (Ord. 00-21,2000)
In the event of violation of the provisions of this section, and in the event the nuisance created or existing is not corrected or removed within twenty four (24) hours after written notice to correct or remove the nuisance is given to the person, firm or corporation creating the nuisance or to the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the premises on which the nuisance is situated, it is lawful for the city, acting through its sanitation department, to remove and abate the nuisance, and for that purpose the sanitation department is authorized to expend such sum of money as may be required for the removal or abatement of the nuisance; provided that when any expenditure greater than one hundred dollars is found necessary to be made, the sanitation department shall report the same to the city council previous to incurring such expense and request authority to make such expenditure for the abatement or removal of the nuisance. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants of property upon which a nuisance as herein defined is situated after failure to remove or abate the nuisance after written notice is given as above provided, shall be chargeable with the expense which may be incurred in the removal thereof, and the expense incurred may be collected by suit or otherwise in addition to the fine and/or penalty herein provided for. (Ord. 1116 §3, 1984: Ord. 1034 §2, 1981; Ord. 548 §1, 1956; Ord. 463 §5, 1954) (Ord 93-31, 1993)(Ord 96-34, 1996)
6.08.060 Burning. It is unlawful for any person to burn any garbage or refuse, or to dump or deposit any garbage and refuse upon any street or alley or private property in the city or to burn the same; or to collect, remove or dispose of the same except as provided in this chapter.(Ord. 463 §6, 1954)(Ord 96-34, 1996)
6.08.070 Pick up schedule. The contractor shall collect, remove, and dispose of all garbage and refuse in the residential district of the city at least once a week; and from hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses, eating places, apartment houses, schools, hospitals, and in the business districts as designated from time to time by the public works director at least once a week. Holiday service will be determined by the public work's director based on needs, equipment and personnel available and costs to the utility. (Ord. 463 §7, 1954) (Ord. 93-13, 1993)(Ord. 00-21,2000)
Residential carts which are collected from the curb shall be placed at the curb in the location designated by the public works department with the arrows on the cart pointing
Page 9 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
toward the street no later than 7:00 am on the day of collection. Carts may be placed in residential districts the evening prior to collection but not before 5:00 pm. All carts shall be removed from the curb placement, after collection of garbage, not later than 7:00 pm the evening following collection. Carts placed at curbside for collection in accordance with the rules of this chapter shall be deemed to be properly parked devices for purposes of enforcement of the parking regulations of the City. (Ord. 96-34, 1996)
6.08.080 Removal notice.
(a) Debris, vegetation, limbs, lawn clippings, lumber piles, wood piles, auto parts or bodies, garbage and the like, and storage of any materials in the alleys of the city of Ephrata, except in approved garbage or refuse carts or containers, do constitute and are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) In the event of violation of the provisions of this section and in the event the nuisance created or existing is not abated or removed within twenty-four (24) hours after written notice to abate or remove the nuisance is given to the person, firm or corporation creating the nuisance, or to the owner or owners, occupant or occupants, of the premises adjacent to which the nuisance is situated, it is lawful for the city, acting through its sanitation department, to remove and abate the nuisance, and for that purpose the sanitation department is authorized to expend such sum of money as may be required for the removal or abatement of the nuisance; provided that when any expenditure greater than one hundred dollars is found necessary to be made, the sanitation department shall report the same to the city council previous to incurring said expense and request authority to make such expenditure for the abatement or removal of the nuisance. (Ord 96-34, 1996)
(c)The person, firm or corporation creating the nuisance as above defined after failure to remove or abate the nuisance after written notice is given as above provided, shall be chargeable with the expense which may be incurred in the removal thereof, and the expense incurred may be collected by suit or otherwise in addition to a fine and/or penalty provided for in this chapter.
(d) The notice provided for above shall be personally served and shall advise, if the nuisance is not abated, that it is lawful for the city to remove and abate the nuisance and that the expense shall be chargeable to the person, firm or corporation creating the nuisance and that it is lawful for the city to remove and abate the nuisance without further notice. (Ord. 1126 §1, 1985).
6.08.090 Rate schedule.
(a) The rates for collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and dead animals, and for the rental of bulk garbage containers shall be as established in Chapter 3.35. The rates for the removal of recyclable materials from accounts serviced by the city's recycling services shall be as established in Chapter 3.35. (Ord. 1140 §1, 1985: Ord. 1134 §1, 1985: Ord. 1116 §4, 1984: Ord. 1034 §1, 1981: Ord. 986 §1, 1979; Ord. 880 §1, 1974: Ord. 790 §1, 1969: Ord. 673 §1, 1962: Ord. 655 §1, 1962] Ord. 463 §8, 1954 Ord. 92-46, 1992, Ord 93-13, 1993, Ord 94-10, 1994, Ord 06-03, 2006; Ord 12-11, 2012).
Page 10 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(b) Drive in service for carts or containers requires an adequate turn around area for the refuse vehicle. The first one hundred twenty five (125) feet or portion thereof, no fee per month. Beyond one hundred twenty five (125) feet, a fee as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be charged.
(c) The use of the sanitation utility provided by this chapter is mandated on all persons and occupants of the city, subject to the minimum monthly garbage charge as established in Chapter 3.35, whether such account makes or produces any disposable garbage, so long as water service is provided to the account address and not disconnected for any month or portion of a month, except as provided in the following subsection (d). (Ord 96-34, 1996 Ord 03-15, 2003; Ord 12-11, 2012)
(d) Individually metered residential structures which are vacant for a continuous period not to exceed five (5) months during any calendar year may suspend garbage services during that period while still receiving water and sewer services. The property owner shall obtain and complete an application form from the city billing clerk which form shall require that the property owner declare under penalty of perjury that the property is vacant and will remain continuously vacant throughout the period for which garbage services are requested to be suspended. During any period of garbage service suspension under this subsection, the garbage cart or container shall be removed by the service provider. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction for each violation with a non-deferrable, non-suspendable C-13 penalty.
6.08.100 Delinquent charges, lien procedure. All charges for services to be rendered herein shall be payable to the city clerk, and if not paid on or before twenty (20) days of the date of the bill, the charge shall be delinquent. Upon failure to pay the charge and upon delinquency, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the premises from which the garbage and refuse collection services shall have been rendered as authorized by state law, including all remedies available to a combined utility service. (Ord. 778 §1, 1969: Ord. 463 §9, 1954)(Ord 96-34, 1996)(Ord. 00-21,2000)
6.08.110 Service suspension. Service to any premises may be suspended for nonpayment of accounts. Such suspension shall not relieve the person owing the account of the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter. Suspension shall render the premises where service is suspended subject to condemnation for sanitary reasons, (Ord. 778 §1, 1967).
6.08.120 Unlawful materials in alleys.
(a) It shall be a civil infraction for a person, firm or corporation to deposit any debris, vegetation, lawn clippings, lumber piles, wood piles, auto parts or bodies, garbage and the like, or store any material of any kind except approved garbage or refuse containers in the alleys of the city of Ephrata.
(b) Said materials referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be removed by the depositor. Failure to remove the materials within twenty-four (24) hours shall be an additional civil infraction, and it shall be considered an additional civil infraction for each twenty-four (24) hour period that a party fails to remove the material after having been notified of its existence. (Ord 96-34, 1996)
Page 11 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(c) A first infraction in violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a C-15 penalty. A second infraction within twelve months of the date of the issuance of the first notice of infraction shall subject the violator to a C-11 penalty. A third infraction shall subject the violator to a C-6 penalty and a fourth infraction shall be punishable by not less than a C-1 penalty, plus all penalties and assessments, if committed within twelve months of the date of the issuance of the first notice of infraction. Additionally, the court may require the party liable for the civil infraction to reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city for abatement and removal of the nuisance related to the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1126 §2, 1985)d(Ord 96-34, 1996; Ord 12-11, 2012)
6.08.130 Exceptions to Policy. The policy of universal collection of refuse and garbage within the city by the city as set forth in the foregoing sections of this chapter shall not apply in the following situations:
(a) The collection, transportation and disposal of medical, biomedical, bio-hazardous and/or infectious waste from generators within the city shall not be exclusive to the city operated sanitation system. In addition to the city, any licensed hauler of such materials authorized to operate in the city may provide such services. It shall be the responsibility of the generator of such wastes to arrange for their proper collection, transportation and disposal. Any licensed hauler operating in the city for the purposes of collection, transportation and disposal of such wastes shall be subject to all license requirements of the city and shall be responsible to pay any utility tax imposed by the city on the occupation of garbage or solid waste collection.
(b) For purposes of this section, medical, biomedical, bio-hazardous and infectious waste is considered to be any biologic material produced within a health care facility for which special precautions are taken within that facility to reduce potential exposure of the health care facility staff, to include but not limited to the untreated solid waste as defined by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission in WAC 480-70-050 as follows:
1. Animal Waste;
2. Liquid Human Body Fluids;
3. Cultures and Stocks;
4. Bio Safety Level 4 Disease Waste;
5. Pathological Waste; and
6. Sharps Waste
(c) A generator of medical, biomedical, bio-hazardous and infectious waste is defined as any person, firm, partnership, corporation, public entity, joint venture or otherwise which produces any of the defined wastes. Nothing herein shall prevent an individual exempted from the definition of a generator from electing to employ a licensed hauler to collect, transport and dispose of that person's medical, biomedical, bio-hazardous and/or infectious waste.
(d) A generator of waste as defined in this section which disposes of such waste by other than the city or an approved collector, transporter and disposer shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction for each violation with a non-deferrable, non-suspend able C-1 penalty.
Page 12 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6.08.140 Sharps Waste Disposal:
(a) Chapter 165, Laws of 1994 provides that residential sharps waste shall not be placed into refuse, trash or solid waste collection containers if a residential sharps waste collection service is separately provided. The City does not elect to provide a sharps waste collection program within the City’s solid waste utility.
(b) All residential generators of sharps waste are prohibited from placing or causing or allowing the placing of such wastes into: (1) recycling containers or collection boxes provided by the City or (2) cans, carts, drop boxes, or other containers in which refuse, trash or solid waste is or has been placed for collection.
(c) All residential sharps waste shall be collected by an approved collector as defined in Section 6.08.130. (Ord 94-13, 1994)(Ord. 00-21, 2000)
(Ord 94-10, 1994)(Ord 96-34, 1996)(Ord 98-9)(Ord 04-33)(Ord. 06-03)(Ord 12-11, 2012)
Page 13 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.10
SOLID WASTE POLICY
Sections:
6.10.010 Authority.
6.10.020 City Regulation.
6.10.030 Solid Waste Planning.
6.10.010 Authority. RCW 70.95.160 requires the city to act by ordinance to determine that Grant County shall not exercise any powers regarding the levels and types of solid waste service for any aspect of solid waste handling in the City of Ephrata. (Ord. 89-21, 1989)
6.10.020 City Regulation. The City hereby determines that Grant County shall not exercise any powers regarding the levels and types of solid waste service for any aspect of solid waste handling in the City of Ephrata. Grant County ordinances and regulations regarding the levels and types of service for any aspect of solid waste handling in the City of Ephrata shall not apply within the corporate limits of the City of Ephrata. (Ord. 89-21, 1989)
6.10.030 Solid Waste Planning. The City of Ephrata will jointly participate in a Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan to be coordinated by Grant County in order to support an enhance regional solid waste management. The City does not abrogate any of its powers to regulate levels and types of services within the corporate limits of the City. Approval by the City Council shall be required before the Grant County Regional Plan together with amendments and supporting plans, will have any force and effect within the City of Ephrata. Implementing ordinances and regulations shall be passed by the City pursuant to RCW 70.95.160. (Ord. 89-21, 1989)
Page 14 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.12
LITTER CONTROL CODE
Sections:
6.12.010 Short title.
6.12.020 Purpose.
6.12.030 Definitions.
6.12.040 Litter in general.
6.12.050 Litter receptacles--Placement.
6.12.060 Litter receptacles--Use.
6.12.065 City Recycling Center
6.12.070 Litter receptacles--Damaging prohibited
6.12.080 Litter removal responsibility.
6.12.100 Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited.
6.12.110 Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 6.12.120 Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
6.12.130 Handbills--Distribution in public places.
6.12.150 Handbills--Distribution on vacant property.
6.12.160 Handbills--Distribution on prohibition-posted premise. 6.12.170 Handbills--Distribution at inhabited residences.
6.12.180 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
6.12.190 Vehicle loading.
6.12.200 City inspections for litter receptacles.
6.12.210 Enforcement officers and procedures.
6.12.220 Interpretation.
6.12.230 Penalties.
6.12.010 Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be commonly referred to and cited as the "uniform litter control code." (Ord. 860 §1, 1973).
6.12.020 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish litter control in the city and pursuant to the general laws of the state of Washington to adopt basically uniform and coordinated litter control local legislation throughout the state. This chapter is intended to place upon all persons within the city, in a cooperative and coordinated statewide effort, the duty of contributing to the public cleanliness of the city and appearance in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to protect the economic interests of the people of the city against unsanitary and unsightly conditions (Ord. 860 §21, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.030 Definitions. As used in this uniform litter control code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms have the following meanings. All words used in the present tense include the future and past tense; all words in the plural under include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number. "Shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(1) "City" means the city of Ephrata, Washington.
Page 15 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(2) "Commercial handbill" is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature, excluding newspapers:
(a) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
(b) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
(c) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city or
(d) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
(3) "Highway" for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes street, road and alley.
(4) "Litter" means all solid wastes including but not limited to containers, packages, wrapping, printed matter or other material thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, but not including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging, saw milling, farming or manufacturing.
(5) "Litter bag" means a bag, sack or other container made of any material which is large enough to serve as a receptacle for litter inside the vehicle or watercraft of any person.
(6) "Litter receptacle" means those containers meeting minimum requirements of state regulations of the State Department of Ecology.
(7) "Newspaper" is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means
Page 16 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
(8) "Noncommercial handbill" is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
(9) "Park" is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the city, devoted to active or passive outdoor recreation.
(10) "Person" is any individual, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, copartnership, association, firm or other entity, whatsoever.
(11) "Private residence" means any privately-owned yard, grounds, walk, driveway, dwelling, house, building or other structure, including appurtenant porches, steps or vestibules, used or designed either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether single-family, duplex or multiple, and whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(12) "Public place" means any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
(13) "Road" for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes street, highway and alley.
(14) "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and discarded commodities.
(15) "State regulations" means the regulations duly promulgated and adopted by the State Department of Ecology pursuant to RCW Chapter 34.04 and codified or prepared for codification as part of the Washington Administrative Code, copies of the applicable portions of which are attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit "A" and on file with the city clerk and by this reference are incorporated in this chapter as if set forth in full.
(16) "Street" for the purpose of this chapter is synonymous with and includes road, highway and alley.
(17) "Vehicle" includes every device capable of being moved upon a public street and in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street, excepting devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(18) "Watercraft" means any boat, ship, vessel, barge or other floating craft. (Ord. 860 §2, 1973).
Page 17 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6.12.040 Litter in general. No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of litter upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any other public place in the city, or upon a private residence or other private property not owned by him, or in any waters within the jurisdiction of the city whether from a vehicle or otherwise except:
(1) When such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or the city for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or
(2) Into a litter receptacle or other container in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of the public place, private residence or other private property; or
(3) When such person is the owner or does have control or custody of the property, or has prior consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, and provided the litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws, rules or regulations. (Ord. 860 §3, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.050 Litter receptacles--Placement.
(1) Litter receptacles shall be placed in all parks, trailer parks in respect to the service of transient habitation, gasoline service stations, tavern parking lots, shopping centers, grocery store parking lots, marinas, boat launching areas, beaches, bathing areas and other such public places in numbers appropriate to need as specified by state regulation.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of any person owning or operating any establishment or public place in which litter receptacles are required by this section to procure and place and maintain such litter receptacles at their own expense on the premises in accord with such state regulations. (Ord. 860 §4, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.060 Litter receptacles--Use.
(1) Persons placing litter in litter receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private residence or other private property.
(2) Litter receptacles placed on sidewalks and other public places shall be used only for such litter material as persons may have for disposal while passing along the street or other public places and in no event shall be used for the disposal of other solid waste accumulated in residences or places of business. (Ord. 860 §5, 1973).
6.12.065 City Recycling Center. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the following requirements when using the City recycling center:
(1) No materials may be deposited outside receptacles regardless of whether the recycling center is closed or the receptacles are full.
Page 18 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(2) All material must be placed within the receptacles in a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements outside the receptacles.
(3) All material must be sorted and deposited in the appropriate receptacle.
(4) All cardboard or other paper boxes must be broken down and flattened prior to depositing in the receptacle.
(5) No materials may be deposited outside receptacles. (Ord. 860 §5, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.070 Litter receptacles--Damaging prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to willfully damage or deface any litter receptacle of another person. (Ord. 860 §6, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.080 Litter removal responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the local municipality, other agency or person owning or maintaining the same for the removal of litter from litter receptacles placed in parks, beaches, campgrounds and other public places. (Ord. 860 §7, 1973).
6.12.100 Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 860 §9, 1973).
6.12.110 Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 860 §10, 1973).
6.12.120 Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in control of any private residence or other private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. (Ord. 860 §11, 1973).
6.12.130 Handbills--Distribution in public places. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; provided, however, that it is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. 860 §12, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.150 Handbills--Distribution on vacant property. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private residence or other private property which is uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 860 §14, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
Page 19 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6.12.160 Handbills--Distribution on prohibition-posted premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private residence or other private property if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the residence or property, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement,” “No Solicitors” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the residence or property do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. 860 §15, 1973; Ord 18-12, 2018).
6.12.170 Handbills--Distribution at inhabited residences. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon a private residence which is inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private residence; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person, unless required by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined in this chapter), except that newspapers shall be placed on private residences or other private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private residences or other private property. (Ord. 860 §16, 1973) (Ord 06-18, 2006)
6.12.180 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or otherwise deposit litter upon any street or other public place or upon any private residence or private property. (Ord. 860 §17, 1973).
6.12.190 Vehicle loading.
(1) No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or gravel may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway surface in the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by public authority having jurisdiction for the same or by persons under contract or other authorization by such public authority.
(2) Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any glass or other objects of its load have fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public street, shall immediately cause the public street to be cleaned of all such glass or other objects and shall pay any cost therefor. (Ord. 860 §18, 1973).
6.12.200 City inspections for litter receptacles.
(1) At such times as the fire department or other local fire control agency makes routine or other fire inspections within the city, it shall also be the duty of the
Page 20 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
fire department to inspect all such inspected premises to assure compliance with the requirements for placing and maintaining litter receptacles as required by this chapter. In the event violations of this chapter are found, meters of the fire department are authorized to issue citations and the other legal process authorized in this chapter as in the case of police and other law enforcement personnel.
(2) The building department shall not approve occupancy of any building, structure or other improvement or new construction or modification to any existing building, structure or other improvement for which a building permit is required, nor give final inspection approval to any such building, structure or other improvement, until litter receptacles as herein required have been set in place on the subject property. In the event violations of this chapter are found, members of the building department are authorized to issue citations and other legal process authorized in this chapter as in the case of police and other law enforcement personnel. (Ord. 860 §19, 1973).
6.12.210 Enforcement officers and procedures. Enforcement of this chapter may be by any police officer or other law enforcement officer, fire department and building department personnel, jurisdictional health department personnel, and those public employees charged with the responsibility of operating and maintaining all public places within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 860 §20, 1973; Ord 18-12; 2018).
6.12.220 Interpretation. In the event any other city ordinance, whether or not codified, is in conflict with any of the terms of this chapter, the more stringent shall be construed as applicable. (Ord. 860 §23, 1973).
6.12.230 Penalties. Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to the following penalties as they are defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code:
Violation Penalty
Littering (6.12.040 C-20
Failure to place required litter receptacle (6.12.050) C-20
Failure to properly use litter receptacle (6.12.060) C-20
Failure to follow recycling center requirements (6.12.065) C-19
Damaging or defacing litter receptacle (6.12.070) C-18
Failure to remove litter from litter receptacle (6.12.080) C-18
Sweeping litter into gutter (6.12.100) C-18
Failure to keep sidewalks free of litter (6.12.110) C-18
Failure to keep property free of litter (6.12.120) C-12
Failure to secure vehicle load (6.12.190(1)) C-7
Failure to remove litter from unsecure vehicle load (6.12.190(2)) C-5
(Ord. 860 §24, 1973; Ord 06-18, 2006; Ord 18-12, 2018)
Page 21 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.18
NOISE CONTROL
Sections:
6.18.010 Declaration of policy--Findings of special conditions.
6.18.020 Definitions.
6.18.030 Motor vehicle noise--Specific prohibitions.
6.18.040 Public nuisances and disturbance noises.
6.18.050 Noises exempt--Completely or partially.
6.18.060 Noises exempt--Daylight hours.
6.18.070 Enforcement--Complaints.
6.18.080 Provisions not exclusive.
6.18.090 Violation.
6.18.100 Severability.
6.18.010 Declaration of Policy--Findings of special conditions.
(1) Declaration of Policy. It is declared to be the policy of the city to minimize exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise. It is the express intent of the city council to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose, and the quality of the environment.
(2) Findings of Special Conditions. The problem of noise in the city has been observed by the city council and the city staff and is documented by the complaints received and logged in the police department. On the basis of these observations and complaints, the city council finds that special conditions exist within the city which make necessary any and all differences between this chapter and the regulations adopted by the Washington State Department of Ecology. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
6.18.020 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meaning indicated below:
(1) "Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities for providing or restoring immediately necessary utility service.
(2) "Motorcycle" means any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, except farm tractors and such vehicles powered by engines of less than five horsepower.
Page 22 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(3) "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled, used primarily for transporting persons or property upon public highways, and required to be licensed under RCW 46.16.010.
(4) "New motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle manufactured after December 31, 1976, the equitable or legal title of which has never been transferred to a person who, in good faith, purchases the new motor vehicle for purposes other than resale.
(5) "Noise" means the intensity and duration character of sounds from any and all sources.
(6) "Off-highway vehicle" means any self-propelled motor driven vehicle not used primarily for transporting persons or property upon public highways nor required to be licensed under RCW 46.16.010.
(7) "Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any other entity, public or private.
(8) "Property boundary" means the survey line at ground surface which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one or more other persons and its vertical extension.
(9) "Public nuisance noise" means any sound which annoys, disturbs, or perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities; or any sound which unreasonably injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace, or safety of persons or animals. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987; Ord 18-27 2018).
6.18.030 Motor vehicle noise--Specific prohibitions.
(1) Mufflers. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the public highways which is not equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation.
(2) Tire Noise. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching, or other sounds from the tires in contact with the ground because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners or other such reason provided that noise resulting from emergency braking to avoid imminent danger shall be exempt from this section.
(3) Alteration of Motor Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to change or modify any part of a motor vehicle or install any device thereon in any manner that permits sound to be emitted by the motor vehicle which violates Section 6.18.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
6.18.040 Public nuisances and disturbance noises.
(1) Public Nuisance Noises. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow to be emitted a noise which has been determined to be a public nuisance noise as defined in this chapter.
Page 23 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(2) Public Disturbance Noise. It is unlawful for any person to cause or any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance. No sound source specifically exempted from this chapter shall be a public nuisance noise or public disturbance noise in so far as the particular source is exempted. The content of the sound will not be considered in determining a violation. The following source of sound shall be public disturbance noises if the noise is clearly audible across a real property boundary, or at least 75 feet from the source:
(a) Frequent, repetitive, or continuous noise made by any animal which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, and repose of property owners or possessors, except that such sounds made by animal shelters, or commercial kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels licensed under and in compliance with this code shall be exempt from this subsection, provided that notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the owner or other person having custody of the animal cannot, with reasonable inquiry, be located by the investigating officer, or if the animal is a repeat violator of this subsection, the animal shall be impounded by the animal control officer or his designee, subject to redemption in the manner provided by Chapter 8.05.
(b) The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle except as a warning of danger or specifically permitted or required by law;
(c) The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous noise in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine in any residential zone so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;
(d) The use of a sound amplifier or other devise capable of producing or reproducing amplified sounds upon public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or sales or for attracting the attention of the public to any vehicle, structure, or property or the contents therein, except as permitted by law, and except that vendors whose sole method of selling is from a moving vehicle shall be exempt from this subsection;
(e) The making of any loud and raucous noise which unreasonably interferes with the use of any school, church, hospital, sanitarium or nursing or convalescent facility;
(f) The Creation by use of a musical instrument, whistle, sound amplifier, stereo, jukebox, radio, television or other device capable of reproducing sound and raucous noises which emanate frequently, repetitively or continuously from any building, structure or property, such as sounds originating from a band session, tavern operation, or social gathering. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
(g) No person, whether or not that person is in actual possession of the noise source, shall create, continue or cause to be created or continued, or allow to be created or continued, any sound from a portable or motor vehicle audio system
Page 24 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
such as a tape player, radio, or compact disc player. (Ord. 92-23, 1992; Ord 18-27, 2018)
6.18.050 Noises exempt--Completely or partially.
(1) The following noises are exempt from the provisions of this chapter at all times, provided, that nothing in these exemptions is intended to preclude the possible reduction of noise consistent with economic feasibility:
(a) Noise originating from aircraft in flight, and sounds which originate at airports and are directly related to flight operations;
(b) Noise created by safety and protective devices, such as relief valves where noise suppression would defeat the safety relief intent of the device;
(c) Noise created by fire alarms, or noise created by emergency equipment, including but not limited to emergency standby or backup equipment, and emergency work necessary in the interests of law enforcement or of the health, safety or welfare of the community, and including, but not limited to, any emergency work necessary to replace or repair essential utility services;
(d) Noise created by auxiliary equipment on motor vehicles used for highway maintenance;
(e) Noise originating from officially sanctioned parades, sporting events, and other public events;
(f) Noise created by warning devices not operated continuously for more than thirty minutes per incident;
(g) Noise created by motor vehicles when regulated by Section 6.18.030;
(h) Noise created by natural phenomenon and unamplified human voices;
(i) Noise created by motor vehicles, licensed or unlicensed when operated off public highways except when such sounds are received in residential zones of the city;
(j) Noise created by existing stationary equipment used in the conveyance of water by utilities and noise created by existing electrical substations;
(k) Noise created by sources in industrial districts which over the previous three years have consistently operated in excess of fifteen hours per day as a demonstrated routine or as a consequence of process necessity.
(2) The following sources of noise are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(a) Noise created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad;
(b) Noise created by aircraft and float planes;
Page 25 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(c) Noise emanating from the temporary construction sites except between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m.;
(d) Noise created by aircraft engine testing and maintenance not related to flight operations except between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m.;
(e) Noise originating from motor vehicle racing events at existing authorized facilities.
(3) Noises exempt under this section shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 173-60 WAC. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987; Ord 18-27 2018).
6.18.060 Noises exempt-Daylight hours. The following noises shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. on weekdays and nine a.m. and ten p.m. on weekends:
(1) Noise created by powered equipment used in temporary or periodic maintenance or repair of resident property, including but not limited to grounds and appurtenances, such as but not limited to lawn mowers, powered hand tools, and composers;
(2) Noise created by the discharge of firearms on authorized shooting ranges;
(3) Noise created by the installation and repair of essential utility services;
(4) Noise created by blasting;
(5) Noise created by bells, chimes or carillons not operated for more than five minutes in any one hour. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
6.18.070 Enforcement--Complaints.
(1) Complaint Only Basis. Only after a complaint has been received from an identified person who owns, rents or leases property that is affected by a noise source may the police department issue a civil infraction notice; provided, that the section of this chapter relating to motor vehicles shall be subject to enforcement proceedings regardless of whether a complaint has been received; provided, further, that with the exception of motor vehicle noises, noise created by industrial areas are to be enforced by the state.
(2) Separate offenses. For enforcement purposes, each day, defined as a twenty-four hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m., in which a violation of this chapter occurs, shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 87-10 §1(part), 1987).
6.18.080 Provisions not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter shall be accumulative and not exclusive, and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy, nor, unless specifically provided, shall this chapter be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law, ordinance or regulation relating to noise, but shall be deemed additional to existing legislation and common law on noise. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
6.18.090 Violation.
Page 26 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
(1) Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows:
(a) First violation in any 12 month period C-9 penalty
(b) Second violation in any 12 month period C-6 penalty
(c) Third and subsequent violations in any 12 month period C-3 penalty
(Ord. 92-23, 1992)
(2) Evidence in Proceedings. In any proceeding under this chapter, evidence of sound level through the use of sound level meter readings shall not be necessary to establish the commission of the violation. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987; Ord 18-27 2018).
6.18.100 Severability. If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected. (Ord. 87-10 §l(part), 1987).
Page 27 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.20
NOXIOUS WEEDS
Sections:
6.20.010 Noxious weed list.
6.20.020 Copies on file.
6.20.030 Property owner's responsibility.
6.20.040 Enforcement officer.
6.20.050 Right of entry for inspection.
6.20.060 Notice of violation.
6.20.075 Action upon noncompliance--Costs.
6.20.080 Recovery in civil action.
6.20.090 Provisions supplemental.
6.20.010 Noxious weed list The weeds listed on the current "Proposed Noxious Weed List" as required by the provisions of RCW 17.10.080, and any additions, deletions or amendments hereafter made thereto, are declared to be noxious weeds and found to be injurious to crops, livestock and other property. (Ord. 1031 §1, 1981).
6.20.020 Copies on file. A copy of the complete list then in existence shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office at all times. (Ord. 87-9 §l(part), 1987: Ord. 1031 §2, 1981).
6.20.030 Property owner's responsibility.
(a) It shall be the duty of each owner of property in the city to control and to prevent the spread of noxious weeds from his property. "Owner of property" means the person in actual control of property, or his agent, whether such control is based on legal or equitable title or on any other interest entitling the holder to possession.
(b) "Control" and "prevent the spread of noxious weeds" mean conforming to the standards of noxious weed control or prevention adopted by rule or regulation by the Grant County noxious weed control board. (Ord. 1031 §3, 1981).
6.20.040 Enforcement officer. The utility officer of the city is designated as the enforcement officer of this chapter. (Ord. 1031 §4, 1981).
6.20.050 Right of entry for inspection. The enforcement officer or his designee may enter upon any property for the purpose of inspecting the property and taking specimens of weeds or other material. A reasonable attempt shall first be made to notify the owners of the property as to the purpose and need for entry, but where such notification is impossible, such entry shall be made without the consent of the owner. (Ord. 87-9 §l(part), 1987: Ord. 1031 §5, 1981)(Ord 95-23,1995).
6.20.060 Notice of violation. Whenever the utility officer finds that noxious weeds are present on any parcel of land and that the owner is not taking sufficient action to control the same, he shall notify the owner that a violation of this chapter exists. Such notice shall be in writing, identify the noxious weed or weeds found to be present, order prompt control and specify the
Page 28 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
time, at least ten days from the issuance of the notice, within which the prescribed action must be taken. Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner or the agent of the owner, at his last known address. (Ord. 87-9 §l(part), 1987: Ord. 1031 §6, 1981)(Ord 95-23,1995).
6.20.075 Action upon noncompliance--Costs. Upon the failure, neglect, refusal of any owner so notified to abate a nuisance by controlling noxious weeds growing upon any lot, place or area within the city, within fifteen days after receipt of the written notice provided for in Section 6.20.060, or within fifteen days after the date of such notice, in the event the same is returned to the city by the post office because of the inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the building official or his designee is authorized and empowered to abate the nuisance and act on behalf of the city in authorizing payment for the controlling of such noxious weeds or to order the removal by the city's own personnel. (Ord. 87-9 §2(part), 1987).
6.20.080 Recovery in civil action. When the city has affected the control of such noxious weeds or has paid for their control, the actual cost of control, plus damages and other charges incurred by the city shall be charged to the owner of such property. The costs, damages and other charges incurred by the city shall be recovered by civil action brought by the city against the property owner(s) responsible. (Ord. 87-9 §2(part), 1987).
6.20.090 Provisions supplemental. This chapter is intended to supplement the weed control provisions contained in the Uniform Fire Code. This chapter is not intended and shall not impair the administration of the Uniform Fire Code as it relates to weed control. (Ord. 87-9 §2(part), 1987).
Page 29 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.21
VEGETATION CONTROL
Sections:
6.21.010 Duty to maintain property.
6.21.020 Notice to comply.
6.21.030 Action upon noncompliance--Costs.
6.21.040 Lien.
6.21.050 Penalty.
6.21.060 Provisions supplemental.
6.21.010 Duty to maintain property. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant or the agent of such owner or occupant of any property, lot, place or area within the corporate limits of the city to remove or destroy all trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or parts thereof, which overhang or obstruct any part of any sidewalk or street or which are growing thereon, in such manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the sidewalk or street by the public. Furthermore, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant or the agent of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy all grass, weeds, shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation growing or which has grown and died and to remove or destroy all debris, upon such property owned or occupied by them and which are a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or welfare, either present or potential. (Ord. 87-12 §1 (part) 1987).
6.21.020 Notice to comply. The City Utility Officer is authorized and empowered to make inspections of all property, lots, places or areas, either vacant or occupied, within the corporate limits of the city to determine whether the obligations imposed by this chapter are being fulfilled. In the event a property, lot, place or area is discovered which is not in compliance with this chapter, the utility officer shall prepare a written notice to the owner or occupant or agent of the owner or occupant of such property, lot, place or area, which notice shall describe the property, lot, place or area involved and the hazardous condition, and shall require the owner or occupant or agent of such owner or occupant to comply with this chapter within ten days after receiving such notice. If the property, lot, place or area is unoccupied, such notice shall be delivered to the record owner of such property, lot, place or area by certified mail at the last known address as shown by the records in the office of the treasurer of Grant County. If the property, lot, place or area is occupied with a dwelling, structure or building which is not vacant, such notice shall be delivered personally to the owner or occupant or agent of the owner or occupant of the dwelling, structure or building. (Ord. 87-12 §1 (part) 1987).
6.21.030 Action upon noncompliance--Costs. In the event that any property, lot, place or area is not brought into compliance with this chapter by the owner or occupant or the agent of the owner or occupant within ten days after receiving the notice prepared by the utility officer, the city, under the direction of the utility officer, shall do what is necessary to bring any property, lot, place or area into compliance. The proceedings for bringing any property, lot, place or area into compliance shall be initiated by resolution of the city council which shall describe the property, lot, place or area involved and shall authorize the utility officer to do what is necessary to bring any property, lot, place or area into compliance. The work which must be performed in order to bring any property, lot, place or area into compliance may be done by the agents and employees of the city, or by independent contractors, as the utility officer may deem appropriate. Careful account of the cost of such work shall be kept and reported to the
Page 30 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
city clerk when the work is completed. The cost to the city of such work shall be and become a charge against the owner of such property, lot, place or area and a lien against the property, lot, place or area. (Ord. 87-12 §l(part), 1987). (Ord. 95-21, 1995).
6.21.040 Lien. Notice of such lien shall as nearly as practical be in substantially the same form, filed with the same officer within the same time and manner, and in force and foreclosed as is provided by law for liens for labor and materials. (Ord. 87-12 §l(part), 1987).
6.21.050 Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, additionally, shall be punishable as defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code. (Ord. 87-12 §1 (part), 1987).
6.21.060 Provisions supplemental. This chapter is intended to supplement the weed control provisions contained in the Uniform Fire Code as administered by the fire department. This chapter is not intended and shall not impair the administration of the Uniform Fire Code as it relates to weed control. The fire department shall continue to administer the Uniform Fire Code as it pertains to weeds and fire hazards. (Ord. 87-12 §l(part), 1987).
Page 31 of 45
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 6.22
BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:
6.22.010 Purpose.
6.22.020 Definitions.
6.22.030 Emergency response card.
6.22.040 Recommendations of the fire chief or designee
6.22.050 Connection fees.
6.22.060 False alarms.
6.22.065 Fire Department Response.
6.22.070 Ownership and maintenance.
6.22.080 Tampering with fire and/or burglar alarm system
. 6.22.090 Work on systems--Notice.
6.22.100 Automatic calling devices prohibited.
6.22.110 Administrative decisions, notice.
6.22.120 Appeal from administrative decision, finality.
6.22.130 Violation--Penalties.
6.22.140 No public duty created.
6.22.010 Purpose. It is the intent of the chapter to set forth standards for the installation, maintenance and removal of fire alarms and burglar alarms within the city; and to reduce the number of false alarms occurring within the city and resultant waste of city resources by providing for corrective administrative action, including recovering fees, potential disconnection, civil penalties, and recovering partial costs for responding to false alarms. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985)(Ord 05-19, 2005)
6.22.020 Definitions.
(a) "Authorized service personnel" means those persons who, by reason of their experience, trade or occupation, have met the minimum state requirements for servicing such alarm systems and who are licensed by the state of Washington to work on an alarm system.
(b) "False alarm" means:
(1) The activation of a burglar and/or a robbery alarm for the purpose of summoning the police at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises; or
Page 32 of 45
(2) False Fire Alarm shall mean the activation of a fire alarm and/or automatic sprinkler alarm for other than a fire, smoke scare, or an emergency building evacuation. A false fire alarm may be caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of maintenance, or negligence of the owner or lessee of a fire alarm system or their employees or agents. (Ord. 05-19, 2005)
(c) "Fire alarm" means, for the purpose of this chapter, the transmission of an alarm by automatic alarm systems and circuits leading to the connection with the municipal alarm system or any component part thereof for the purpose of summoning the fire department when a fire or emergency is occurring.
(d) "Burglar alarm" means, for purposes of this chapter, the transmission of an alarm by automatic alarm systems and circuits leading to the connection with the municipal alarm system or any component part thereof for the purpose of summoning the police department when a burglary or emergency is occurring.
(e) "Person" means an natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or unincorporated association.
(f) "Premises" means any building, structure, enclosure, real property or vehicle. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.060 False alarms. For a police and/or fire department response to any false burglary or robbery alarm, the chief of police or fire chief shall charge and collect from the person having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery alarm and/or fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, fees as follows: (Ord. 05-19, 2005)
(1) For a response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period, thereinafter referred to as a "first response," no fee shall be charged, but the person having or maintaining such burglar and/or fire alarm shall, within three working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the chief of police or fire chief on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the chief of police or fire chief may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary. (Ord 05-19, 2005)
(2) For a second response to premises within six months after a first response, no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first response and the chief of police or fire chief shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this section.
(3) For a third response to premises within six months after such a second response, and for all succeeding responses within six months of the last response, a fee as established in Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services shall be charged, and if such third false alarm is as a result of failure to take necessary
Page 33 of 45
corrective action prescribed by the chief of police or fire chief, said chief may order the disconnection of such alarm system until such corrective action is taken; provided, that no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. (Ord. 1136 §1, 1985; Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985; Ord. 11-13, 2011).
6.22.065 Fire Department Response. For an Ephrata Fire Department response to any false fire alarm, the Ephrata Fire Chief, or their designee, shall inform the City Clerk/Finance Director; and the Clerk shall charge and collect from the person having or maintaining such fire and/or automatic sprinkler alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by him, fees as follows:
A) For a response to premises at which no other false alarms have occurred within the preceding three (3) month period, hereinafter referred to as a Afirst response@, no fee shall be charged. However, the person having, owning, or maintaining such a fire alarm system, shall within three (3) working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the Ephrata Fire Chief, on forms prescribed by the Department, setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action(s) taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service representative, and other such information as the Ephrata Fire Chief shall reasonably require to determine the cause of such fire alarm and efficacy of any corrective action.
B) For a second response to the same premises within three (3) months after a first response, no fee shall be charged, but the person having, owning, or maintaining such a fire alarm system, shall within three (3) working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the Ephrata Fire Chief, on forms prescribed by the Department, setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action(s) taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service representative, and other such information as the Ephrata Fire Chief shall reasonably require to determine the cause of such fire alarm and efficacy of any corrective action. Additionally, the Ephrata Fire Chief shall be authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, the alarm system and/or automatic sprinkler alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person having, owning, or maintaining such a fire alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this section.
C) For a third response to the same premises within three (3) months after a second response, and for all succeeding responses within three (3) months of the last response, a fee as established in Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services shall be charged. If such third false alarm, or any succeeding false alarm is a result of a failure to take necessary and/or mandated corrective action(s) as prescribed by the Ephrata Fire Chief, the Fire Chief may order the disconnection of such alarm system. It shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until such corrective action is taken; provided no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation.
D) For a first response caused by a failure of maintenance personnel to provide proper notification to the Ephrata Fire Department that testing, maintenance, or service work is to be performed on a fire alarm and/or automatic sprinkler or suppression system, a fee as established in Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services
Page 34 of 45
shall be charged to the service company performing the work. Any second, and subsequent response(s) caused by the failure to provide proper notifications shall result in a charge as established in Chapter 3.35 being assessed. (Ord. 05-19, 2005; Ord. 11-13, 2011)
6.22.070 Ownership and maintenance. Ownership and maintenance of alarm systems, circuits leading to the connection with the municipal alarm system, or any component parts thereof, except as herein provided, shall remain and be the responsibility of the person owning or leasing the property. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.080 Tampering with fire and/or burglar alarm system.
(a) Tampering. It is unlawful for any person to tamper with or to wantonly cut, break, deface, or actuate any alarm device (including auxiliary alarm devices, wires or wire supports, or appurtenances thereto) or intentionally to transmit an alarm knowing no emergency exists. It is also unlawful for anyone to deactivate or turn off a fire alarm until fire department personnel have determined the cause of the alarm, or until instructed by fire department personnel to deactivate or turn off the alarm.
(b) Exception. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to city employees in the police division or fire department engaged in their official duties.
(c) Exception--Manufacturer's Representative. Subsection (a) shall not apply to any competent representative of a manufacturer of burglar alarm equipment or fire alarm equipment who, with the consent of the chief of police or fire chief, is modifying, adjusting, altering, repairing, or replacing the system or any of its component equipment.
(d) Exception--Insurance Rating Engineer. Subsection (a) shall not apply to any competent insurance rating engineer who is testing the system in discharge of his duties and with permission of the chief of police or fire chief. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.090 Work on systems--Notice. Any person doing any work on an alarm system that may cause a signal to be transmitted over the city system shall notify the chief of police or fire chief before doing such work, stating the time and place thereof. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.100 Automatic calling devices prohibited. No person shall use or operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, initiate a telephonic or recorded message to any telephone number assigned, or any additional telephone numbers assigned, to the city of Ephrata including, but not limited to, the city of Ephrata police department or fire department. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.110 Administrative decisions, notice. Notice of imposition of any administrative sanction, including the imposition of a fee or order of disconnection, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be given to the person having or maintaining a burglar or fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, providing that with respect to business premises, the
Page 35 of 45
owner, manager, or chief administrative agent regularly assigned and employed on the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false alarm shall be presumed to be the person having or maintaining said alarm on said business premises. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.120 Appeal from administrative decision, finality. Any person subject to the imposition of a fee, order of disconnection or other administrative sanction under the terms of this chapter, shall have a right of appeal therefrom to the Ephrata Municipal Court. Unless notice of appeal is filed with the chief of police or fire chief, as the case may warrant, within ten days of receipt of notice of imposition of administrative sanction, said sanction is deemed to be final. (Ord. 1129 §l(part), 1985).
6.22.130 Violation--Penalties.
A. Every person, firm, or corporation found to have committed an infraction under this chapter shall be assessed a C-5 penalty for each separate infraction. (Ord. 11-13, 2011).
B. Payment of any fee(s) due under this chapter are due within thirty (30) days from the invoice date. Late payments will be assessed an additional penalty of 20% of the fees due and owing. If payment is not received within sixty (60) days of the original due date, then interest shall accrue on the fees and penalties at 1% per month. Notice of the amount of any penalties so added or assessed shall become due and shall be paid within ten days from the date of written notice mailed via first class mail to the obligated party.
C. The city may use any lawful means to collect such penalties and interest, including referral to a collection agency. In the event the city refers the matter to a collection agency or the city or its agent files an action to recover such penalties, the city shall be entitled to recover its collection costs, including any court costs and attorney=s fees, in addition to all penalties and interest then due and owing. AFire Alarm@ means a signal initiated by a device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch, smoke detector, or other devise which, when activated, is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature. (Ord. 05-19, 2005)
6.22.140 No Public Duty Created.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons or individual who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this chapter.
B. Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that police and/or fire response may be based on factors such as; availability of police and/or fire units,
Page 36 of 45
priority of call, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and prior response history.
C. The city shall not be responsible for investigating alarm sites that are inaccessible due to fences, terrain obstructions, other physical obstructions or potentially dangerous animals. (Ord. 05-19, 2005)
Page 37 of 45
Chapter 6.30
NUISANCES
Sections:
6.30.010 Definitions.
6.30.020 Public nuisance defined.
6.30.030 Nuisance Declared.
6.30.040 Prohibited conduct.
6.30.060 Correction by owner or other responsible person.
6.30.070 Abatement by the city.
6.30.080 Immediate danger – Summary correction.
6.30.090 Unlawful materials in alleys.
6.30.100 Violation – Penalty.
6.30.010 Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall have the following meanings:
“Building materials” means and includes lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing materials, cans of paint and similar materials.
“Compliance officer” means the mayor’s designee.
“Correct” means to abate, repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such extent as the compliance officer, in his judgment, determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
“Criminal gang activity” means: (1) the commission, solicitation to commit, conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit any crime or violation of law, including but not limited to crimes against persons, crimes against property, graffiti, creation and maintenance of public or private nuisances, threats to do harm, intimidation, robbery, burglary, assault, homicide, theft, violation of laws pertaining to controlled substances, alcohol offenses, with the intent or effect to promote, further, aid, abet, or assist any criminal street gang; (2) any intimidation of or harm to any person with the purpose or intent to cause such person to participate in criminal gang activity, or to intimidate or harm any person who has ceased to participate in criminal gang activity; or (3) any public participation or use of identifiable apparel, name, sign or symbol of any criminal street gang in a manner that creates a threat of harm or intimidation to persons or property, or that promotes, furthers, aids, abets or assists any criminal street gang or criminal gang activity.
Page 38 of 45
“Criminal street gang” means a group that: (1) consists of three or more persons; (2) has identifiable leadership or an identifiable name, sign, or symbol; and (3) on an ongoing basis, regularly conspires and acts in concert mainly for criminal purposes, or whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in criminal gang activity.
“Health officer” means the director of the Grant County health district or his designee.
“Membrane” means a tarpaulin, banner, fabric, or other sheeting, made of cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper or other similar material.
“Occupant” means any person occupying the premises.
“Owner” means the record owner of the subject property as listed in the records of the Grant County assessor.
“Premises” or “subject property” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portions of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking lanes.
“Responsible person” means any agent, lessee or other persons occupying or having charge or control of any premises.
6.30.020 Public nuisance defined.
A “public nuisance” is any thing, act, failure to act, occupation or use of property which:
A. Annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of one or more persons;
B. Offends public decency;
C. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage a public park, street, sidewalk, alley, highway or other public area; or
D. In any way renders one or more persons insecure in life or the use of property.
6.30.030 Nuisance Declared.
Page 39 of 45
Each of the following conditions, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the compliance officer determines that any of these conditions exist upon any premises or in any stream, drainage way or wetlands, the officer may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter. The determination of the compliance officer shall be afforded great weight in the resolution of any contest over the enforcement of this chapter. The determination of the compliance officer shall be sustained unless the court determines that the officer’s application of this chapter is contrary to law or the respondent establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the factual basis for the issuance of the infraction or notice to correct unsafe or unlawful condition is unfounded. It is the policy of the city to establish a duty requiring each property owner within the city to maintain their premises in a neat, orderly, and clean condition, to preserve property values, esthetics, and quality of life.
A. The existence of any weeds, trash, excess dirt, filth, the carcass of any animal, waste shrubs, accumulation of lawn or yard trimmings or other offensive matter;
B. Defective or overflowing septic or sewage systems, and the existence of any noxious, foul, or putrid liquid or substance which poses a health hazard or creates a noxious odor;
C. Any man-caused pool of standing or stagnant water, except storm drainage systems, which serves as a breeding area for insects;
D. Accumulation of garbage, decaying vegetation, manure, dead animals, or other noxious things in a street or alley, or on public or private property to an extent injurious to the public health (as determined by the Grant County health district);
E. All other acts, failures to act, occupations, or uses of property which are determined by the health officer to be a menace to the health of the public;
F. All limbs of trees which are less than seven feet above the surface of any public sidewalk, or 12 feet above the surface of any street;
G. All buildings, other structures, or portions thereof which have been damaged by fire, decay, or have otherwise deteriorated so as to endanger the safety of the public;
H. All explosives, flammable liquids, and other dangerous substances stored or used in any manner in violation of the fire code in force within the city;
I. The keeping or harboring of any dog, fowl, or other animal which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing, or in the making of other noises, annoys or disturbs the public, or the habitual allowing of dogs kept at any one address to run
Page 40 of 45
at large (more than four offenses in a 12-month period) in violation of Chapter 8.05 EMC, Animal Control;
J. Making or causing to be made by means of any mechanical device, electrical or otherwise, any unnecessary noise of any kind which annoys the public prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. daily;
K. Dumping, throwing, placing, leaving or causing or permitting to be dumped, thrown, placed or left, any filth, paper, cans, glass, rubbish, trash, garbage, grass trimmings, shrub trimmings, and shrubbery of any kind, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, ditch or public or private property of another in the city;
L. The erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway, or other public or private place in the city, any one or more of the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, disease-causing places, conditions or things:
1. Any putrid, unhealthy, or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl, or waste parts of fish, vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved covered receptacles;
2. Any privies, vaults, cesspools, swamps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies and rats, or which are foul or malodorous;
3. Any filthy, littered, or trash-covered dwellings, cellars, house yards, barnyards, stable yards, factory yards, vacant areas in the rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;
4. Any animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies or weather conditions, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinances of the city;
5. Any poison oak or poison ivy, Russian thistle, or other noxious weeds, whether growing or otherwise; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of such weeds in approved covered receptacles;
6. Any bottles, cans, glass, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire, metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken glass, broken plaster, and all such trash, or abandoned material, unless it is kept in approved covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;
7. Any trash, litter, rags, accumulations, or empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other
Page 41 of 45
packing material not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire hazard;
M. The permitting to remain outside any dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling, or other structure, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice chest, refrigerator, or other airtight container which does not have the door, lid or other locking device removed;
N. Any pit, hole, basin, or excavation, which is unguarded or dangerous to life, or has been abandoned, or is no longer used for the purpose constructed, or is maintained contrary to statutes, ordinances, or regulations;
O. Any well or storage tank permitted to remain on any public or private property without being securely closed or barring any entrance or trap door thereto, or without filling or capping any well;
P. The repair or abandonment of any automobile, truck, or other motor vehicle of any kind upon the public streets or alleys of the city;
Q. The keeping or permitting the existence of any bees or other insects, reptiles, rodents, fowl, or any other animal, domestic or wild, in any manner contrary to law, or which affect the safety of the public;
R. The existence of any fence, or other structure, or thing on private or public property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk, or place, which is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, or is otherwise dilapidated and creating an unsafe condition;
S. The existence of any vine, shrub, or plant growing on, around, or in front of any fire hydrant, utility pole, utility box, or any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection, public, or private utility purposes in such a way as to obscure from view or impair access thereto;
T. The keeping or permitting the existence of morning glory, tackweed, Russian thistle, or other noxious weed, as defined in Chapter 17.10 RCW and EMC Chapter 6.20, growing or otherwise, which is a health or safety hazard to persons or property;
U. All grasses, weeds, or other vegetation growing, or which has grown and died, determined to be a fire or safety hazard or a nuisance to persons, shall not exceed 12 inches in height measured above the ground except as follows:
1. Any parcel of land or contiguous segregated parcels of land which when combined represent a parcel larger than one acre in size, may comply with these requirements by providing a firebreak along that portion of the perimeter of the
Page 42 of 45
parcel which abuts developed property or an improved street. The firebreak shall be a minimum of twenty feet in width, within which all weeds and vegetation, except established trees, shall not exceed 12 inches in height measured above the ground;
2. Any designated public parkland, natural area, or environmentally sensitive area, or any large undeveloped parcels of land not adjacent to developed areas or which are used for agricultural purposes. Any of the above exceptions may be waived and additional maintenance required by the compliance officer if he determines such action is necessary to protect the safety of persons or adjoining property. All maintenance shall be done in a manner so as to minimize disruption of soil stability;
V. The existence of any dead, diseased, infected, or dying tree, shrub, or other vegetation which may pose a danger to vegetation, crops, property, or persons;
W. The existence of any accumulation of materials or objects in a location when the same endangers property, safety, or constitutes a fire hazard;
X. The depositing or burning or causing to be deposited or burned in any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public place which is open to travel, of any hay, straw, paper, wood, boards, boxes, leaves, manure, or other rubbish or materials;
Y. The existence on any premises of any unused and abandoned trailer, house trailer, automobile, boat or other vehicle or major parts thereof;
Z. The keeping or maintenance in any area on private property which is clearly visible from a public street, sidewalk, park, or other public area any accumulation, collection or untidy storage of any of the following: old appliances or parts thereof; old iron, steel, aluminum, or other metal; inoperable junk vehicles, vehicle parts, machinery, or equipment; mattresses, bedding, clothing rags or cloth; straw, packing material, cardboard, or other paper; tin cans, wires, bottles, glass, cans, barrels, bins, boxes, containers, ashes, plaster or cement; or wood. This determination shall not apply to conditions completely enclosed within a building or fencing so as not to be visible from public property;
AA. The existence of graffiti, which is defined as a defacing, damaging, or destructive inscription, figure or design painted, drawn or the like, on the exterior of any building fence, gate, or other structures or on rocks, bridges, trees, other real or personal property;
BB. The locating of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, or any other vehicles, vessels, or the like for the purpose of advertising their sale on property located in any commercial or industrial zone not owned by the seller, except for new and used vehicle and vessel
Page 43 of 45
sales lots, unless the seller presents to the compliance officer a document containing the name, address and telephone number of the property owner allowing the seller to use the property for the sale of that specific item;
CC. The permitting of any condition or situation where the soil has been disrupted, disturbed or destabilized so as to allow blowing dust to exist;
DD. Permitting any violation of RCW 59.18.510 in any rental dwelling unit;
EE. Criminal street gangs and criminal gang activity are each declared to be a public nuisance in violation of this chapter and other applicable code provisions, including but not limited to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and Uniform Housing Code, subject to abatement through all available means. In addition thereto and without limitation, criminal gang activity upon, and the presence and use of property by a criminal street gang, with the owner’s knowledge or consent, constitutes a public nuisance and grounds for revocation of any permit or license regulating or authorizing the use of such property.
6.30.040 Prohibited conduct.
A. It is unlawful for any responsible person or owner to permit, maintain, suffer, carry on, or allow, upon any premises, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.
B. It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry on or do any other acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.
C. In the enforcement of this chapter, the city shall be permitted to act upon the reports of persons, including the observations of city employees, to investigate and, if in the opinion of the compliance officer the complaints are based upon events which have occurred in violation of this chapter, issue a notice of infraction or a notice to correct unsafe or unlawful condition as set forth in EMC 6.30.050.
6.30.060 Correction by owner or other responsible person.
If and when an owner or other responsible person shall undertake action to correct any condition described in this chapter, whether by order of the compliance officer, or otherwise, all necessary and legal conditions pertinent to the correction may be imposed by the compliance officer. It is unlawful for the owner or other responsible person to fail to comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any required permits or approvals to do any work incidental to the correction.
Page 44 of 45
6.30.070 Abatement by the city.
A. In all cases where the code enforcement officer has determined to proceed with issuance of a notice of violation and order to correct, then 10 days after issuance of such notice, the city shall have the ability, in addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter and not as an alternative means of abatement to the exclusion of others, to abate the nuisance identified by the code enforcement officer in the notice of violation and order to correct as provided herein.
B. A violation of this chapter may be subject to abatement by the following means:
1. Summarily, by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction; or
2. Following issuance of a notice of violation and order to correct, and following the expiration of the time to correct the condition or cease the activity constituting a nuisance as identified in the notice and order, a written notice of the code enforcement officer sent by return receipt mail to the owner, as such appears on the rolls of the county assessor, which notice shall state that the city council will consider for adoption, after not less than 10 days from the date of that notice, of a resolution which shall describe the property involved by street address or parcel number and the condition in violation of this chapter and require the owner to make the removal or destruction of such condition. Such notice shall state the owner may appear before the city council at the time it considers such resolution and that will be the owner’s only opportunity to protest the proposed action of the city council to abate the nuisance as provided in this section. Such notice shall further provide that should the city council adopt such resolution it may direct therein that the destruction or removal of the condition in violation of this chapter is to be accomplished by city forces or contractors and that all costs, direct and indirect, of such work shall be charged to the owner. If such removal or destruction is not made by the owner after the notice is given, the city council may, by resolution passed not less than 10 days from the date of the notice, cause the city to make the removal or destruction thereof as provided herein and provide that the cost thereof shall become a charge against the owner of the property. This debt shall be collectible in the same manner as other debts owing to the city.
6.30.080 Immediate danger – Summary correction.
Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or significant portion thereof, the correction officer shall have the authority to summarily and without notice correct the same. The correction officer shall make a reasonable effort consistent with the circumstances to contact
Page 45 of 45
the owner and occupant of the subject property to obtain compliance before proceeding. The expense of such correction shall become and be collectible in the same manner as any debt owing the city.
6.30.090 Unlawful materials in alleys.
A. It is unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to deposit any debris, vegetation, lawn clippings, lumber piles, wood piles, auto parts or bodies, garbage, and the like, or store any material of any kind except approved garbage or refuse containers in the alleys of the city. Abutting property owners shall be responsible for the control of vegetation within alleys.
B. The materials referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall be removed by the depositor. Failure to remove the materials within five days shall be an additional infraction and it shall be considered an additional infraction for each five-day period that a party fails to remove the material after having been notified of its existence.
6.30.100 Violation – Penalty. A violation of this chapter shall be enforceable as set forth in Chapter 1.22 EMC, Civil Code Enforcement.
(Ord. 08-19, 2008; Ord 15-15, 2015)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 1
Title 8
ANIMALS
Chapters:
8.05 Animal Control
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 2
Chapter 8.05
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections:
8.05.010 Definitions.
8.05.020 Chapter supplementary.
8.05.030 License required.
8.05.040 License fee and tag.
8.05.050 Rabies control.
8.05.060 Running at large.
8.05.070 Vicious animals.
8.05.071 Dangerous Animals.
8.05.072 Appeal Process
8.05.073 Electronic Chip, Responsibility to Scan
8.05.074 Restraining Potentially Dangerous Dogs
8.05.080 Impoundment procedure--Disposition.
8.05.090 Dogs barking.
8.05.100 Large livestock running at large.
8.05.110 Wild animals.
8.05.120 Guard dogs.
8.05.130 Confinement of females in heat.
8.05.140 Animal feces control.
8.05.150 Responsibility of owner or custodian.
8.05.160 Interference with animal control officer.
8.05.170 Records.
8.05.180 License and permit issuance and revocation.
8.05.190 Household pets.
8.05.200 Penalty.
8.05.210 Disposal by city.
8.05.220 Severability.
8.05.010 Definitions. When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Abandonment" means leaving of an animal by its owner or other person or persons responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper care.
(2) "Animal" means any animal, domestic or wild, other than humans.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 3
(3) "Officer or City Designee" means any person or persons empowered by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter together with all police officers of the city. (Ord 10-10, 2010)
(4) "Animal shelter" means the facility designated by the city for the boarding and caring of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or law of the state.
(5) "Cats" means any animal of the species Felidae, regardless of sex.
(6) "Common areas" of a condominium, townhouse, or apartment buildings includes but is not limited to the yards, grounds, patios, garden areas, play areas, clubhouses, swimming pools, sidewalks, walkways, canyon garage areas, entryways, hallways and driveways.
(7) "Dogs" means any animal of the species Canidae, regardless of sex. This shall include all breeds, varieties, or hybrids of canine mammals.
(8) "Dog owner" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust arrangement, or the like who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or dogs.
(9) "Guard dog" means a dog trained to protect persons or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog. These dogs must be registered with the city as a guard dog.
(10) "Wild animal" means any live nonhuman primate, coyote, raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. An animal that is one-fourth coyote or more shall be considered a wild animal.
(11) "Owner or custodian" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust arrangement, or the like who shall keep, maintain, control, care for, or be responsible for keeping, maintaining, or caring for any animal.
(12) "Running at large" means off the premises of the owner and not under the effective control of that owner, his agent, servant or competent member of his family by means of a leash, cord or chain reasonable in length; except that, for the purpose of this definition, the "premises of the owner" shall not include common areas of a condominium complex, townhouses, and apartment buildings, and any animal not in the effective control of its owner upon the common area of a condominium, townhouse or apartment building or the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 4
grounds thereof, shall be deemed to be running at large.
(13) "Vicious animal" means any animal that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals whether or not such animal has ever displayed any vicious tendencies, bitten, attacked, or threatened any person or domestic animal before that time. This is a specific abandonment of the common law concept that every dog is allowed one vicious act before being declared vicious.
(14) "Household pets" means dogs, cats, rabbits, pigeons, chickens, ducks, mice, hamsters, gerbils, parakeets, canaries, finches and other similar exotic fowl and songbirds, reptiles, amphibians, fish and other similar animals and fowl kept for companionship or for personal enjoyment.
(15) "Potentially dangerous dog" and "dangerous dog" have the meaning given them in RCW Chapter 16.08.
(16) All other words and phrases used herein will have their commonly accepted meanings. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987)(Ord. 05-06, 2005).
8.05.020 Chapter supplementary. The provisions of this chapter shall be supplementary to the provisions of RCW Chapter 16.08 relating to dangerous dogs. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.030 License required. It is unlawful for any person or persons to own or harbor any dog over the age of six months within the corporate limits of the city, unless such person or persons first procures a license therefore as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.040 License fee and tag.
(A) The license fee shall state whether the dog is male or female, and with each license a metal tag shall be issued having a number corresponding to the number of the license together with the words "City of Ephrata". All dog licenses shall be issued as non-expiring licenses. The applicant for any dog license shall cause the tag to be continuously attached to the licensed dog’s collar during the term of the animal’s residency within the City of Ephrata and the collar shall be furnished by the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog. (Ord. 13-17, 2013)
(B) It is unlawful for any person, who for the purpose of securing the license to falsely represent the age or sex of any dog, or that dog has been spayed or neutered.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 5
(C) A non-expiring animal license shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee, said license expiring on December 3lst of a given year, the applicable fees as defined in Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services. (Ord. 11-14, 2011)(Ord. 13-17, 2013)
(D) No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued.
(E) All persons must present a current rabies vaccination receipt before a city dog license or state certificate is issued.
(Ord. 1099 §3, 1984: Ord. 1068 §2, 1992: Ord. 910 §1, 1976: Ord 665 §2, 1962; Ord. 07-14, 2007; Ord. 11-14, 2011)
8.05.050 Rabies control.
(a) All cats and dogs over the age of four months or dogs with a full set of canine teeth shall have a current rabies vaccination administered by a licensed veterinarian. If a dog or cat is obtained from the animal control shelter, the owner or custodian shall arrange for the dog or cat to be vaccinated within thirty days of obtaining the dog or cat and the owner or custodian shall provide proof of such vaccination to the Ephrata Police Department, Officer, or City Designee or be in violation of this section. An owner acquiring a dog or cat shall have such a dog or cat inoculated against rabies within thirty days after the dog or cat reaches four months of age. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this section thirty days after having moved into the city. A current rabies vaccination means that a dog vaccinated between three months to one year shall be revaccinated within one year and then revaccinated at least within every three years thereafter and that a cat shall be revaccinated annually. (Ord 10-10, 2010)
(b) Any animal that bites, regardless of severity or circumstances, shall be impounded for not less than ten days in the City Pound, at the owner’s expense. The dog shall have an electronic chip inserted by a local veterinarian, at the owner’s expense, so as to record the incident. Any dog that bites, regardless of severity or circumstances, shall be declared as “Potentially Dangerous” or “Vicious”. Refusal to comply with this section of Code will result in the seizure and destruction of the animal and shall subject the owner to a C-1 penalty. No animal under confinement shall be released from confinement until such release has been approved by the Chief of Police or his/her Designee. (Ord 10-10, 2010)
(c) It is unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other animal that has bitten to destroy such animal before it can be properly confined by the Officer or City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 6
Designee. The location of such confinement shall be determined by the Officer or City Designee and shall be at the expense of the owner. (Ord 09-05, 2009; Ord 10-10, 2010)
(d) The owner of any animal that has been reported as having inflicted a bite shall, on demand of an Officer or City Designee, produce such animal for examination and quarantine as prescribed in this section. If the owner, his agent, servant or competent member of his family, or any custodian of any such animal refuses to produce such animal, the owner, his agent, servant or competent member of his family, or any custodian shall be subject to immediate arrest if there shall be probable cause to believe that the animal has inflicted a bite upon a person and the owner, his agent, servant or competent member of his family, or any custodian is keeping or harboring the animal and willfully refuses to produce the animal upon such demand. Such person shall be taken before a judge of the district court, who may order the immediate production of the animal. If the owner, his agent, servant or competent member of his family, or any custodian of such animal shall willfully or knowingly secrete or refuse to produce the animal, each day of secretion or refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a separate and individual violation of this section. (Ord 09-05, 2009; Ord 10-10, 2010)
(e) When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid by a licensed veterinarian, the veterinarian making such diagnosis shall immediately notify the county public health officer and advise him of any reports of human contact with such rabid dog.
If any animal under quarantine dies while under observation, the animal control officer or his agent shall immediately take action to obtain a pathological and inoculation examination of the animal. As soon as a diagnosis is made available, the animal control officer shall notify the county public health officer of any reports of human contact with the animal. Any animal which has not be inoculated against rabies and known to have been bitten by a rabid animal shall be humanely destroyed immediately.
(f) Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for bites inflicted by animals shall report such treatment to the animal control officer, giving names and addresses of such persons.
(g) Any veterinarian who diagnoses rabies in any animal shall report such fact to the animal control officer. The veterinarian shall determine, before any rabies inoculation is given, whether the subject animal is under quarantine or has inflicted a bite on any person within the last ten days.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 7
(h) In case of an outbreak of rabies, constituting an emergency situation, the mayor shall be authorized to impose strict regulations pertaining to animals within the city limits. (Ord. 87-8 §1(part), 1987)(Ord. O5-06, 2005).
8.05.060 Running at large.
(a) It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to permit any such dog to run loose or be at large upon any public street, highway or public place, or upon private property owned by a person or persons other than the owner or custodian of the dog, within the corporate limits of the city unless such dog is controlled by a leash, rope, device, or cord of such length as is sufficiently short to allow for the containment and control of such dog, or is at heel of the owner, custodian, or other competent authorized person. “At heel” shall mean that the dog shall be immediately at the owner’s or custodian’s heel; provided, however, that such leash or chain is not required for any dog when otherwise safely and securely confined or completely controlled while in or upon any vehicle. Any person who elects to be at large within the corporate limits of the City with a dog or dogs contained and controlled by a leash, rope, device, or cord as provided for herein shall be in violation of this section if that person in fact does not or cannot control and contain any dog by the leash, rope, device, or cord method. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to dogs which are in special areas designated by the City as dog training areas or designated off-leash parks, and as long as the regulations of the City, or its authorized representative, with respect to the use of such areas are complied with and said dogs are under the custody and control of the owner or custodian. (Ord. 16-08, 2016)
(b) Animals injured or killed in the street shall be considered as running at large; the animal control officer shall remove all such animals and, at his discretion, take those needing medical attention to a veterinarian. The owner of any such animal shall be responsible for all expenses of the treatment and of the impoundment. All reasonable efforts will be made to notify the owner or custodian of any such animal prior to the animal being treated and impounded. Injured animals may be destroyed humanely, if it is determined by the Officer or City Designee or a veterinarian that the animal has sustained critical injuries, suffering is extreme, and/or the prognosis for recovery is poor. The Officer or City Designee shall consult with a veterinarian as to the disposition of injured animals, when the animals’ prognosis cannot be ascertained with reasonable certainty. (Ord 10-10, 2010)
(c) If a dog owner has received five or more running at large violations within a twelve-month period, the City may find and declare the dog owner to be a problem dog owner and shall revoke all dog licenses issued to the dog owner
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 8
upon service of a Notice of Problem Dog Owner. The Notice shall be in writing and shall contain the name and address of the owner who is subject to the revocation, a description of the violations forming a basis for the finding, a description of all dogs licensed to the owner, notification of the right to a hearing pursuant to Section 8.05.072, and a summary of the effects of the revocation of all dog licenses, requirements for impound, and the potential penalties for violation of the restrictions. The finding and declaration of problem dog owner shall become final unless an appeal is filed. Once the finding and declaration of problem dog owner is final, the owner shall immediately surrender all dogs of the problem dog owner to an animal control officer or police officer for disposal. A problem dog owner is prohibited from licensing, owning, keeping, or harboring any dog in the City for a period of twelve months. (Ord. 16-08, 2016)
(d) It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to permit any such dog to enter or be upon the premises of the city cemetery; provided however, seeing eye dogs are allowed upon the city cemetery grounds to assist their owners in attending funeral services at the city cemetery. (Ord. 89-11 §1 (part), 1989: Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
(Ord. 16-16-08, 2016)
8.05.070 Vicious animals. No one shall keep, possess or harbor a vicious animal within the city. It shall be the duty of the Officer or City Designee to impound such animal at the owner’s expense and may do so in all instances where the Officer or City Designee determines in his opinion, that the animal is vicious, and if impoundment cannot be made with safety to the Officer or City Designee or other citizens, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner, keeper or possessor. If an animal is impounded because it is vicious, a mandatory court appearance is necessary and the animal shall not be released to the owner or custodian until after the court appearance unless the owner agrees with the city attorney to have the animal placed outside the corporate limits of the city or agrees to have the animal euthanized. Having a vicious animal is declared to be a nuisance and may be corrected as such as prescribed by law including the summary correction procedure of Chapter 6.30. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987)(Ord. 05-06, 2005)(Ord 10-10, 2010).
8.05.071 Dangerous Dogs. No one shall keep, possess or harbor a dangerous dog, as defined by RCW 16.08.070 as now enacted or hereafter amended within the city. It shall be the duty of the Officer or City Designee to impound such animal at the owner’s expense. Upon the discovery of a dangerous dog within the City limits, the City shall provide notice and copies of relevant codes via certified mail to the owner or custodian of the dog. The owner or custodian shall then have ten calendar days from the date upon the original notice to remove the dog
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 9
from the City. Failure to comply will result in C-1 penalty, seizure and destruction of the dog. If impoundment cannot be made with safety to the Officer or City Designee or other citizens, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner, keeper or possessor. The Officer or City Designee shall have the authority to declare an animal dangerous, based on the severity of the bite or attack, in accordance with RCW 16.08 as now enacted or hereafter amended. If an animal has been previously declared as Potentially Dangerous, pursuant to RCW 16.08, the Officer or City Designee shall have the authority to declare the dog as Dangerous and/or seize the dog immediately for any behavior that the officer deems as threatening in accordance with RCW16.08 as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord. 05-06, 2005; Ord. 10-10, 2010)
8.05.072 Appeal Process. Upon intention by the City of Ephrata to declare a dog owner a problem dog owner under EMC 8.05.060(c) or to declare a dog as dangerous, as defined by RCW 16.08.070 as now enacted or hereafter amended, or upon impound of a dog for a bite, the City shall provide notice of the same and provide an opportunity for appeal to the dog owner or custodian, per RCW 16.08.080 as now enacted or hereafter amended. The owner or custodian of the dog shall have 10 calendar days, from the date of the notice, to submit a written request for an appeal to the Ephrata Police Department. The appeal request should include all pertinent contact information. (Ord. 16-08, 2016)
If the owner or custodian, making the request for an appeal, fails to attend or participate in the appeal process, or notifies the City of the same, the owner is deemed to have waived any such rights to appeal or otherwise challenge the determination.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the authority to make the final determination as to uphold any fees, requirements, and/or designations; or to waive any fees, requirements, and/or designations.
(Ord 10-10, 2010)
1. Following an appeal, the City will issue its final determination, in the form of a written order by certified mail, as provided by RCW 16.08.080 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
2. Appeals of the final determination shall be to the Ephrata City Council. Any appeal must be filed within twenty calendar days of the date upon the final determination notice. While the appeal is pending, and during any time at which the City has yet made the final determination, the dog shall be confined in the City Pound at the owner=s expense.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 10
3. If, after all administrative appeals have been waived or otherwise been disposed of, ten calendar days pass, the owner has not reclaimed the dog, any dangerous or vicious dog still contained within the Ephrata Pound is deemed to have been abandoned, and may be destroyed in accordance with Chapter 8.05.080(d). (Ord. 05-06, 2005)
8.05.073 Electronic Chip, Responsibility to Scan. Upon reasonable suspicion, the City may require an owner to produce an animal for inspection by a handheld electronic scanner to determine if an electronic chip has previously been inserted in the dog. Failure to comply will result in an automatic declaration of the dog as vicious and seizure of the dog pursuant to Chapter 8.05. (Ord. 05-06, 2005)
8.05.074 Restraining Potentially Dangerous Dogs. Any dog declared as Potentially Dangerous shall be restrained by leash, or similar device, at all times when in public. When not in public, Potentially Dangerous animals shall be confined to a proper enclosed area adequate to confine the animal. (Ord. 05-06, 2005)
8.05.080 Impoundment procedure--Disposition.
(a) Any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the city shall be subject to seizure by a police officer or City Designee, or any other city authority designated by the mayor for the purpose of seizing such dogs. Any private person shall have the right to seize any such dog and to immediately notify the Officer or City Designee. (Ord 10-10, 2010; Ord. 11-14, 2011)
(b) Any other animal which may be impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to seizure by a police officer or City Designee, or any other city authority designated by the mayor for the purpose of seizing such animal. (Ord 10-10, 2010; Ord. 11-14, 2011)
(c) After any such seizure, a written record thereof shall be kept in a record book for that purpose at the city police department, which record shall give a general description of such dog, and such dog so seized shall be held for a period of forty-eight hours from the time of impounding, exclusive of holidays and Sundays, during which time the owner or custodian of such dog, upon establishing ownership or control of such dog, may recover the same by procuring a license for such dog if none has been issued and paying an impounding and/or redemption fee, together with a boarding fee as established in Chapter 3.35, Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services, shall be paid to the keeper of such dog. (Ord. 11-14, 2011)
The owner, by paying such impounding and/or redemption fee and boarding
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 11
fee, shall not thereafter be immune from other liabilities imposed by this chapter.
(d) If such dog is not claimed within forty-eight hours, exclusive of holidays and Sundays, from the time of impounding, the dog may be put to death, or otherwise disposed of as directed by the police chief. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987; Ord. 07-14, 2007)
8.05.090 Dogs barking. It shall be the duty of the Officer or City Designee to respond to and investigate complaints of any dog which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, or barking, annoys or disturbs a neighborhood or the quiet and repose of a complainant, and shall have the authority to issue a notice of infraction if warranted. This action is supplementary to any other summary action that is provided in Chapter 6.30. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987; Ord 10-10, 2010)
8.05.100 Livestock running at large or being ridden or driven. It is unlawful for the owner or custodian or any horse, mule, donkey, oxen, goat, sheep, livestock, poultry or other animals generally regarded as farm or ranch animals to permit the same to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any of said animals to allow said animals to use, be upon or be ridden over, along or upon any public sidewalk, walkway or park within the corporate limits of the City. It shall not be unlawful for said animals to use, be upon or be ridden over, along or upon any street, alley or access way that is available to motor vehicles or bicycles unless such street, alley or access way has been designated by the Public Works Department as prohibiting such animals. Provided, such restriction against said animals using, being upon, or being ridden, over, along or upon any public sidewalk, walkway or park may be waived by the city council if so requested in connection with any fair, show, exhibition, parade or other function generally open to the public. (Ord 89-11 §1 (part), 1989: Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.110 Wild animals. It is unlawful to own or harbor a wild animal as defined in Section 8.05.010. (Ord. 87-7 §1 (part) 1987).
8.05.120 Guard dogs. It is unlawful to place or maintain guard dogs in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The dogs shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to insure that they will not escape; or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 12
(2) They shall be under the absolute control of a handler at all times; and
(3) Warning signs shall be conspicuously posted indicating the presence of guard dogs, and such signs shall plainly show a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such dogs can be reached at all times; and
(4) Prior to the posting of guard dogs on any property, the person or persons responsible for the posting shall inform the animal control officer in writing of their intention to post such dogs, the number of dogs to be posted, the location where such dog or dogs will be posted and the approximate length of time such dog or dogs will be patrolling the area. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.130 Confinement of females in heat. Any unspayed female dog in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure, and such area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or dogs may gain access to the confined animal. The Officer or City Designee shall order any unspayed female that is in the stage of estrus (heat) and that is not properly confined or any such dog that is creating a neighborhood nuisance to be removed to a boarding kennel or to a veterinary hospital. (Ord 10-10, 2010)
All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the order of the Officer or City Designee shall be a violation of this provision, and the animal shall then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter subject to monetary penalties and charges as directed. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987; Ord 10-10, 2010)
8.05.140 Animal feces control. It shall be the duty of every person who allows or takes any animal off of that person’s premises onto any public or private property, including but not limited to yards, lawns, sidewalks, alleys, parking strips, school grounds, parks and recreational fields, to have in their possession the equipment necessary pick up or to remove and to properly dispose of any feces produced by the animal while that animal is not upon the person’s premises.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person to fail to immediately remove fecal matter deposited by a dog or other animal in their possession on public property, such as park property, trail ways, open space, school grounds, public right-of-ways, or public easements. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987)(Ord. 09-07, 2009)
8.05.150 Responsibility of owner or custodian.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or custodian of any animal within the corporate limits of the city to so control and care for their animal so as to prevent and keep that animal from being in violation of this chapter. In any
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 13
proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter, it shall be conclusively presumed that the owner or custodian of any animal within the corporate limits of the city is aware of the animal’s whereabouts, condition, or method of being treated and/or maintained.
(b) The owner or custodian of any animal within the corporate limits of the city shall be responsible for any cost, charge, fee or expense of any nature incurred by the city in capturing, controlling, caring for or destroying any animal in violation of this chapter. Without limitation but by way of illustration, the following are examples of costs, charges, fees and expenses which the owner or custodian shall be responsible to pay to the city: board charges, tranquilizer costs, euthanasia costs, veterinary expenses. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.160 Interference with animal control. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct an Officer or City Designee or any city employee or official in the discharge of his official duties under this chapter. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987). (Ord 10-10, 2010)
8.05.170 Records.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Officer or City Designee to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of reports of animal bites reported to him.
(Ord 10-10, 2010)
(b) It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a record of the names of all persons to whom licenses are issued with the number of each license and whether for a male or female dog or whether the male dog has been neutered or the female dog spayed. (Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987)
8.05.180 License and permit issuance and revocation.
(a) The city may revoke any animal permit or license if the person holding the permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the city, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals.
(b) Any person whose animal permit or license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such person and no part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded.
(c) It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the city shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 14
the permit or license of the refusing owner.
(d) If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the city shall refuse to issue or may revoke a permit or license.
(e) No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment.
(f) Any person having been denied a license or permit may not reapply for a period of thirty days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a ten-dollar fee.
(g) Any dog impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall not be released until the owner of such dog shall have paid all fees and charges due. (Ord. 87-8 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.190 Household pets. The following requirements shall apply to the raising and keeping of all household pets:
(A) The maximum number of household pets permitted to be kept in conjunction with each permitted dwelling is as follows:
(1) Not more than the accumulative total of three of the following:
(i) Dogs and cats over the age of six months;
(ii) Ducks, chickens, other than roosters, and similar animals and fowl over the age of three months;
(iii) Pigeons over the age of three months except the keeping of show or performing pigeons.
(2) Unlimited numbers of mice, hamsters, gerbils, parakeets, finches, canaries and other similar exotic fowl and songbirds, reptiles, amphibians, fish and other similar animal and fowl may be kept.
(3) No more than 12 rabbits above the age of three months, kept in such a manner so as not to create any objectionable noise, odor, or otherwise disturb the pubic. (Ord 13-11, 2013)
(B) The keeping of household pets for the principal purpose of sale and profit is prohibited.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 15
(C) All household pets shall be kept and maintained in a manner which confines their movement and activity to the premises of the owner.
(D) All household pets shall be kept in such a manner so as to not create any objectionable noise, odor or otherwise annoy or disturb the public. The keeping of roosters is prohibited. (Ord. 89-11 §1 (part), 1989: Ord. 87-7 §1(part), 1987).
8.05.200 Penalty. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to the following penalties as they are defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code. Specific penalties for selected provisions of this Chapter are as follows:
Violation
(A) No License on Dog (8.05.030)
(1) First offense C-18
(2) Subsequent offense within twelve months, each C-14
(B) Failure to Confine Biting Animal (8.05.050)
(1) First offense C- 7
(2) Each subsequent offense C- 4
(C) Refusal or Failure to Produce Rabid Animal (8.05.050) C- 1
(D) Dog Running at Large (8.05.060)
(1) First offense C-18
(2) Second offense C-12
(3) Each subsequent offense C- 7
(4) Failure to control dog by leash or device C-17
(5) Owning, keeping, or harboring any dog by a problem dog owner C-5
(6) Refusal to surrender dogs by a problem dog owner C-5
(E) Keeping Vicious Animal, Mandatory Court Appearance (8.05.070)
(1) First offense C- 7
(2) Each subsequent offense C- 4
(F) Dogs barking (8.05.090)
(1) First offense C-18
(2) Second offense C-12
(3) Each subsequent offense C- 7
(G) Livestock at Large (8.05.100)
(1) First offense C-18
(2) Each subsequent offense C-12
(H) Guard Dog in Violation of Conditions (8.05.120)
(1) First offense C-12
(2) Each subsequent offense C- 4
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 - 16
(I) Failure to Confine Female Dog in Estrus (Heat) (8.05.130)
(1) First offense C-15
(2) Each subsequent offense C-12
(J) Obstructing Animal Control Officer or Police Officer Enforcing
Chapter (8.05.160) C-4
(K) Failure to Provide Evidence of Rabies Vaccination (8.05.050) C-17
(L) Household Pet Violations (8.05.190) C-18
(M) Failure to possess equipment for collection of feces (8.05.140) C-18
(N) Failure to Collect Animal Feces (8.05.140) C-13
(O) Allowing Livestock on Sidewalks, Parks, or Walkways (8.05.100)
(1) First offense in 12 month period C-15
(2) Second offense in 12 month period C-12
(3) Third offense in a 12 month period C-7
(P) Allowing Dog into City Cemetery (8.05.060)
(1) First offense in 12 month period C-18
(2) Second offense in 12 month period C-15
(3) Third offense in a 12 month period C-12
(Ord. 89-11 §1(part), 1989: Ord. 87-8 §l (part), 1987).
(Q) Potentially Dangerous or Vicious animal running at large (8.05.060- 074)
(1) 1st Offense: C-5
(2) 2nd Offense: C-1
(3) 3rd Offense: C-1 and Animal is impounded and destroyed.
(Ord. 09-07, 2009)(Ord. 13-17, 2013)(Ord. 16-08, 2016)
8.05.210 Disposal by city. The fee to be charged to any person voluntarily offering his dog to the city for disposal shall be the fee then established by the veterinary association for similar services. It is not the intent of the city to solicit or encourage the commercial disposition of animals and referrals will be made for this service. The city will commercially dispose of animals only when other commercial sources are not available. (Ord. 87-8 §2 (part), 1987).
8.05.220 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 87-8 §1 (part), 1987). (Ord. 05-06, 2005)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 1
Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Chapters:
9.12 Explosives
9.18 Fireworks Regulation
9.20 Weapons (repealed Ord. 09-04, 2009)
9.32 Vegetation
9.36 Discharge of Water
9.40 Park Rules and Regulations
9.48 Fishing in Oasis Park
9.52 Bicycles, Roller Skating, Scooters & Skateboards
9.56 Prohibiting cargo containers and the like
9.60 Graffiti Abatement Code
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 2
Chapter 9.12
EXPLOSIVES
Sections:
9.12.010 Definitions.
9.12.020 Permit required.
9.12.030 Storage outside of city.
9.12.040 Application for permit.
9.12.050 Permit time period, revocation.
9.12.060 Bond.
9.12.070 Public officers need not furnish bond.
9.12.080 Qualifications of person handling.
9.12.090 Blasting.
9.12.100 Miscellaneous provisions.
9.12.110 Types prohibited.
9.12.120 Regulations not applicable when.
9.12.010 Definitions. "Explosive" or "explosives", whenever used in this chapter means and includes any chemical compound or chemical mixture that contains any oxidizing or combustible units or other ingredients in such proportion, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. (Ord. 269 '1, 1949).
9.12.020 Permit required. lt is unlawful to keep or store, or permit to be kept or stored, used or transported, any explosives within the city without first complying with the laws of the state and obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk, and without complying with all of the provisions of this chapter relating to explosives and the handling, storage, use, and transportation thereof. (Ord. 269 '2, 1949).
9.12.030 Storage outside of city. Every person, firm or corporation in the city engaged in the business of handling, storing, using, or transporting explosives shall establish one central loading station situated outside the city, where delivery shall be made to customers. (Ord. 269 '3, 1949).
9.12.040 Application for permit. No person shall handle, store, use, or transport explosives within the city without first obtaining a permit so to do. At the time this permit is applied for they shall furnish the city clerk with accurate information as to the kind and quantity of explosives to be handled, stored, used, or transported, and the disposition to be made of them; the vehicle or conveyance in which they are to be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 3
transported; the names and number of persons in charge; and the route or routes to be traveled; the length of time for which the permit is desired; the class of magazine in which the explosives are to be kept or stored; and such other reasonable information as may be desired by the city clerk, all of which shall be incorporated in the permit. This section shall not apply to railroads or other transportation companies that are hauling explosives through Ephrata or are delivering them as articles of commerce to consignees within the city. (Ord. 269 '4, 1949).
9.12.050 Permit time period, revocation. Permits to handle, store, use, or transport explosives within the city shall not be issued for a longer period than thirty days, and the city clerk is authorized to revoke any such permit upon violation by the holder thereof of any of the provisions hereof relating to the handling, storing, use, or transporting of explosives. (Ord. 269 '5, 1949).
9.12.060 Bond. No permit for keeping, storing, use, handling, or transportation of explosives within the city shall be issued except as herein otherwise provided, until the applicant therefor shall have furnished a good and sufficient surety bond in such amount as may be determined by the city council, approved by the mayor, and approved as to form by the city attorney, and conditioned:
(1) That the applicant will abide by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the laws of the state relating to the handling, keeping, storing, use, and transportation of explosives, and will save harmless and indemnify the city for any and all loss or damage of any kind or character which may be suffered by the city by reason of or resulting from the keeping, storing, use, handling, or transportation of the explosives;
(2) To save harmless and indemnify the city from any and all loss, damage, actions, and claims of any kind or character which may accrue to or be suffered by any person by reason of or resulting from the keeping, storing, use, handling, or transportation of the explosives;
(3) To save harmless and indemnify any and all persons for any and all loss or damage of any kind or character which may be suffered by them by reason of or resulting from the keeping, storing, use, handling, or transportation of the explosives. The obligations under the bond shall not be terminated before sixty days from the date of written notice to the city clerk that the keeping, storing, use, handling, or transportation of the explosives has been terminated. (Ord. 269 '6, 1949).
9.12.070 Public officers need not furnish bond. Public officials and employees using, keeping, storing, handling, or transporting explosives in connection with public work shall not be required to furnish the bond herein above specified, but shall be subject to all other provisions relating to explosives. (Ord. 269 '7, 1949).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 4
9.12.080 Qualifications of persons handling. No permit shall be issued for the handling, storing, use or transportation of explosives within the city unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the city clerk that the person who is to handle, keep, store, use, or transport the explosives is over the age of twenty-one years, able to speak, read, and write the English language, possessed of good sight and hearing, good habits, intelligence, reliability and judgment, has had no less than two years' experience in the work, and shall be familiar with the necessary precautions to be taken incident to the service to be performed by him. The habits, appearance, and fitness of such persons shall be certified to by someone who has known the applicant for a period of at least one year and whose judgment is considered competent and reliable to the city clerk. (Ord. 269 '8, 1949).
9.12.090 Blasting. All permits for blasting within the city shall limit the time for blasting within the hours from eight a.m. to five p.m., unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the city clerk that blasting at other times during the day would be just as safe. Before any explosives are used, or a blast is set off, the persons using the explosives shall take every precaution to clear all people from the area where the explosives are being used, and to warn all persons living near the area where the explosives are being used, and shall take all other proper steps to protect persons and their property from any possible harm which may occur from the use of explosives. (Ord. 269 '9, 1949).
9.12.100 Miscellaneous provisions. Whenever explosives are handled, stored, used, or transported within the city limits, the following miscellaneous provisions, in addition to the provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter and the laws of the state, shall apply:
(1) All explosives coming within the city shall be of known quality and of standard manufacture. Such explosives shall be packed and marked in compliance with the Interstate Commerce Commission's regulations governing the transportation of explosives, as formulated and published from time to time;
(2) All explosives shall be kept apart and away from fire or artificial light, other than electric flashlight or electric lantern, and no person shall have, drop, throw, or leave any fire, lighted match, cigar, cigarette, or pipe ashes within fifty feet of any magazine or receptacle containing explosives;
(3) Explosives shall not be exposed to the weather or to the direct rays of the sun, nor shall any explosive or any grains or particles thereof be left or permitted to remain on the outside of or about the containers in which they are encased or enclosed;
(4) If any explosive shall deteriorate so as to be in a dangerous condition, or if any nitroglycerine shall leak out of any explosive, the person to whom the permit for
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 5
the handling, storing, using, or transporting of the explosive has been issued shall immediately notify the fire marshal and shall cause the explosive to be disposed of in such manner as the fire marshal may require;
(5) No person shall discharge any firearm at or in the neighborhood of explosives. (Ord. 269 '10, 1949).
9.12.110 Types prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to handle, store, use, or transport within the city any of the following named explosives:
(1) Liquid nitroglycerine;
(2) Any explosive containing over sixty percent of nitroglycerine, except gelatine dynamite;
(3) Gelatine dynamite equal in strength to dynamite containing more than seventy-five percent nitroglycerine;
(4) Any explosive having a nonretentive absorbent or one that permits leakage of nitroglycerine under any condition liable to exist during the handling, storage or transportation of the same;
(5) Nitrocellulose in a dry condition in quantity greater than ten pounds in one exterior package;
(6) Fulminate or mercury in bulk in a dry condition, and fulminate or any other metal in any condition except as a component of manufactured articles not prohibited within the city;
(7) Any explosive containing an ammonium salt and a chlorate. (Ord. 269 '11, 1949).
9.12.120 Regulations not applicable when. None of the requirements hereof relating to the handling, storage, use, and transportation of explosives shall apply:
(1) To gunpowder in closed metal receptacles of a capacity not exceeding one pound each, of a total quantity not exceeding fifty pounds, when plainly marked "gun powder" and when kept at all times in view near the entrance to the premises;
(2) To munitions of war when the same are under the direct control and jurisdiction of the Army and Navy of the United States, or to military supplies of the state of Washington under the direct control and jurisdiction of the National Guard of the state of Washington, where the rules and practices of the federal government and/or the state of Washington would be affected adversely thereby;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 6
(3) To the fire or police department in the proper performance of their duties;
(4) To gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, and other petroleum products not usually classed as explosives. (Ord. 269 '12, 1949).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 7
Chapter 9.18
FIREWORKS REGULATIONS
Sections:
9.18.010 Scope. This ordinance applies to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale, transportation and use of fireworks. This ordinance does not prohibit the following:
(1) The use of any device allowed by state law or regulation except where such use is specifically prohibited herein;
(2) The use of any blank cartridges for use in athletics or sports events;
(3) The use of fireworks by military operations for the purpose of bona fide military exercises, demonstrations or ceremonials;
9.18.020 Definitions.
(1) "Fireworks" means any composition or device, in a finished state, containing any combustible or explosive substance for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and classified as common or special fireworks.
(2) "Special Fireworks" means any fireworks designed primarily for exhibition display by producing visible or audible effects as defined by WAC 212-17-035 (2)-(7) as written now or hereafter amended.
(3) "Common Fireworks" means any fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustions defined by WAC 212-17-035 (1) (a)-(g) as written now or hereafter amended
(4) "Special Effects" has the meaning provided by RCW 70.77.146.
(5) "Agricultural and Wildlife Fireworks" has the meaning provided by RCW 70.77.141.
(6) "Fire nuisance" has the meaning provided by RCW 70.77.165.
(7) "Fire Chief" means the chief of the City of Ephrata's Fire Department and/or his designee who shall be the local fire official for purposes of RCW Chapter 70.77.
(8) “Aerial Devices” means those listed in WAC 212-17-035 (2)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 8
paragraphs (a) through (c), and (3) combination items, as written now or hereafter amended.
(9) “Public Display” means an entertainment event where the general public is, or could be, admitted or allowed to view the display or discharge of fireworks as defined by RCW 70.77.160 as written now or hereafter amended. (Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.030 Acts Prohibited Without a Permit. No person shall do any of the following acts within the City without having first obtained and having in full force and effect a valid permit issued by the City to do so:
(1) Manufacture, import, possess, or sell, at wholesale or retail, any class or kind of fireworks, for any use whatsoever, excluding possession of Common Fireworks lawfully purchased at retail.
(2) Discharge or ignite any class or kind of fireworks at any place, excluding common fireworks lawfully purchased at retail at such places and times as permitted by this Chapter.
(3) Make a public display of any class or kind of fireworks.
(4) Transport any class or kind of fireworks, except as follows:
(a) as a public carrier delivering to a licensee; or,
(b) transportation of common fireworks in a private passenger vehicle during the legal sales period established in this Chapter.
(5) Store fireworks of any class or kind in any amount exceeding ten (10) pounds aggregate weight.
(6) Discharge special fireworks.
(7) Use or discharge fireworks of any class or kind inside a structure.
(8) Use or discharge fireworks of any class or kind for ceremonial purposes; provided that there shall be no fee for such permit.
(Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.040 Application for Permit.
1. Any person desiring to do any act set forth in Section 9.18.030 shall first make written application for a permit to the City of Ephrata. The application for a permit shall be signed by the applicant. If the application is made by a partnership, it shall be signed by each partner of the partnership, and if the application is made by a corporation, it shall be signed by an officer of the corporation and bear the seal of the corporation.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 9
The application shall be in such form as the City of Ephrata shall require and shall include, as a minimum, the following information:
(a) The true name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(b) A statement by the applicant that he or she is over the age of eighteen (18) years of age;
(c) A statement as to whether the applicant possesses a license issued by the State Fire Marshal to do the act for which the permit is sought, and the current status of said license;
(d) The proposed location at which the applicant intends to perform the act for which the permit is sought; and
(e) Such other information as the City of Ephrata may require in order to make any investigation or report required by this chapter.
2. All applications for permits pursuant hereto shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee, to cover the administrative costs for processing and inspection, in such amount as shall be set by the City Council by resolution, not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
3. All applications for permits pursuant hereto other than public display permits shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance as evidence that the applicant carries a comprehensive general liability insurance policy written on an "occurrence basis" and not a "claims made basis" with minimum coverage of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury liability for each person and event and not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage liability for each event. Such general liability policy shall name the City of Ephrata as a additional insured, must be in full force and effect for the duration of the permit, and shall include a provision prohibiting cancellation of said policy without thirty (30) days written notice to the City. Said policy and certificate shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
4. Applications for public display of fireworks shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the proposed display.
5. Except as provided by RCW 70.77.355, all applications for a permit for a public display of fireworks shall be accompanied by a bond or certificate of insurance meeting the requirements of RCW 70.77.285 and 70.77.295, as now stated or hereafter amended.
(Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.050 Application for Seller's Permit - Conditions for Issuance. Applications for seller's permits shall be made to the Fire Chief annually on or after January 1st of the year for which the permit is issued and the filing period shall close on June 1st of such year unless extended by action of the City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 10
Council. Applications shall be signed before a notary public by the retail seller if an individual, or by the duly authorized officer, if an association or corporation. It is unlawful for a fireworks manufacturer, wholesaler or supplier to make application for or to obtain a retail sales permit on behalf of any retailer. Seller's permits shall be issued only to applicants meeting the following conditions:
(1) The retailer or person in charge and responsible for the retail operation shall be over twenty-one (21) years of age, of good moral character and have demonstrated responsibility.
(2) The applicant shall have a valid and current license issued by the Washington State Fire Marshal pursuant to RCW Chapter 70.77 authorizing the holder thereto to engage in the retail sale of fireworks.
(3) The applicant shall own or have the right to possess a temporary fireworks stand complying with the requirements of this Chapter.
(4) The permit holder's location or place of business shall be only in those areas or zones within the City wherein retail sales are authorized under applicable zoning law.
(5) The applicant must possess and have in full force and effect a valid "Transient Merchants and Vendors" business license issued by the City of Ephrata pursuant to Ephrata Municipal Code (EMC) chapter 5.40. The transient merchants/vendors business license fee for the operation of each business selling fireworks lawfully within the city shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per stand except for those businesses which are operated by non-profit companies, associations, corporations or co-partnerships which shall pay a business license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per stand.
(6) The applicant shall be required to report to the State Department of Revenue the City's sales tax number in conjunction with payment of any sales taxes due from retail sales originating in the City.
(Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.060 Investigation, Report on Permit Application. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make an investigation and prepare a report of his findings and conclusions for or against the issuance of the permit, together with his reasons therefor. In the case of an application for a permit for a public
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 11
display of fireworks, the Fire Chief shall, in addition to any other investigation, make an investigation as to whether such display as proposed will be of such character and will be so located that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person.
9.18.070 City Council May Grant or Deny Permit - Conditions. The City Council shall have the power to grant or deny any application for a permit, or to subject the same to reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe. The City Council shall deny any application which contains material misrepresentation or if it finds that the public health, safety, or welfare would be adversely affected by granting the permit. Considerations shall include:
(1) Whether the activity and structure housing the activity, if any, will be in compliance with all applicable zoning, building, fire and other ordinances and regulations.
(2) Danger of fire or explosion associated with the place designated in the application.
(3) Adequacy of fire extinguishing equipment to be kept available at such place.
(4) Experience and training of the applicant relevant to safety of the activity.
(5) Compatibility of use with surrounding land uses, particularly such uses as hospitals, retirement centers, nursing homes, day-care facilities, and other uses which might be disrupted by the activity.
(6) Compliance with the provisions of this chapter. When possible, conditions shall be placed upon issuance of the permit as needed to eliminate dangers or incompatibility with other uses which would otherwise require denial of the permit.
9.18.080 License Required Prior to Issuance of Permit. No permit shall be issued unless the person applying therefor shall first have obtained and have in full force and effect a valid license issued by the State Fire Marshal, pursuant to RCW Chapter 70.77, to do the particular act or acts for which the permit is sought.
9.18.090 Public Display Permit - Granted for Exclusive Purpose - Nontransferable. If a permit for the public display of fireworks is granted, the sale, possession and use of fireworks for the public display is lawful for that purpose only. No such permit shall be transferable.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 12
9.18.100 Supervision of Public Display. Every public display of fireworks shall be handled or supervised by a pyrotechnic operator approved by the Fire Chief and licensed by the State Fire Marshal.
9.18.110 Permit - Authorized Activities of Employees. The authorization to engage in the particular act or acts as conferred by a permit to a person shall extend to the employees of such person, provided all such employees are eighteen (18) years of age or older, unless a higher age requirement is imposed upon the licensee by this chapter in which case such requirement shall apply to employees, and provided that section 9.18.100 governing public displays shall be complied with.
9.18.120 Revocation or Suspension of Permit.
(1) Authority. The Fire Chief may at any time suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, if the permittee has:
(a) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any permit condition imposed by the City Council, or if such a violation has been committed by any of his servants, agents or employees;
(b) Violated any provision of RCW 70.77;
(c) Made any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in connection with obtaining the permit;
(d) Failed to obtain, or has had suspended or revoked, any license required by RCW Chapter 70.77 or this Chapter; or
(e) Had any insurance coverage required by this Chapter canceled, revoked or lapsed;
Or if circumstances affecting public safety are discovered which, if known at the time of application for the permit, would have justified denial of the application.
(2) Effective Date of Revocation. When the Fire Chief determines that there is cause for revoking or suspending any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the Fire Chief shall notify the person holding such permit in writing of such determination. The notice shall specify the grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit. The suspension or revocation shall become effective after the permittee has been given reasonable opportunity to respond to the notice and the Fire Chief has considered whether such response merits withdrawal of his determination. The opportunity to respond may be informal. A formal hearing prior to suspension or revocation is not required. When the Fire Chief determines that a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 13
significant, imminent threat to public safety is caused by continued operation under the permit and that the circumstances do not allow delay, the permit may be immediately suspended on a temporary opportunity to respond as set forth above. Permanent revocation of a permit shall not be implemented prior to giving the permittee an opportunity to be heard in opposition to such action.
(3) Appeal. The decision of the Fire Chief with respect to the revocation or suspension of any permit issued under this Chapter shall be appealable to the City Council. A written notice of appeal stating specifically the errors which are claimed to justify overturning the action of the Fire Chief shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be considered at the next regular meeting following filing of the notice of appeal unless the permittee consents to a later hearing. Any appeal or other request for judicial review of the decision of the City Council not filed with the Grant County Superior Court and served on the City within ten (10) days of the Council's decision shall be barred.
(4) In the event of any conflict between this section and section 9.18.190 governing standards for public fireworks displays, said section shall control over the provisions of this section.
9.18.130 Unlawful Fireworks Sales.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to sell, transfer, or agree to sell or transfer any fireworks, other than common fireworks, to any person who is not a fireworks licensee as provided for by RCW Chapter 70.77 and this Chapter.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to sell or transfer any common fireworks to a consumer or other user other than at the place of business of a retail seller of fireworks for which a license pursuant to RCW Chapter 70.77 and a permit pursuant to this Chapter have been issued.
9.18.140 Restriction Upon Sale of Fireworks Within City. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale at retail, or to engage in the retail sale of any of the following fireworks, notwithstanding the inclusion of any of such fireworks within the definition of "common fireworks" as defined by RCW Chapter 70.77 and regulations issued by the State Fire Marshal:
Those listed in WAC 212-17-035(2) Aerial Device paragraphs (a) through (c) and in WAC 212-17-035(3) (as written now or hereafter amended) Combination items and aerial (flying) bees. It shall further be unlawful to offer for sale at retail or to engage in the retail sale of any common fireworks between the hours of eleven o'clock pm and nine o'clock am. No common fireworks shall be sold except from twelve o'clock noon on
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 14
June 28th to 11 o'clock pm on July 4th of each year, and from twelve o’clock noon on December 29th to 11 o’clock p.m. on December 31st of each year. (Ord 14-04, 2014; Ord 15-14, 2015)
9.18.150 Fireworks Sales - Location.
(1) Fireworks which may be lawfully sold pursuant to this chapter shall be sold at retail only from temporary fireworks stands, the construction and location of which have been approved as provided in this section.
(2) All fireworks stands shall be erected in a stable and safe manner and must be approved by the Fire Chief and the City Code Compliance Officer prior to use.
(3) Location – Location of retail fireworks stand shall comply with WAC 212-17-21509, as written now or hereafter amended.
(4) All weeds, grass and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the temporary fireworks stand and the surrounding area a distance of not less than twenty feet, measured from the exterior walls on each side of the temporary fireworks stand.
(5) Each fireworks stand shall have a person who is eighteen years or older in attendance at all times the stand is stocked. No person under sixteen years of age shall be permitted to sell fireworks or to remain within a fireworks stand while open to the public. Stock from the stand shall not be removed and stored in any other building during the sales period without the express approval of the Fire Chief.
(6) Each fireworks stand shall have provisions for sufficient off-street parking, at least fifteen spaces, to avoid impeding a continuous flow of traffic at entrances and exits from the premises. None of the required off street parking shall be located closer than twenty feet to any fireworks stand.
(7) No motor vehicles shall be permitted within 20 feet of any fireworks stand at any time the stand is stocked, except when delivering, loading, or unloading fireworks.
(8) There must be posted on the exterior of all walls of the temporary fireworks stand a complete list of those areas where the discharge or ignition of fireworks are prohibited within the City of Ephrata.
(9) No smoking shall be permitted in or near a temporary fireworks stand for a distance of not less than twenty feet measured for the exterior walls of the temporary fireworks stand.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 15
(10) All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the fireworks stand and surrounding area by twelve noon on the 7th day of July of each year.
(11) No person shall discharge any fireworks within 100 feet of the exterior walls of the temporary fireworks stand and signs stating "No discharge of fireworks within 100 feet" shall be posted on the exterior of all walls of the temporary fireworks stand.
(12) All heating units shall be listed by a recognized testing laboratory and shall be used in accordance with the listing. Heating sources shall have “tip-over” and temperature overheat protection. All heating devices shall have sealed type elements (i.e., oil filled or water filled radiator type). Open flame heating devices are prohibited.
(13) Generators which use combustible fuel and which are at least twenty feet from the retail fireworks stand or the temporary fireworks storage structure shall be allowed. Generator fuel shall be limited to not more than five gallons and stored at least twenty feet from all stands.
(14) Customers shall not be permitted within a fireworks stand.
(15) No fireworks shall be stored outside the fireworks stand in any vehicle, trailer, or camper. Overnight sleeping in a stand is prohibited. No trailer or camper may be permitted within twenty feet of any fireworks stand.
(Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.160 Fireworks Sales - Age Limitation. Sales of fireworks shall be prohibited to anyone under the age of sixteen years. Identification documenting age shall be shown upon request.
9.18.170 Discharge of Fireworks Prohibited at Certain Locations. No fireworks of any type or classification shall be discharged or ignited within the City at any of the following locations:
(1) In or upon any public park or other publicly owned property, not including publicly owned streets and sidewalks.
(2) Within 300 feet of any hospital, nursing home, retirement center, public library, church, synagogue or other place of worship.
(3) Within, or closer than 100 feet to any stand or field of dry grass or other dry plant material, whether or not designated as a hazardous fire area.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 16
(4) Within 200 feet of any gasoline station, tank or premises where flammable liquids or gases are used or stored for dispensing where the volume stored is in excess of 500 gallons.
(5) Within 100 feet of any hotel, motel or "bed and breakfast" lodging and boarding facility.
9.18.180 Dates and Times that Use of Fireworks is Permitted. No common fireworks shall be discharged or ignited except between the following hours and dates:
June 28 12:00 noon to 11:00 pm
June 29-July 3 9:00 am to 11:00 pm
July 4 9:00 am to 12:30 am
December 31 9:00 pm to 12:15 am
(Ord 14-04, 2014; Ord 15-14, 2015)
9.18.190 Standards for Public Fireworks Displays. No public fireworks display may be conducted without having first obtained and having in full force and effect a permit issued by the City. All public fireworks displays shall conform to the following standards and conditions, in addition to all applicable standards and conditions prescribed by State law:
1. A scaled drawing shall be submitted to the City of Ephrata showing a plan view of the fireworks discharge site and the surrounding area within a five-hundred-foot radius. The drawing shall include all structures, fences, barricades, streets, fields, streams, and any other significant factors that may be subjected to ignition or that may inhibit fire-fighting capabilities.
2. The City of Ephrata may require a City of Ephrata Fire Department fire-fighting apparatus and a minimum of two trained Department fire-fighters shall be on-site thirty minutes prior to and after the shooting of the event. The Fire Department shall receive a minimum compensation as per the Washington State Chiefs Association’s fee schedule.
3. All compensation for Fire Department apparatus will be as per the Washington State Chiefs Association's fee schedule and shall be revenue to the Fire Department's general fund.
4. All combustible debris and trash shall be removed from the area of discharge and ignition for a distance of 500 feet in all directions.
5. All unfired or "dud" fireworks shall be disposed of in a safe manner.
6. A minimum of two 2A-rated pressurized water fire extinguishers shall be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 17
required to be at the fireworks discharge and ignition site.
7. Any permit for a public fireworks display issued by the City may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or designee due to any noncompliance, or unsafe weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or wind factor. The display may also be canceled due to accidental ignition of any combustible material in the vicinity of the display.
9.18.200 Cost of Extinguishment. Any person responsible for starting a fire with fireworks shall be liable to the public entities suppressing any such fire for the actual costs of the fire suppression services provided.
9.18.210 Compliance with State Law. This Chapter is intended to implement RCW Chapter 70.77 and WAC 212-17 (as written now or hereafter amended), and shall be construed in connection with those laws and any and all rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. (Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.220 Enforcement. The Fire Chief, or designee, City Code Compliance Officer, and City Police Department are authorized to enforce all provisions of this Chapter and, in addition to criminal sanctions or civil remedies, may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter upon any failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with the orders and directives of the Fire Chief or designee, City Code Compliance Officer, or City Police Department, and/or to comply with any provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord 14-04, 2014)
9.18.230 Penalties for Violations. Failure to comply with and provision of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the following penalties as they are
defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code:
(1) Participation in public
fireworks display without
a permit issued by the City C-1
(2) Violation of any of the
provisions of EMC 9.18.130
and 9.18.140 relating to the
sale of fireworks. C-1
(3) Violation of EMC 9.18.160
relating to the sale of fireworks
to persons under the age
of sixteen. C-12
(4) Violation of EMC 9.18.170(A)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 18
relating to discharge of
fireworks on public property. C-7
(5) Violation of EMC 9.18.170(B)
relating to discharge of
fireworks near hospitals, etc. C-12
(6) Violation of EMC 9.18.170(C)
relating to discharge of
fireworks near fire areas. C-7
(7) Violation of EMC 9.18.170(D)
relating to discharge of
fireworks near gas stations
and gas tanks. C-7
(8) Violation of EMC 9.18.170(E)
relating to discharge of
fireworks near hotels/motels. C-12
(9) Violation of EMC 9.18.150
relating to prohibited discharge
of fireworks in certain locations. C-4
(10) Violation of EMC 9.18.190 relating
to standards for public display
of fireworks. C-1
(11) Violation of EMC 9.18.180 relating
to discharge times and dates. C-12
(12) Violation of any provision of this
Chapter not specifically referenced
above. C-12
(Ord. 91-24, 1991)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 19
Chapter 9.22
WEAPONS ON PREMISES DISPENSING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:
9.22.020 Knives.
9.22.030 Unlawful acts.
9.22.040 Exceptions.
9.22.050 Violation--Penalty.
9.22.020 Knives. It is unlawful for any person to carry in any manner whatsoever any knife or other cutting or stabbing instrument with a blade of a length of four or more inches on or in any premises in the city where alcoholic beverages are dispensed by the drink, whether the weapon is concealed or not. (Ord. 1041 '2, 1981).
9.22.030 Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or draw any firearm, dagger, sword, knife or cutting or stabbing instrument, club or any other weapon apparently capable of producing bodily harm or in any premises in the city where alcoholic beverages are dispensed by the drink. (Ord. 1041 '3, 1981).
9.22.040 Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) Any lawful act done by a person while in his place of abode or fixed place of business;
(2) Any person, who by virtue of his office, position or employment is vested by law with a duty to preserve public safety, order, or to make arrests for offenses, while carrying out such duties;
(3) Any person making or assisting in making a lawful arrest for the commission of a felony. (Ord. 1041 '4, 1981).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 20
9.22.050 Violation--Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a term not to exceed sixty days in jail, or by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars, or by both such jail term and fine; and the weapons involved may be permanently confiscated by the city. (Ord. 1041 '5, 1981).
(Ord 12-17, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 21
Chapter 9.32
VEGETATION
Sections:
9.32.010 Obstructing streets prohibited.
9.32.020 Menace to public health, safety prohibited.
9.32.030 Growths deemed hazardous.
9.32.040 Removal notice.
9.32.050 Removal by city.
9.32.060 Cost of removal by city, lien notice.
9.32.070 Lien foreclosure.
9.32.080 Recovery of lien costs.
9.32.010 Obstructing streets prohibited. It is unlawful for the owner or occupier of any property within the corporate limits of the city; to allow or permit any tree, tree branch, plants, weeds, shrubs, bushes or vegetation to overhang any sidewalk, street, or alley that obstructs or impairs the free and full use of the sidewalk, alley or street. This prohibition shall be enforced as a public nuisance under the provisions of Chapter 6.30.(Ord. 345 '1, 1951) (Ord 93-43, 1993).
9.32.020 Menace to public health, safety prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner or person occupying any property within the limits of the city; to grow or permit the growth of any grass, weed, or vegetation upon property within the city limits, that constitutes a fire hazard, or a menace to the public health or safety of the people of the city. (Ord. 345 '2, 1951).
9.32.030 Growths deemed hazardous. Any growth of grass, other than lawns, vegetation or weeds upon any of the property within the city limits, which has become dry enough to burn, or may become dry enough to burn, or which may spread by seeds or roots, or contains pollen, or may be carried by the wind; is declared to be a fire hazard, and a menace to the public health and safety. (Ord. 345 '3, 1951).
9.32.040 Removal notice. For the purposes of enforcing sections .020 and .030 all persons who own, or occupy any property within the city, shall immediately after the posting of a notice upon the property for a period of fourteen days, which is signed by the Utility Officer, destroy and remove from the property, all weeds, grass and vegetation. (Ord. 345 '4, 1951) (Ord 93-43, 1993)(Ord. 95-26, 1995).
9.32.050 Removal by city. Whenever any owner or occupant of any property within the city limits, fails, neglects or refuses to remove any weeds, grasses, other than lawns, or vegetation, from his property, after the service for fourteen days of a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 22
notice describing the property involved, and the hazardous condition; and a demand that the owner remove or destroy the hazardous condition; which notice may be served personally, or posted upon the property, and a copy mailed to the owner at the last known owner' s address in the office of the county treasurer; the city may remove the hazardous condition or destroy it upon the property. (Ord. 345 '6, 1951) (Ord 93-43, 1993).
9.32.060 Cost of removal by city, lien notice. An account of the actual cost for removal or destruction of the hazardous condition shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor, a notice of a lien in substantially the form prescribed by RCW Chapter 60.04; and filed within the time prescribed. (Ord. 345 '7, 1951) (Ord 93-43, 1993).
9.32.070 Lien foreclosure. At any time after filing the notice and within eight months thereafter the city on behalf of the city, shall commence proceedings to foreclose the lien, and proceed to sell the property in the manner and in accordance with the laws relating to foreclosure and sale of property for labor and mechanics liens; which statutes are referred to and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 345 '8, 1951).
9.32.080 Recovery of lien costs. In addition to the cost of removal or destruction of the hazardous condition, the city shall be entitled to recover the cost of filing the notice of lien, all court costs and a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court; and all of which shall be a part of the lien foreclosure and sale of the property. All of which lien laws, foreclosure and sale of property are adopted in to. (Ord. 345 '9, 1951).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 23
Chapter 9.36
DISCHARGE OF WATER
Sections:
9.36.010 Air conditioner runoff regulations.
9.36.020 Roof runoff regulations.
9.36.010 Air conditioner runoff regulations. Every person who shall have, or permit another to have upon any commercial building under his control an air conditioning or cooling apparatus or device upon any building which employs the use of water in connection therewith, shall make provision that the water used therein shall drain or run into the sanitary or storm sewer system of the city in such manner that the water shall not be allowed to run or fall upon the street, sidewalks or ground surface of the town except through downspouts and drains under the sidewalks to the curb and that such persons shall not be permitted or permit any other person to lay any pipes, hose or other device across or upon any sidewalk or street for the purpose of carrying away the water, and that the commission of any of the acts prohibited by this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and against the public health. (Ord. 258 Art. 1, 1948).
9.36.020 Roof runoff regulations. No water shall be permitted to run or drain from the roof, marquee, or other part of any building in the city so that the same shall run or fall upon any street, sidewalk or alley of the city, and the owner of any building or the tenant in possession of it shall make proper arrangements for the running or draining of the water into the storm sewers of the city. Water to be released into the storm sewer system shall be drained into a downspout which will conduct the water under the sidewalk to the curbs. All drainage pipe installed under the sidewalk shall be inspected and approved by the city engineer. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for keeping all drains in good working order, and the permitting of any water from the roof, marquee, or other part of any building in the city to run or fall upon any street sidewalk or alley in the city except through downspouts and drains to the curb is declared to be a public nuisance and against the public health. Violation of any provision of this section will subject the owner of the property to a C-9 Penalty. Upon the first notification by the City, the owner of property not properly conducting runoff to the City storm water system shall have thirty (30) days to correct the violation. Following the first notification period by the City, continued violations will result in additional C-9 penalties to the property owner for every occurrence thereafter. (Ord. 296 '1, 1950: Ord. 258 Art. 2, 1948; Ord. 06-28, 2006).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 24
Chapter 9.40
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
9.40.010 Purpose
9.40.020 Identification of Parks
9.40.030 Hours of Operation
9.40.040 Prohibited Acts
9.40.050 Violations-Penalty
9.40.010 Purpose. The establishment and maintenance of park property and facilities is intended to benefit current and future citizens of the City of Ephrata by providing opportunities for active and passive recreation. Rules and regulations governing use of park properties and park facilities will help to ensure that park property and park facilities are used and maintained in a beneficial manner to the community. The foregoing park rules and regulations are intended to provide standards for the public use and enjoyment of these facilities and to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and protection in the use and enjoyment of these facilities.
9.40.020 Identification of Parks. Parks are identified as any existing or future city parks, presently including Lee, Ephrata Sports Complex (including the Splashzone and Skate Park), Lions, Ephrata Cemetery, Patrick, and Sun Basin Plaza.
9.40.030 Hours of operation. Parks shall be open to the public from 6:00a.m. to 10:00p.m.. No person shall enter or remain in any municipal park for any purpose whatsoever between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. Activities on park property or in park facilities that exceed normal hours of operation may be authorized in association with a lease agreement or park use permit authorized by the city council.
9.40.040 Prohibited acts.
A. All activities that constitute civil or criminal violations under state, local or federal statutes shall be prohibited on park property or in park facilities.
B. It is unlawful for any person to do or permit any of the following acts within any city park:
1. Scatter, leave, throw, break or strew any litter, bottles, glass, paper, debris, garbage, refuse, or advertising matter in any park except in designated receptacles; provided, however, that it is further unlawful to deposit in such designated litter receptacles or elsewhere within a park any refuse, litter or other trash collected at the home, business or other dwelling of any person and intentionally brought to the park solely for the purpose of disposing of such refuse, litter or trash.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 25
2. Damage, deface, mar, or destroy any park equipment or facility.
3. Cut, damage or destroy any park trees, shrubs, landscaping or plants, including grass.
4. Consume any beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in any park, or have possession of any container of beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in any park.
5. Drive or park any vehicle on the grass in any park or any other place not specifically designated for vehicular traffic, or operate a vehicle negligently within any park or park facility.
6. Disturb or molest the peace of others using the park and park facilities.
7. Solicit, promote or engage in any private commercial enterprise without prior approval of the city council.
8. Start or maintain a fire except in permanent park facilities provided for that purpose or in a barbeque, hibachi or other freestanding apparatus commonly used for outdoor food preparation purposes.
9. Camp in any portion of any park.
10. Bring, ride, leave, turn loose, or allow any animal to be within a park or park facility, other than a dog under positive control.
11. Erect, put or place any sign or advertisement in a park or park facility.
12. Engage or participate in any disorderly, lewd, obscene, drunken, or indecent conduct within any park or park facility.
13. Use or engage in any of the following activities: archery, discus, javelin, shot, golf, or aircraft, rocket or missile powered devices unless specific permission is obtained from the City Council or City Administration.
(Ord. 09-08, 2009)
9.40.050 Violations - Penalty. Any violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a civil infraction. Each violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense and the violator shall be subject to a C-9 monetary penalty as provided in EMC 1.04.030. (Ord. 03-21, 2003)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 26
Chapter 9.48
FISHING IN OASIS PARK
Sections:
9.48.010 Permitted when.
9.48.020 Persons allowed fishing rights.
9.48.040 Assistance and attendance regulations.
9.48.050 Penalty for violations.
9.48.010 Permitted when. Fishing in all waters located in the Oasis Park owned by the city of Ephrata shall be permitted during daylight hours only. Beginning and ending from the third (3rd) Saturday in April to Labor Day both days inclusive each year. (Ord. 91-25, 1991)
9.48.020 Persons allowed fishing rights. Only persons of the age of fourteen (14) years and under and an individual who has an impairment, including a mobility, sensory or cognitive impairment, which results in a functional limitation shall be allowed to fish in said waters, and the bag limit for each person shall be five (5) of any size fish.
9.48.040 Assistance and attendance regulations. All persons authorized in this chapter to fish in the waters located in Oasis Park shall immediately attend their fishing pole at all times and may be assisted by other adult persons only for the purpose of instruction.
9.48.050 Penalty for violations. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall have a C-7 penalty. (Ord. 91-25, 1991)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 27
Chapter 9.52
BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATING, SCOOTERS & SKATEBOARDS
Sections:
9.52.010 Definitions
9.52.020 Bicycle Regulation
9.52.030 Adoption by Reference
9.52.040 Prohibited Areas
9.52.050 Control
9.52.060 Traffic Control Devices
9.52.070 Penalty - Impoundment
9.52.010 Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
A. "Roller skates" means a pair of shoes, mounted, permanently or temporarily, upon two sets of wheels or a row of wheels and is most often propelled by the user in an upright, crouched or kneeling position.
B. "Scooter" means a footboard mounted upon two or more wheels and controlled by an upright steering handle. This device is propelled by the user in an essentially upright position.
C. "Skateboard" means a footboard mounted upon four or more wheels and is usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels or lays upon the device while it is in motion.
D. "To operate in a negligent manner" means the operation of one or more of the above described devices in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. Examples of operating in a negligent manner include, but are not limited to, failure to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic.
E. "Central Business District" means that portion the city defined by the West side of Alder Street and the streets of Third Avenue Southwest, Second Avenue Northwest, and C Street, excepting the West side of C Street Southwest from Third Avenue Southwest to First Avenue Southwest. It shall include the sidewalks of both sides of those streets which define this area. (Ord 93-11; 1993; Ord 95-2)
9.52.020 Bicycle Regulation - Supplementary. The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to the provisions of state law which already govern the operation of bicycles.
9.52.030 Adoption by Reference. The provisions of RCW 46.90.545 - .555 and 46.90.565 are hereby adopted by reference.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 28
9.52.040 Prohibited Areas.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon any skateboard, roller skates or scooter upon any street, alley, sidewalk or publicly owned parking lot in the Central Business District of the city as that area is defined in Section .010.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon any bicycle upon any sidewalk or publicly owned parking lot in the Central Business District of the city as that area is defined in Section .010.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or scooter upon city owned park, tennis court, parking lot, or any other city owned or controlled property which has been properly posted by the City Administrator or his designee.
9.52.050 Control. No skateboard, roller skates or scooter shall be ridden or operated in a negligent manner but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and other persons and property.
9.52.060 Traffic Control Devices.
(1) Any person operating a skateboard, roller skates or scooter shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(2) Any person operating a skateboard, roller skates or scooter shall obey the instructions control signs installed or placed by the City Administrator or his designee regulating the operation or use of such devices.
9.52.070 Penalty - Impoundment.
(1) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall be punished by a C-15 penalty for the first offense within a six month period and by a C-13 penalty for a second or subsequent violation within a six month period. The fact one violation may be committed upon a different device than another violation is no defense tot he enhanced penalty.
(2) The chief of police is empowered and authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter. The chief or any of his officers, regular and reserve, or any person designated by the chief for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter is empowered to and shall impound any device operated in violation of this chapter. Any device impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be held by the chief of police for a period of at least 15 days. During that time the chief of police shall investigate to the extent possible to determine if the device is stolen. If the device is not determined to be stolen, it shall be released to a person over the age of eighteen years who shall establish a sufficient relationship to the person from whom the device is impounded to insure the device will be returned to the person from whom it was impounded. Before release from impoundment, the chief of police or his designee shall collect an administrative fee of $20.00 for the handling and storage of the impounded device. (Ord. 91-19, 1991)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 29
Chapter 9.56
PROHIBITING/RESTRICTING THE USE OF CARGO
CONTAINERS & THE LIKE
Sections:
9.56.010 Purpose and Intent
9.56.015 Definition
9.56.020 Prohibiting Placement of Containers in Residential Zones
9.56.030 Restricting Placement of Containers in Certain Commercial Zones
9.56.035 Restricting Placement of Containers in C-2 Commercial Zone
9.56.040 Penalty
9.56.010 Purpose and Intent: Locating Containers in certain zones is contrary to the best interests and welfare of the citizens of the City of Ephrata. If placed and located in certain zones, the placement could have a negative and deleterious effect on surrounding property values and the well-being of the residents living in and near the affected neighborhoods. (Ord. 12-02, 2012)
9.56.015 Definition: Containers, in this chapter, shall be defined as containers formerly used for transporting sea-going cargo, railroad cars and cabooses, semi-trailers, or any other unit which slides off a chassis or frame, when intended to be used as primary or accessory structure. ( Ord. 12-02, 2012)
9.56.020 Prohibiting Placement of Containers and Like in Residential Zones: No person, partnership, joint venture, or corporation shall locate any Container on any residential property, property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and S-R in the City of Ephrata. (Ord. 12-02, 2012)
9.56.030 Restricting Placement of Containers and the Like in Certain Commercial Zones: No person, partnership, joint venture, or corporation shall locate any Container on any commercial property zoned C-1, or C-3, in the City of Ephrata.
(Ord. 12-02, 2012)
9.56.035 Restricting Placement of Containers and the Like in C-2 Commercial Zone:
A conditional use permit shall be required for the placement of each cargo container used for permanent or temporary storage within the C-2 zone. The Hearing Examiner may impose conditions for the granting of a conditional use permit, consistent with the intent of this chapter. The following additional restrictions shall apply to placement of a Container within C-2 zone:
1. Containers shall be used only as an accessory to the primary use, such primary use being situated in an adjoining building.
2. Containers shall be placed on a level concrete, asphalt, or other approved surface at all times.
3. Containers shall no be stacked.
4. Fire apparatus access shall be provided to both the containers and to the primary structure in accordance with EMC 16.04.150 Appendix D.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 30
5. Containers shall not be visible to the motoring public or from residential neighborhoods immediately adjacent to the property where it is located unless other measures approved by the Hearing Examiner are employed to mitigate the visual impacts of the containers. However, the Hearing Examiner does not need to require mitigation measures if it determines that the motoring public or adjacent residential neighborhoods are not impacted. (Ord. 12-02, 2012)
6. Containers shall abide by all setback requirements applicable to the zone in which they are located.
7. The recipient of the conditional use permit is the only party allowed to use the Container(s).
8. Containers shall be painted so as to blend in with the building to which they are associated.
9. Containers shall have a maximum allowable square footage of container storage area not to exceed eight percent (8%) of the gross floor area of the building with which the container(s) is/are associated, and not to exceed eight (8) containers total under any circumstances.
10. A cargo container shall not remain on site if, the use it is accessory to, is abandoned or changes use, unless a separate conditional use permit is granted.
11. When located in special flood hazard areas, the cargo container shall be securely anchored to prevent flotation.
12. Cargo containers shall not be used for rental and/or mini-storage purposes.
(Ord. 12-02, 2012)
9.56.040 Penalty: Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to the following penalties as they are defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code:
Violation Penalty
Locating container in a residential or commercial neighborhood C-7
(Ord. 92-35, 1992)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 31
CHAPTER 9.60
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT CODE
Sections:
9.60.010 Statement of purpose
9.60.020 Definitions
9.60.030 Graffiti prohibited
9.60.040 Failure to remove graffiti prohibited
9.60.050 Continued presence of graffiti an infraction
9.60.060 Graffiti – Notice of removal
9.60.070 Appeal
9.60.080 Violation
9.60.090 Severability
9.60.010 Statement of purpose. Because existing graffiti will attract and create more graffiti, graffiti is a blight on the aesthetic beauty of Ephrata, and graffiti is connected to gang activity; the City Council for the City of Ephrata has determined that graffiti is a public nuisance. Therefore there is a need for an ordinance prohibiting graffiti and which requires regulating the cleanup of graffiti within the city limits of Ephrata. After considering the matter and having heard input from staff and citizens, the City Council adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter as necessary for the general benefit, health, and welfare of the residents of the City of Ephrata.
9.60.020 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
(1) “Abate” means the removal, painting over, or other obscuring of graffiti from view as directed by the notice provided for in EMC 9.60.040 and 9.60.060.
(2) “Graffiti” means the defacing, damaging or destroying by spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, facilities, natural features, and places.
(3) “Graffiti nuisance property” means property upon which graffiti exists and where, after notice as provided by this chapter, the graffiti has not been abated by the deadline set in a notice as established by this chapter.
(4) “Graffiti abatement procedure” means the abatement process; which identifies graffiti, issues notice to the property owner to abate the graffiti, and cures in absence of response.
(5) “Owner” means any person or persons, entity or entities, corporations or other associations having a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 32
including but not limited to the interest of a tenant or lessee.
(6) “Responsible party” means an owner, and also an entity or person acting as an agent for an owner, or an entity or a person who has dominion and control over a property. There may be more than one responsible party for a particular property.
9.60.030 Graffiti prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to spray, write, paint, disfigure, or draw an inscription, figure, or mark upon a building, fence, gate, sign, bridge, or other structure, tree or rock, regardless of being either publicly or privately owned.
9.60.040 Failure to remove graffiti prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property in the city of Ephrata, Washington, to permit any graffiti to remain on their property more than 10-days after receipt of a notice to abate, providing seasonal temperatures and weather conditions permit the painting of exterior surfaces. If seasonal temperatures and weather conditions do not allow for the painting of exterior surfaces within the 10-day period, owner shall make arrangements with the Code Enforcement Official, or one of their representatives, to extend the 10-day period. Said arrangements shall be in writing, signed by both owner and the Code Enforcement Official or one of their representatives. Said arrangements shall include a reasonable alternative for temporarily covering or obscuring the graffiti until painting is permitted.
9.60.050 Continued presence of graffiti an infraction. It shall be a civil infraction for a responsible party to allow a graffiti-nuisance property to exist. Each day a graffiti nuisance property shall exist shall be a separate infraction. A civil infraction under this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty as provided for in section 9.60.080 for each violation.
9.60.060 Graffiti– Notice of removal. (1) Procedure. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official or one of their representatives, or the mayor’s designee, to notify such person or persons violating any provision of this chapter to abate such nuisance within 10-days after receipt of a notice to abate graffiti. Said notice to abate graffiti shall be sent by certified mail/return receipt requested to the last known address of the responsible party and to the address of the party, or personally served. In the event an owner fails to remove the graffiti within the 10-day period or fails to make arrangements to extend the 10-day period if seasonal temperatures and weather conditions do not permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the Code Enforcement Official may issue a civil infraction for each day that the nuisance exists.
(2) All penalties and fines shall be assessed to the violator of this chapter and collected in a civil action. The city may take all lawful action to collect the debt of the responsible party or to foreclose any lien upon the graffiti nuisance property.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 - 33
(3) Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the graffiti nuisance. The monetary penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the responsible party to whom the notice of civil violation is issued. Any monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall accrue interest from the date payment is due at the maximum rate authorized by law for interest on civil judgments, and there shall be added to such penalty the reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in collecting it.
9.60.070 Appeal. Owner may, within 10-days after receipt of the notice to abate graffiti, file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. Filing of an appeal will stay any enforcement or actions by the city to abate the graffiti nuisance. The appeal shall be to the hearing examiner, pursuant to EMC 19.06.010. The hearing examiner shall determine whether (1) graffiti exists upon property within the City of Ephrata in violation of this chapter; (2) whether proper notice has been given to the appropriate person; and (3) whether the time for abatement is reasonable in light of seasonal temperatures and weather conditions. If no appeal is filed within said 10-days, the “Notice of Graffiti, of Graffiti Nuisance Property and Removal” shall become final and conclusive, and not subject to appeal or review in any forum.
The hearing examiner’s decision becomes final 21-days after the date of the decision unless the decision of the hearing examiner is appealed to the Grant County Superior Court.
9.60.080 Violation. Any person found to be in violation of EMC 9.60.030 of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be subject to a C-1 civil penalty pursuant to EMC 1.04.030. Any person found to be in violation of any other provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be subject to a C-12 civil penalty pursuant to EMC 1.40.030.
9.60.90 Severability. The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, subsection or portion of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances.
(Ord. 08-07, 2008)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 1
Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:
10.10 Motorized Scooters
10.16 Speed Regulations
10.24 One-Way Streets and Alleys
10.28 Special Stops Required
10.30 Snow Removal
10.55 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited
10.60 Street Use Regulations
10.64 Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
10.70 Junk Vehicles
10.72 Impounds on Publicly Owned or Controlled Property
10.74 Impounds after driving without a valid driver’s license and under the Influence arrests.
10.80 Alternative Vehicles
10.85 Golf Carts
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 2
Chapter 10.10
MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
Sections:
10.10.010 Statutory authority.
10.10.020 Definition.
10.10.030 Rules of operation.
10.10.040 Responsibility.
10.10.050 Violation - penalty.
10.10.060 Confiscation.
10.10.010 Statutory authority. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the authority and power of the city to regulate the use of motorized scooters as allowed by RCW 46.61.710, for the purposes of enhancing the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and to promote the orderly flow of traffic in the City of Ephrata.
10.10.020 Definition of motorized foot scooter. A device with no more than two ten-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion.
Definition of Pocket Bike/Pocket Rocket/Mini-Motorcycle. Any motor driven device that meets the definition of motorcycle set forth in RCW 46.04.330 as a motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, on which the driver rides astride the motor unit or power train and is designed to be steered with a handle bar, but does not meet one or more of the requirements for operation on roadways set forth in RCW 46.37.525, RCW 46.37.400, and RCW 46.37.420.
10.10.030 Rules of operation.
A. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on public roadways with a speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour.
B. Operators of motorized foot scooters shall adhere to all rules of the road applicable to motorized vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles, as well as instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
C. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on City owned property, City parks, walkways, paths, trails, sidewalks or any other place where other motorized vehicles are expressly prohibited.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 3
D. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on publicly owned parking lots, and privately owned parking lots without the permission of the owner.
E. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated at any time during one half hour after sunset to one half hour before sunrise unless equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state patrol which shall be visible from all distances up to six hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful low beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. A light emitting diode flashing taillight visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear may also be used in addition to the red reflector.
F. No person shall transport or tow another person on, in or with a motorized foot scooter within the City of Ephrata.
G. Motorized foot scooters shall not be ridden in a negligent or unsafe manner, but shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator, and other persons, and in a manner to avoid damage to real or personal property. For purposes of this section, to operate “in a negligent or unsafe manner” means operation of a vehicle in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
H. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated without an approved helmet designed for safety which shall have either the neck or chin strap fastened securely while the motorized foot scooter is in motion. “Helmet” means a protective covering for the head consisting of a hard outer shell, padding adjacent to and inside the outer shell and a neck or chin strap type retention system, with a label required by the Federal Consumer Product Safety Committee as adopted by the Code of Federal Regulations 16 CFR 12.03, or an approved safety design that meets or exceeds the requirements of standard Z.90.4 set by American National Standard Institute, or a subsequently nationally recognized standard for helmet performance as the city may adopt.
I. Motorized foot scooters must be equipped with a braking device which forces a wheel to skid on clean, dry, level pavement.
J. Operation of a motorized foot scooter is subject to the provisions of the City of Ephrata noise ordinance. Operation of a gas motorized foot scooter without a muffling device, or operation with a modified muffling device is unlawful.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 4
K. Operation of “Pocket Bikes/Pocket Rockets/Mini-Motorcycles” are banned from operation on any public right of way, City owned property, City parks, walkways, paths, trails, sidewalks or any other place where other motorized vehicles are expressly prohibited, or on publicly owned parking lots, and privately owned parking lots without the permission of the owner.
10.10.040 Responsibility. No person shall do any act forbidden by this chapter or fail to perform any act required by this chapter. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
10.10.050 Violation-penalty. Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be punished by imposition of a monetary penalty as follows:
Operation in a negligent manner or in a restricted area: C-12
First violation of any other provision: C-9
Second violation of any provision: C-6
Third or subsequent violation of any provision: C-6 and confiscation
10.10.060 Confiscation. In the event of a third or subsequent offense, the motorized foot scooter may be seized and held for a 90-day period by the Ephrata Police Department. After 90 days, the scooter may be released to the owner, upon verification of ownership satisfactory to the Police Department, and upon payment of a $50.00 administrative processing fee to the City of Ephrata. Any unclaimed motorized foot scooters may be disposed of in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 05-08, 2005)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 5
Chapter 10.16
SPEED REGULATIONS
Sections:
10.16.010 State speed laws applicable.
10.16.020 Decrease of state speed limit at certain intersections.
10.16.030 Increasing speed limit in certain zones.
10.16.040 Decrease of state law maximum speed.
10.16.010 State speed laws applicable. The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this title, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this title when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 781 Art. IV §22, 1969).
10.16.020 Decrease of state speed limit at certain intersections. It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law at the following street intersections is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at such intersections and it is declared that a reasonable and safe speed limit thereat, which shall be effective at all times or during hours of daylight or darkness or at the times specified in this chapter and within those intersections designated in this chapter shall be as stated in this chapter, which speeds so declared shall be effective at the times specified in this chapter when appropriate signs are erected at such intersections or upon approaches thereto giving notice of the speed limit so declared thereat: All streets and intersections within the central business district as defined in this chapter: 25 mph at all times. (Ord. 781 Art, IV §23, 1969).
10.16.030 Increasing speed limit in certain zones. It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and sign posting of said streets as arterial highways and by reason of widely spaced intersections and it is declared that the speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets designated in this chapter, at the times specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Name of Street Speed Limit Times
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 6
Alder Street N.W: from 400 feet north of 7th Avenue
NW to the intersection of Alder Street NW and SR-28 50 mph At all times
Nat Washington Way: from 9th Avenue SE to SR-282 35 mph At all times
E Division Street: from 600 feet east of Summitview Drive
to Airport Street 35 mph At all times
Dodson Road: from Road 14 NW to Road 13 NW 55 mph At all times
Railroad Avenue: from Road 14 NW to Road 13 NW 35 mph At all times
SR-282: from SR-28 to A Street SE 35 mph At all times
Basin Street/SR-28: from Burlington Northern Railroad
Bridge (MP 44.30) to 19th Avenue SW (MP 46.06) 50 mph At all times
Basin Street/SR-28: from 19th Avenue SW to
4th Ave SW 35 mph At all times
Basin Street/SR-28: from 4th Avenue NW to 1000 feet
north of 8th Ave NW 35 mph At all times
Basin Street/SR-28: from 1000 feet north of 8th Avenue
NW to the intersection of Alder Street NW and SR-28
(MP 49.13) 50 mph At all times
(Ord. 96-41, 1996, Ord. 00-15, Ord. 10-04, 2010)
10.16.040 Decrease of state law maximum speed. It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law outside of business and residence districts as applicable upon the following streets is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets and it is declared that the speed limit shall be twenty miles per hour as set forth in this section on those streets or parts of streets herein designated at the times herein specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Name of Street Speed Limit Times
Parkway Boulevard SW 20 mph At all times
All alleyways within the corporate limits of Ephrata 15 mph At all times
(Ord. 91-23, 1991, Ord. 10-04, 2010).
10.16.050 Any altered limit established as hereinbefore authorized shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. Such maximum speed limit may be declared to be effective at all times or at such times as are indicated upon
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 7
such signs; and differing limits may be established for different times of day, different types of vehicles, varying weather conditions, and other factors bearing on safe speeds, which shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs.
(Ord. 00-15)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 8
Chapter 10.24
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sections:
10.24.020 One-way streets and alleys--Regulations. Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited, and a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. (Ord. 90-28, 1990).
(a) The vehicular traffic shall travel westerly from Basin Streets Northwest onto this alley.
Block 3, Cyrus First Addition to Ephrata
(b) The vehicular traffic shall travel easterly from Basin Street Northwest onto these alleys.
Block 1, Cyrus First Addition to Ephrata
Block 1, Original Town Plat of Ephrata
(c) The vehicular traffic shall travel easterly from Basin Street Southwest onto these alleys:
Block 2, Original Town Plan of Ephrata
(d) The vehicular traffic shall travel westerly on these alleys to Basin Street S.W.
Block 3, Original Town Plat of Ephrata
(Ord. 90-28, 1990)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 9
Chapter 10.28
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
Sections:
10.28.020 Arterial highways designated. Those streets and parts of streets described are declared to be arterial highways for the purpose of this section. (Ord. 90-41, 1990)
State Highways
State Secondary Highway 282, from Basin S.W. to East City Limit
Primary Secondary Highway 28, from South City Limit to North City Limit
City Major Arterials
S.E. Boulevard from Railroad to East City Limit
Division Street E. from Railroad to Airport Street
A Street S.E. from S.E. Boulevard to South City Limit
11th Avenue S.W. from C Street S.W. to Basin Street S.W.
5th Avenue S.W. from Basin Street S.W. to Alder Street S.W.
3rd Avenue S.W. from Railroad to C Street S.W.
Division Street West from Railroad to E Street N.W.
A Street S.W. from 5th Avenue S.W. to Division
C Street S.W. from 11th Avenue S.W. to Division
1st Avenue N.W. from Alder Street N.W. to West City Limits
4th Avenue N.W. from Basin Street N.W. to C Street N.W.
Alder Street N.W. from Division Street to North City Limits
C Street N.W. from Division Street to 4th Avenue N.W.
City Secondary Arterials
5th Avenue S.E. from S.E. Boulevard to Division Avenue E.
D Street S.E. from S.E. Boulevard to Division Street
D Street N.E. from Division to 3rd Avenue N.E.
16th Avenue S.W. from Basin Street S.W. to C Street S.W.
3rd Avenue S.W. from C Street to E Street S.W.
C Street S.W. from Division Street to 18th Avenue S.W.
8th Avenue N.W. from Basin Street N.W. to Frey Road
Frey Road from 5th Avenue N.W. to 8th Avenue N.W.
C Street N.W. from 4th Avenue N.W. to 5th Avenue N.W.
F Street N.W. from W. Division Street to 3rd Avenue N.W.
A Street S.E. from E. Division to S.E. Boulevard
2nd Avenue S.E. from D Street S.E. to Ivy Street S.E.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 10
H Street S.E. from E. Division Street to 2nd Avenue S.E.
Mocliff Road from 1st Avenue N.W. to Statter Road
3rd Avenue N.W. from E Street N.W. to F Street N.W.
E Street N.W. from 3rd Avenue N.W. to 4th Avenue N.W.
4th Avenue N.W. from C Street N.W. to E Street N.W.
Statter Road from 1st Avenue N.W. to Mocliff Road
3rd Avenue N.E. from D Street N.E. to J Street N.E.
5th Avenue N.W. from Frey Road to Alder Street N.W.
H Street N.E. from Division to 3rd Avenue N.E.
18th Avenue S.W. from Basin Street S.W. to C Street S.W.
(Ord. 90-41, 1990)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 11
Chapter 10.30
SNOW REMOVAL
Sections:
10.30.010 Purpose.
10.30.020 Policy Reference
10.30.030 Prohibited Actions
10.30.040 Penalty
10.30.050 Exception
10.30.010 Purpose. Snow removal and sanding are required to allow emergency access to all areas of the City. Roads must be cleared and kept as wide as possible. Secondarily, garbage trucks, water and sewer repair vehicles, PUD repair trucks, and school busses must navigate our streets efficiently and safely in order to protect the lives and property of Ephrata citizens.
10.30.020 Policy Reference. The City Council may, from time to time, adopt specific procedures, priorities, and conditions by which the City performs snow removal and sanding.
10.30.030 Prohibited Actions. The following actions are prohibited in the City of Ephrata:
1) No person, firm, or corporation shall move, in any manner, snow from any lot, building, structure, driveway, sidewalk, or other private property into the public right-of-way of any highway, street, sidewalk, or alley. Snow sliding from roofs of building or structure upon any street, sidewalk or alley shall be construed to have been moved by the owner or tenant thereof, and the same shall be immediately removed at the expense of the owner or tenant.
2) No person firm, or corporation shall interfere, by action or omission, with the operation of City snowplows or sanders. This includes, but is not limited to blocking or obstructing City snowplows from plowing curb-to-curb, parking cars in such a manner so as to block or obstruct access from a street or section of a street, and/or blocking, obstructing or preventing City snowplows from proceeding down a highway, street, or alley.
10.30.040 Penalty. Violation of this Chapter shall constitute a civil infraction and shall be subject to the following penalties as referenced in EMC 1.04; in addition to the actual costs, if applicable, for removing illegally dumped snow:
EMC 10.30.030 (1) Depositing snow into City right of way or public highway: C-19
EMC 10.30.030 (2) Interfering with snowplowing or sanding: C-14
Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 12
10.30.050 Exception. This Chapter shall not apply to city snow removal, emergency services, or street maintenance operations.
(Ord. 17-02, 2017)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 13
Chapter 10.55
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
Sections:
10.55.010 Definitions
10.55.020 Statutes Adopted by Reference
10.55.030 Officers Authorized to mark vehicles
10.55.040 Parking Regulations Established
10.55.050 Parking Signs Required
10.55.060 Designation of Parking Spaces
10.55.070 Parking in alleys, parks, playgrounds and city property
10.55.080 Parking - License & Bonded Automobile Dealer
10.55.090 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
10.55.100 Parking of disabled vehicles
10.55.110 Violations
10.55.120 Enforcement
10.55.130 Handicapped parking -- penalty
10.55.135 Parking in a Fire Lane
10.55.140 Parking adjacent to schools
10.55.150 Parking prohibited on narrow streets
10.55.160 No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places
10.55.170 Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets
10.55.180 Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets
10.55.190 Parking time limited on certain streets
10.55.200 Designated streets
10.55.210 Punishment for violations
10.55.220 Reservation of powers
10.55.010 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following words are defined as follows:
(1) "Parking space" means any space adjacent to a curb or located in a parking lot which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably noted on a curb or on the surface of the street or lot as the case may be.
(2) "Person' or "Responsible Person" as that term refers to a person parking a vehicle or being responsible for a vehicle subject to this chapter means the registered owner of that vehicle. Infractions or notices delivered as that person's name and address appears in the records of the Washington State Department of Licensing as accessed by the police department shall be sufficient notice. It is not a defense to an infraction issued pursuant to this chapter that the registered owner was not operating the vehicle or that the registered owner has sold the vehicle
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 14
without insuring the records of the Department of Licensing were updated as required by law.
10.55.020 Statutes Adopted by Reference: RCW 46.61.570 entitled "Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places - Reserving portion of highway prohibited" and RCW 46.61.575 entitled "Additional parking regulations" as now enacted or hereafter amended are adopted by reference as the law of the City.
10.55.030 Officers Authorized to Mark Vehicles. Police officers or persons designated by the Chief of Police are authorized to mark vehicles parked from time to time to aid in the enforcement of the parking ordinances. Such mark shall be by chalk upon the tires of the vehicles or by some other convenient method, but on which will not be injurious to or damage such vehicle. The marks placed upon any such vehicle shall not be interfered with, concealed, obliterated or erased by any person other than a police officer or an enforcement officer of the City while the same shall remain parked or standing at the place where marked. The standing or parking under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed continuous despite any movement of the vehicle unless the vehicle is moved sufficiently to pass through or across a street intersection. Such movement is deemed to be the termination of any parking or standing period.
10.55.040 Parking Regulations Established. The Public Works Director shall establish no parking zones, time limitation parking zones, loading zones and all regulations concerning parking of vehicles within the City.
10.55.050 Parking Signs Required. Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution, or order of the Public Works Department any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited or restricted on designated streets, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged violation.
10.55.060 Designation of Parking Spaces. The Public Works Director is authorized and directed to mark off individual parking spaces in the areas designated and described in Section 10.55.200 and in such other zones, areas or lots as the Public Works Director may establish, the parking spaces to be suitably designated by lines or other markers. At each space so designated or marked off, it is unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that the vehicle is not entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
10.55.070 Parking in Alleys, Parks, Playgrounds and City Property.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than eight feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property, except that within the area defined by Second Avenue NW to Alder Street to Second Avenue SW to C Street stopping and standing which blocks
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 15
traffic is allowed in the alleys for the purpose of pickups and deliveries to businesses located adjacent to those alleys.
(b) No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle upon any public park, playground, or other city property except on streets, alleys, thoroughfares or parking lots and areas provided for such purposes nor shall vehicles be parked in such manner as to block, obstruct or impede free access to and from said park or playground or city property.
(c) No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicles upon any street or alley in the City for more than a consecutive period of one hundred twenty hours.
(d) Any person violating subsections (a)-(c) of this section shall be deemed to have committed a non-traffic infraction which shall pay a C-16 penalty.
10.55.080 Parking - License & Bonded Automobile Dealer. Notwithstanding RCW 46.90.436, any licensed and bonded automobile dealer duly licensed by the State of Washington and having an established place of business within the City of Ephrata may display during said dealer's established place of business one motor vehicle with advertising indicating said vehicle is for sale so long as said vehicle is lawfully parked and does not constitute a traffic hazard.
10.55.090 Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
(a) Displaying such vehicle for sale or for advertising services for vehicles (except as designated in Section 10.55.080).
(b) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(c) Selling, distributing, or displaying for sale any good, wares, foods and/or merchandise located on said vehicle without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.
10.55.100 Parking of Disabled Vehicles.
(a) It is a traffic infraction for a person to park or leave parked a disabled motor vehicle upon the rights-of-way of the City of Ephrata. However, if the motor vehicle is removed from the public right-of-way within twenty-four hours of being disabled, the person shall not be cited with an infraction.
(b) For the purpose of this Section, a motor vehicle is disabled if it is incapable of being moved or operated under its own power and bears current license.
10.55.110 Violations. It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 16
(1) To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, such person to be parked in violation of the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(2) To park any vehicle across any line and/or marking of a parking space in a controlled parking zone or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such line or markings.
10.55.120 Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or his designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
10.55.130 Handicapped Parking -- Penalty.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a parking space indicated to be for use by disabled or handicapped persons as indicated by signage in compliance with RCW 46.61.581, or by signage displaying the international symbol of access described under RCW 70.92.120 upon the parking surface of upon a sign between forty-eight inches and sixty inches off the ground unless such person shall display, as provided by the laws of the State of Washington, a special card, decal, or license plate issued under RCW 46.16.381.
(b) Any person violating subsection (a) of this Section shall be deemed to have committed a non-traffic infraction which shall be liable to pay a C-13 penalty.
10.55.135 Parking in a Fire Lane
(a) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any area designated a fire lane by the Fire Chief or so designated by a red curb or signage except in compliance with the directions of a police or fire officer in a period of emergency.
(b) Any person violating subsection (a) of this Section shall be deemed to have committed a non-traffic infraction, which shall be liable to pay a C-13 penalty. (Ord. 01-07, 2001).
10.55.140 Parking Adjacent to Schools.
(a) The Public Works Director is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(b) When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
10.55.150 Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets
(a) The Public Works Director is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon both sides of a street when the width of the improved roadway does not exceed
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 17
twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the improved roadway is between twenty and twenty-eight feet.
(b) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
10.55.160 No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous or Congested Places.
(a) The Public Works Director is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
10.55.170 Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park any vehicle at any time upon any of the streets designated by the Public Works Director.
10.55.180 Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of two o'clock a.m. and six o'clock a.m. of any day within the district or upon any of the streets described in Section 10.55.160.
10.55.190 Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets.
(a) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than fifteen (15) minutes at any time within the district or upon any of the streets described in Section 10.55.200.
(b) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than thirty (30) minutes at any time within the district or upon any of the streets described in Section 10.55.200.
(c) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than one (1) hour within the district or upon any of the streets described in Section 10.55.200.
(d) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than two (2) hours within the district or upon any of the streets described in Section 10.55.200. (Ord 14-10, 2014)
(e) Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire or police department or in compliance with the directions of the police officer or traffic control sign or signal, every vehicle using any parking space subject to a restriction described in this section shall completely leave such parking space at the end of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 18
each designated time period which regulates parking in such space and shall not return to a parking space on the same side of the city block or in the same lot until after the end of the succeeding regulated parking period applicable to such block or lot unless the period of regulation of the parking in the block from which the vehicle is moved at the end of the designated parking period has expired as indicated by the posted signage for that block. Any vehicle having remained in the same parking space for a period exceeding two hours shall receive additional parking infractions for each two-hour period the vehicle remains in the space. (Ord. 01-07, 2001).
(f) No person shall park any vehicle upon any public street, alley or way or leave such vehicle in the same public place for a period exceeding one hundred twenty hours.
10.55.200 Designated Streets and Lots.
1) On the easterly side of Parkway Boulevard from 5th Street SW to 9th Street SW
2) Alder Street - 1st Avenue SW to 1st Avenue NW
3) Basin Street - 6th Avenue SW to 6th Avenue NW
4) C Street - 2nd Avenue SW to 2nd Ave NW
5) 2nd Avenue NW - Alder Street NW to C Street NW
6) 1st Avenue NW - Alder Street NW to D Street NW
7) The parking lot owned by the city lying west of Basin Street NW between Division Street and 1st Avenue NW.
8) The parking lot owned by the Samis Foundation, developed under the agreement dated March 20, 1998 lying east of Basin Street between 1st Ave. NW and 2nd Ave NW.
(Ord. 98-3, 1998)
10.55.210 Punishment for Violations
(a) Any person who violates, permits, allows, counsels, aids or abets the violation of the provisions of this chapter has committed a civil traffic infraction and shall be liable to the City of Ephrata for any infractions committed and for payment of the penalties proscribed.
(b) A person found to have committed an infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty, which may not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation not otherwise provided for in this chapter; provided, however:
(1) That the penalty for overtime parking in any zone shall be a C-19 penalty for the first overtime parking infraction committed during any twelve hour period. The second overtime parking infraction within any twelve hour period shall subject the responsible person to a C-18 penalty. A third infraction and any subsequent overtime violations within any twelve hour period shall result in a C-15 penalty.
(2) That the penalty for parking longer than one hundred twenty hours shall be a C-16 penalty.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 19
(3) That the penalty of any violations of Sections 10.55.020 and 10.64.015 shall be a C-16 penalty.
(4) That the penalty for a violation of section 10.55.110 shall be a C-19 penalty. (Ord 14-10, 2014)
(c) If the responsible person fails to respond to a notice of infraction issued for a violation of this chapter, a penalty of $25 shall be imposed by the Municipal Court for the failure to respond. Such penalty shall not be suspended or excused by the court.
(d) All other violations of this chapter not otherwise provided for herein shall subject the responsible person to a C-18 penalty.
(e) The Municipal court or the violations bureau, as the case may be, shall determine in all cases where no response is made to the notice of infraction issued pursuant to this chapter that the infraction was committed and that the responsible person has failed to appear and is subject to the penalty provided for in sub-section (c), above. This determination shall be made more than 31 days after the issuance of the infraction and shall result in a judgment being entered against the responsible person for all penalties imposed by this chapter and all assessments imposed by state law. The municipal court or violations bureau shall report the determination of the court or violations bureau to the State of Washington as required by law.
10.55.220 Reservation of Powers. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the City from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including the loading and unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles.
(Ord. 14-10, 2014)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 20
Chapter 10.60
STREET USE RESTRICTIONS
Sections:
10.60.010 Vehicles using cleats, lugs prohibited.
10.60.020 Vehicle weight limits.
10.60.030 Vehicle violating weight limit prohibited.
10.60.040 Penalties.
10.60.050 U Turns
10.60.060 Certain vehicles to be kept off street
10.60.080 Restricted Parking
10.60.090 Vehicular Access Restrictions
10.60.010 Vehicles using cleats, lugs prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to drive, propel, move, convey or transport, or cause to be driven, propelled, drawn, moved, conveyed or transported upon, over, along or across any public street or alley in the city limits, any vehicle, animal or object which shall have any wheels or tires, or shoes or cleats, so made, constructed, formed or shaped or equipped with spikes, cleats, lugs or other attachments or projections or shall be constructed of such materials as to destroy or injure streets or alleys or the surface, foundation or part thereof. (Ord. 90-32, 1990)
10.60.020 Vehicle weight limits. The city engineer, or any other person authorized by the city council, may prohibit the operation on city streets and alleys of motor trucks or other vehicles or may impose limits as to the weight thereof, or any other restrictions as may be deemed necessary, whenever any street or alley by reason of rain, snow, climatic or other conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the operation of vehicles thereon be prohibited or restricted on the permissible weights thereof reduced. Signs designating the provisions of the limitation or restriction shall be erected in each end of the portion of public highway or alley affected thereby and the signs shall be maintained during the term of the restriction. (Ord. 90-32, 1990).
10.60.030 Vehicle violating weight limit prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor truck or other vehicle in violation of restrictions and limitations set in accordance with Section 10.60.020. (Ord. 90-32, 1990).
10.60.040 Penalties. Any person violating Section 10.60.010 shall be subject to a C-12 penalty and any person violating Section 10.60.020 shall be subject to a C-6 penalty. (Ord. 90-32, 1990).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 21
10.60.050 U Turns. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make a U turn at any point other than within a street intersection or street end. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make a U turn in any street intersection controlled by an electronic traffic control device. No person shall make a U turn unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with the normal flow of traffic.
Any person violating any of these restrictions relative to the making of a U turn shall be deemed to have committed a traffic infraction and shall be punished by a C-12 penalty as provided herein. (Ord 93-35, 1993)
10.60.060 Certain Vehicles to be kept off street when not in use.
City Streets and Alleyways – No parking at any time:
A. Any vehicle exceeding 12,000 lbs Gross Vehicle Weight; including truck-tractors, truck and trailer combinations, truck-tractor and semi-trailer combinations, flatbeds, dump trucks, busses, trucks with three or more axles, mobile home transporter vehicles, or the like.
B. Vehicles exceeding 8 feet, 6 inches in width, or 14 feet in height, or 20,000 lbs load per axle.
City Alleyways – No parking at any time:
C. Any trailer
D. Any self-propelled recreation vehicle.
City Streets – No parking for any continuous period exceeding 72 hours:
E. Any trailer
F. Any self-propelled recreation vehicle.
City Streets – No parking for any continuous period exceeding 120 hours:
G. All other vehicles
Exceptions:
H. Vehicles or trailers engaged in construction or activity licensed, permitted, or otherwise authorized by the City of Ephrata.
I. Vehicles or trailers involved in a collision or mechanical failure may remain up to 84 hours, provided; the vehicle has not been marked by law enforcement per RCW 46.55.085, the vehicle or trailer may be moved out of the driving lane, coned properly, and does not violate RCW 46.61.571 or other EMC.
J. Vehicles or trailers engaged in deliveries, loading or unloading; vehicles supporting a short-term ongoing activity, such as moving, concrete pouring, or the like.
City provided or arranged dumpsters may be placed along the curb of the property affected, provided that they do not impede traffic in the opinion of the City Public Works Director, for a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 22
period not exceeding thirty-one (31) days, as long as relevant work is proceeding that necessitates the dumpster. Violation of this section is punishable by a C-8 penalty. (Ord 96-35, 1996; Ord. 06-16, 2006; Ord 13-10, 2013)
10.60.080 Restricted Parking. On those streets which in the opinion of the Public Works Director are too narrow to permit the safe passage of vehicles while other vehicles are parked on those streets, the Public Works Director shall have the authority to recommend the adoption by the City Council of a resolution prohibiting parking on one or both sides of those streets. Upon approval of a resolution prohibiting such parking by the City Council, the Public Works Director shall post appropriate signs and the police department shall begin enforcement of the parking restriction.
10.60.090 Vehicular Access Restrictions. The City Council has determined that a portion of the alley right of way identified as the East-West alley within Block 1 of the Town Plat of Ephrata and the East-West alley within Block 3 of Jesse Cyrus First Addition present a pedestrian/vehicle safety issue which is best resolved by closing the following described portion to all vehicular traffic:
That portion adjacent to Lots 17, 18 & 19, Block 1 of the Town Plat of Ephrata and that portion adjacent to Lots 17, 18 & 19, Block 3 of Jesse Cyrus First Addition.
The Public Works Director shall cause appropriate signage and any barriers to be installed to effectuate the closure of said alley right of way to vehicular traffic.
(Ord 03-11, 2003)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 23
Chapter 10.64
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
Sections:
10.64.015 Loading Zones or Unloading Zones.
(a) In addition to any areas designated by the city engineer the following are designated as loading or unloading zones in the city of Ephrata:
(1) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin Street S.W. lying along the west side of Block 2, of the Town Plat of the city of Ephrata, on Basin Street S.W., commencing approximately one hundred twelve feet north of the south-west corner of said block and thence in a northerly direction along Basin Street for a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(2) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin N.W. lying along the west side of Block 1, of the Town plat of the city of Ephrata on Basin Street S.W., from the established alley way running east and west in said Block 1 and running in a southerly direction twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(3) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin Street N.W. lying along the west side of Block 1, of the Jesse Cyrus lst addition to the city of Ephrata on Basin Street S.W., commencing at the established alley way running east and west in said block and running in a southerly direction along Basin Street. N.W. for a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(4) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin Street N.W. lying along the east side of Block 2, of the Jesse Cyrus lst addition to the city of Ephrata on Basin Street S.W., commencing one hundred seventy-five feet from the southeast corner of said block and thence in a northerly direction along Basin Street for a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(5) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin Street N.W. lying along the east side of Block 3, of the Jesse Cyrus lst addition to the city of Ephrata on Basin Street S.W., from the existing east and west alley way on said block running in a northerly direction a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(6) A twenty-two-foot portion of Basin Street S.W. lying along the east side of Block 4, of the Jesse Cyrus lst addition to the city of Ephrata on Basin Street S.W., commencing approximately one hundred twelve feet north of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 24
the southeast corner of said block thence in a northerly direction along Basin Street for a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(7) A twenty-two-foot portion of West Division Street lying on the north side of Lot 1, Block 4, Jesse Cyrus lst addition to the city of Ephrata on West Division Street, commencing at the established alley and running in a westerly direction for a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(8) A forty-four-foot portion of lst Avenue N.W. lying on the north side of Lot 21 and 22, Block 3, Jesse Cyrus lst Addition to the city of Ephrata on lst Avenue N.W., commencing at Basin Street N.W. and running in a westerly direction for a distance of forty-four feet and having a width of nine feet.
(9) A twenty-two-foot portion of lst Avenue N.W. lying on the North side of Lot 1, Block 1 Town plat of Ephrata to the city of Ephrata on lst Avenue N.W., commencing sixty-five feet from the Northeasterly corner of said block thence in a westerly direction along lst Avenue N.W. a distance of twenty-two feet and having a width of nine feet.
(b) The loading or unloading zones mentioned in subsection (a) above, shall be used by vehicles loading or unloading from nine a.m. to twelve noon. (Ord. 1092 §1, 1983).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 25
Chapter 10.70
JUNK VEHICLES
Sections:
10.70.010 Authority and purpose.
10.70.020 Summary removal procedures.
10.70.030 Nuisance abatement procedures.
10.70.010 Authority and Purpose.
(a) RCW Chapter 46.55 and RCW 46.55.240, as now enacted or hereafter amended, provide the authority for the city to adopt laws relating to the removal of junk vehicles, parts thereof and automobile hulk. It is the intent of the city that the greatest possible powers be granted to the city and its police officers and building official to facilitate the removal of junk vehicles from private property within the city.
(b) The keeping of junk vehicles or parts thereof or automobile hulks on public or private property within the corporate limits of the city is declared to be a public nuisance, except as provided for herein. Such public nuisance may be abated as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1159 §l(part), 1986).
10.70.020 Summary removal procedures.
(a) Upon discovery of a junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk as defined in RCW Chapter 46.55, as now enacted or hereafter amended, the police department may contact the landowner, as defined in RCW 46.55, as now enacted or hereafter amended, where the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk is located, and determine if the landowner claims any ownership interest in or bailment responsibility for the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk. If the landowner claims no ownership or bailment interest, officer shall have the landowner execute a statement to that effect under penalty of perjury.
(b) If the landowner claims any ownership interest or bailment responsibility for the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk located upon his property, the officer may proceed to deal with the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk as provided in Section 10.70.030.
(c) Upon execution by the landowner of the statement of no ownership or bailment interest in the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk, officer shall cause a notification (junk vehicle) form to be mailed to the vehicle's registered legal owner of record by certified mail. Additionally, the notification shall inform the owner of the city's intent to dispose of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk. If the junk vehicle, parts thereof or automobile hulk remains unclaimed more than
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 26
fifteen days after the junk vehicle notification form was mailed, the officer may have the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or auto- mobile hulk removed with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Department of Licensing that the junk vehicle has been wrecked.
(d) If no information on the owner of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk is available after the landowner has executed the statement of no ownership or bailment interest, the officer may place a legal notice of custody and sale in the official newspaper of the city. This notice shall comply with RCW 46.55.230(5), as now enacted or hereafter amended, and shall additionally inform the owner of the city's intent to dispose of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk. If the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk remains unclaimed more than twenty days after publication of the notice, the officer may have the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk removed with notice to the Washington State Patrol and Department of Licensing that the junk vehicle has been wrecked. (Ord. 1159 §l(part), 1986).
10.70.030 Nuisance abatement procedures.
(a) If a landowner claims an ownership interest or bailment responsibility for a junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk, located on his property, upon contact by the police department as provided in subsection (b) of Section 10.70.010, the police department may inform the landowner keeping a junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk within the city, in any zone, that such vehicle is a public nuisance and said nuisance must be abated by the landowner within fifteen days or the city will proceed to abate the nuisance by removal of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk from the landowner's property and the costs of such removal including administration costs shall be charged against the landowner and/or the last registered owner of the automobile hulk, junk vehicle, or parts thereof, unless the owner, in the transfer of ownership of the vehicle or automobile hulk, has complied with RCW 46.12.101. This notice and warning shall be delivered to the last registered owner of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk and to the property owner of record by certified mail, within a five day return receipt requested. Such notice shall also inform the registered owner and the landowner of the right to request a hearing to contest the city's proposed removal of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 27
(b) (1) Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
"JUNK VEHICLE, PARTS THEREOF, OR AUTOMOBILE HULK REMOVAL NOTICE:
A junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) described as:
has been discovered by the City of Ephrata located at ____________ _______________(street address), described as ____________________ __________________(legal) within the City of Ephrata which is shown by public record to be the property of the last registered owner of such junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) is listed of record as ______________________________________________
All of you are informed such junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) is a public nuisance and unless such nuisance is abated as provided by Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 10.70, the City of Ephrata will proceed to abate such public nuisance by removal of the listed junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) fifteen (15) days after the date of this notice. Cost of such removal, including administrative costs, will be charged against the registered owner, unless the owner can demonstrate compliance with RCW 46.12.101 at the time of transfer of ownership, and or against the landowner.
You may request a hearing before the Judge of the Municipal Department of the District Court to contest the City's determination that your junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) is a public nuisance and the abatement thereof, or that you are legally responsible for the junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) described above. To request this hearing, one of you must notify the City of Ephrata Police Department, in writing at the address below, within ten (10) days of the date of this notice.
If you do not request a hearing, the junk vehicle(s), parts thereof, or automobile hulk(s) will be removed by the City of Ephrata and the costs thereof, including administrative costs, shall be assessed against all or any one of you.
Chief of Police
City of Ephrata
121 South Alder
Ephrata, Washington 98823
(2) If either the last known registered owner of the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk or the landowner requests a hearing to contest the city's discrimination that the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk constitutes a public nuisance and the abatement thereof, or that either or both the registered owner and landowner is legally responsible for the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk, such hearing shall be conducted after a written notice of the date,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 28
time, and place of such hearing is mailed, by certified mail, with a five day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Such hearing shall be held within thirty days of receipt of a written request for a hearing. No action shall be taken to remove the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk during the pendency of a hearing except pursuant to a court order. The landowner may appear in person at said hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at said hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for the denial.
(c) After the expiration of the fifteen days provided for in the notice to the registered owner and landowner above, if no hearing has been requested, or after a hearing, if requested, the city may proceed to have the junk vehicle, parts thereof, or automobile hulk removed and the costs of such removal, including administrative costs, shall be assessed against the registered owner and/or landowner jointly and severally.
(d) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply under the following conditions:
(1) If a vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or;
(2) If a vehicle or part thereof is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to RCW 46.80.130. (Ord. 1159 §l(part) 1986).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 29
Chapter 10.72
IMPOUNDS ON PUBLICLY OWNED OR CONTROLLED PROPERTY
Sections:
10.72.010 Intent.
10.72.020 Impounds.
10.72.030 Notice.
10.72.010 Intent. It is the intent of the city pursuant to RCW 46.55.240 to authorize impounds of vehicles under various circumstances on publicly owned or controlled rights-of-ways or property. This chapter is not intended to limit the city's ability to impound vehicles pursuant to RCW 69.50.505(b), RCW 46.20.435, or other city or state law. (Ord. 1160 §l(part), 1986).
10.72.020 Impounds. A law enforcement officer may authorize the impound of a vehicle by a registered tow truck operator which is on public property, public right-of-ways or publicly controlled property if the vehicle has been left unattended in one of the following locations or circumstances for the indicated period of time:
(1) Constituting a traffic hazard as defined by RCW 46.61.565 as presently enacted or hereafter amended; vehicle subject to immediate removal;
(2) On a highway as defined by RCW 46.04.431 and tagged as described in RCW 46.52.170 as presently enacted or hereafter amended, where no parking time limit is posted (including trailers and other vehicles which are not self-propelled); vehicle subject to removal within twenty-four hours;
(3) In a publicly owned or controlled parking facility, properly posted under RCW 46.55.070 as presently enacted or hereafter amended/vehicle subject to immediate removal;
(4) In an alleyway; vehicle subject to immediate removal;
(5) When parked on a highway as defined by RCW 46.04-431 where a parking time limit has been posted, and the vehicle has been unattended for longer than twice the time permitted in the time zone or parked during time not authorized; vehicle subject to immediate removal;
(6) A motor vehicle which has been parked in violation of RCW 10.56.020(b); vehicle subject to immediate removal;
(7) In any designated no parking zone (e.g. firelane); immediate removal. (Ord. 1160 §l(part), 1986).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 30
10.72.030 Notice.
(a) Notice of impoundment of an unauthorized vehicle impounded shall be given by sending a notification by first class mail within twenty-hours after the impoundment to the last known registered owner and legal owner of the vehicle. The notification shall contain the following information:
(1) By whose authority the vehicle was impounded;
(2) Location and time of impound; and
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the impounding tow firm.
(b) In the case of an abandoned vehicle, the tow truck operator should send, by certified letter, a notice of custody and sale to the legal owner and registered owner as required by RCW 46.55.110 and 46.55.120. (Ord. 1160 §l(part), 1986).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 31
Chapter 10.74
IMPOUNDS AFTER DRIVING WITHOUT A VALID DRIVER=S LICENSE
AND UNDER THE INFLUENCE ARRESTS
Sections:
10.74.010 Period of impoundment
10.74.020 Redemption of impounded vehicles
10.74.030 Post-impound hearing procedure
10.74.010 Period of impoundment.
(1) Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20.015, 46.20.342, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504, the vehicle is subject to impoundment at the direction of a police officer.
(2) Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation of RCW 46.20.005, 46.20,015, 46.20.341, 46.20.420, 46.61.502, 46.61.504, then the vehicle may be released as soon as all the requirements of the EMC '10.74.020(1) are satisfied.
(3) If the vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one (1) time of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for fifteen (15) days.
(4) If the vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted two (2) or more times of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for thirty (30) days.
(5) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has not been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for thirty (30) days.
(6) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one (1) time of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance once within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for sixty (60) days.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 32
(7) If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or similar local ordinance two (2) or more times within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for ninety (90) days.
10.74.020 Redemption of impounded vehicles. Vehicles impounded by the City shall be redeemed only under the following circumstances:
(1) Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to Section 10.74.010 EMC must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and is in compliance with RCW 46.30.020. A vehicle impounded pursuant to Subsections (3) to (7) of EMC 10.74.010 can be released only pursuant to a written order from the police department or a court.
(2) Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the City shall pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment removal, towing and storage prior to redeeming such vehicle, except as provided for by subsection (3) of this section. Such towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(b) as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to Section 10.74.010 and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all penalties, fines or forfeitures owned by the registered owner have been satisfied.
(3) The Chief of Police is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to EMC 10.74.010(3) through (7) prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the spouse of the driver based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from release of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status, and access to the vehicle if such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle still must satisfy the requirements of EMC 10.74.020(1) and (2).
(4) Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded as a result of a parking or traffic citation has a right to a Municipal Court hearing to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, and storage charges if such request for hearing is in writing, in a form approved by the Chief of Police and signed by such person, and is received by the Municipal Court within ten (10) days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the date the notice was given to such person by the registered tow truck operator pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2)(a). Such hearing shall be provided as follows:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 33
(A) If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under EMC 10.74.010, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately and a hearing as provided for in EMC 10.74.030 shall be held within ninety (90) days of the written request for hearing.
(B) If not all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under EMC 10.74.010, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing provided pursuant to EMC 10.74.030, which shall be held within two (2) business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the written request for hearing.
(C) Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in EMC 10.74.020(4) may petition the Chief of Police for an extension of time to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purposes of this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.
(D) If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing and no extension to file such a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and the City shall not be liable for removal, towing and storage charges arising from the impoundment.
10.74.030. Post-impound hearing procedure.
Hearings requested pursuant to EMC 10.74.020 shall be held in Municipal Court, which court shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated removal, towing, and/or storage fees were proper.
(1) At the hearing, an abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit, or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, a certified vehicle registration of the impounded vehicle is admissible without further evidentiary foundation and is prima facie evidence of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle.
(2) If the impoundment is found to be proper, the court shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment, removal, towing, and storage have not been paid or any other applicable requirements of EMC 10.74.020 have not been satisfied or any period of impoundment under EMC 10.74.010 has not
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 34
expired, the court’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment to the City of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic or parking infraction and satisfaction of any other applicable requirements of EMC 10.74.
(3) If the impoundment is found to be improper, the court shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the court shall enter judgment against the city and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of costs of the impoundment.
(4) In the event that the court finds that the impound was property, but the removal, towing, storage fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the court shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the court shall enter a judgment against the city and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of overpayment.
(5) No determination of facts made a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and such determination shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.
(6) As to any impoundment arising from an alleged violation of RCW 46.20.342 or 46.20.420, if is determined to be improper, the law enforcement officer directing the impoundment and the government employing the officer are not liable for damages if the officer relied in good faith and without gross negligence on the records of the department in ascertaining that the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver’s license.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 35
EMC Chapter 10.80 ALTERNATIVE VEHICLES
Sections:
10.80.010 Definitions
10.80.020 Use of Alternative Vehicles on city streets
10.80.030 Restrictions on use of Alternative Vehicles on city streets
10. 80.040 Equipment requirements of an Alternative Vehicle
10. 80.050 Registration requirements of an Alternative Vehicle
10. 80.060 Duty to obey traffic-control devices and rules of the road
10. 80.070 Prohibited uses
10. 80.080 Prohibited areas
10. 80.090 Violation—Penalty
10. 80.990 Severability
10.80.010 Definitions
When used in this chapter, the city defines the words and phrases listed below as follows:
1. “City” means the City of Ephrata, its elected officials, its employees, and its agents.
2. “City street” means every way, lane, road, street, boulevard, and every way or place in the city open as a matter of right to public vehicular traffic inside the city limits.
3. “Motorcycle helmet” has the same meaning as provided in RCW 46.37.530.
4. “Rules of the road” means all the rules that apply to vehicle or pedestrian traffic as set forth in state statute, rule or regulation.
5. “Sidewalk” means that property between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a city street and the adjacent property, set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians or such portion of private property parallel and in proximity to a city street and dedicated to use by pedestrians.
6. “Alternative Vehicle” means:
A. Any wheeled motorized all-terrain non-highway vehicle with handlebars that is fifty inches or less in width, has a seat height of at least twenty inches, weighs less than one thousand five hundred pounds, and has at least four tires having a diameter of thirty inches or less, or
B. A utility-type vehicle designed for and capable of travel over designated roads that travels on four or more low-pressure tires of twenty psi or less, has a maximum width less than seventy-four inches, has a maximum weight less than two thousand pounds, has a wheelbase of one hundred ten inches or less, and satisfies at least one of the following:
I. Has a minimum width of fifty inches;
II. Has a minimum weight of at least nine hundred pounds; or
III. Has a wheelbase of over sixty-one inches. An Alternative Vehicle is an off-road vehicle for the purposes of Chapter 4.24 RCW.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 36
10.80.020 Use of Alternative Vehicles on city streets
Subject the restrictions and requirements set forth in this chapter, a person who has attained the age of sixteen years, has proof of valid insurance, and who has a valid, non-intermediate driver’s license issued by the state of the person’s residence may operate a Alternative Vehicle upon a city street having a speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour or less.
10.80.030 Restrictions on use of Alternative Vehicles on city streets
A. Unless the Vehicle has a windscreen and an enclosed overhead rollover structure, each person who operates or rides in an Alternative Vehicle must wear a securely fastened motorcycle helmet while the vehicle is in motion.
B. A person may not operate an Alternative Vehicle upon Basin Street/State Route-28, State Route-282, and Dodson Road. An Alternative Vehicle may cross Basin Street/State Route-28 only, at a controlled intersection if the crossing begins and ends on a city street with a speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour or less and occurs at an intersection of approximately ninety degrees; (Ord 14-16, 2014)
C. A person may not operate an Alternative Vehicle upon a city street with a speed limit in excess of thirty-five miles per hour; however, a person may cross a city street with a speed limit in excess of thirty-five miles per hour at a controlled intersection if the crossing begins and ends on a city street with a speed limit of thirty-five miles per hour or less and occurs at an intersection of approximately ninety degrees;
D. A person may operate an Alternative Vehicle upon any city street while being used under the authority or direction of an appropriate agency that engages in emergency management, as defined in RCW 46.09.310, or search and rescue, as defined in RCW 38.52.010, or a law enforcement agency, as defined in RCW 16.52.011, within the scope of the agency’s official duties; and
E. Alternative Vehicles are subject to Chapter 46.55 RCW.
10.80.040 Equipment requirements of an Alternative Vehicle
An Alternative Vehicle operated on a city street must comply with the following equipment requirements:
A. Headlights meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.030 and 46.37.040 and used at all times when the vehicle is in motion;
B. One tail lamp meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.525 and used at all times when the vehicle is in motion upon a city street; however, a utility-type vehicle, as described under RCW 46.09.310, must have two tail lamps meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.070(1) and to be used at all times when the vehicle is in motion upon a city street;
C. A stop lamp meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.200;
D. Reflectors meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.060;
E. During hours of darkness, as defined in RCW 46.04.200, turn signals meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.200;
F. Outside of hours of darkness, the operator must comply with RCW 46.37.200 or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 37
46.61.310;
G. A mirror attached to either the right or left handlebar, which must be located to give the operator a complete view of the city street for a distance of at least two hundred feet to the rear of the vehicle; however, a utility-type vehicle, as described under RCW 46.09.310(19), must have two mirrors meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.400;
H. A windshield meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.430, unless the operator wears glasses, goggles, or a face shield while operating the vehicle, of a type conforming to rules adopted by the Washington state patrol;
I. A horn or warning device meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.380;
J. Brakes in working order;
K. A spark arrester and muffling device meeting the requirements of RCW 46.09.470; and
L. Seatbelts meeting the requirements of RCW 46.37.510 for all utility-type vehicles, defined under RCW 46.09.310(19);
M. Must have an individual seat, designed to seat a person, for each occupant. If equipped with seatbelts, the seatbelts must be worn at all times the Vehicle is being operated.
10.80.050 Registration requirements of an Alternative Vehicle
An Alternative Vehicle operated on a city street must comply with all the registration requirements of Chapter 46.09 RCW.
10.80.060 Duty to obey traffic-control devices and rules of the road
Unless a police officer directs otherwise, a person operating an Alternative Vehicle must obey all rules of the road that apply to vehicle or pedestrian traffic and must obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles. A person operating an Alternative Vehicle upon a city street is subject to all of the duties that Chapter 46.61 RCW et seq. imposes on an operator of a vehicle, except as to those provisions thereof which by their nature can have no application.
10.80.070 Prohibited uses.
A. No person may operate or ride an Alternative Vehicle in a negligent or unsafe manner, but must operate it with reasonable regard for his or her own safety and for the safety of others.
B. No person may occupy an Alternative Vehicle unless that person is seated in a seat designed to carry a person. No person may tow any devices or persons behind an Alternative Vehicle.
C. No person may operate an Alternative Vehicle side-by-side in a single lane of traffic.
10.80.080 Prohibited areas
A. It is unlawful to operate an Alternative Vehicle on a sidewalk or other area where it is
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 38
unlawful to operate a motor vehicle.
B. It is unlawful to operate an Alternative Vehicle in a park, except on a park drive or in a designated parking lot.
C. It is unlawful to operate an Alternative Vehicle on any bicycle trail, any walking path, or in any marked bicycle lane.
D. It is unlawful to operate an Alternative Vehicle on Beezley Hill, other than upon the main access road from the gate, when open, at Cyrus Road to the Autism Ribbon.
10.80.090 Violation—Penalty
A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a traffic infraction and will be punished by the imposition of a C-09 penalty, exclusive of statutory assessments; provided, that conduct that constitutes a criminal offense may be charged as such and is subject to the maximum penalties allowed for such offenses.
10.80.990 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, phrase, or word of this chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, phrase or word of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-07, 2014)
Chapter 10.85
GOLF CARTS
Sections:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 39
10.85.010 Definitions
10.85.020 Requirements and Restrictions
10.85.030 Registration
10.85.040 Prohibitions
10.85.050 Violation—Penalty
10.85.010 Definitions. The following definitions shall be used in this chapter. Where a word or term is undefined reference shall be to RCW Title 46.
A. Golf Cart: A gas powered or electric powered four (4) wheeled vehicle originally designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting purposes and has a speed attainable in one mile of not more than twenty (20) miles per hour. A golf cart is not a non-highway vehicle or off road vehicle as defined in RCW 46.09.310. A golf cart is not considered a motor vehicle, except for the purposes of Chapter 46.61 RCW.
B. Golf Cart Zone: Any public roadway within the City of Ephrata having a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less, excepting State Route-28/Basin Street, provided golf carts may cross all city streets and State Highways at intersections. Signs identifying the Golf Cart Zone shall be placed at all 10 entrances to the City limits.
C. Street: The entire right of way width including the sidewalk (if present) and between the curb and boundary lines and shoulder or swale of public property when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular travel including parking.
10.85.020 Requirements and Restrictions. The following use, operational requirements, and restrictions are adopted by the city for golf carts:
A. Every person operating a golf cart as authorized under this section is granted all rights and is subject to all duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under Chapter 46.61 RCW.
B. A golf cart may be operated on a street by a person as follows:
1. Every person operating a golf cart as authorized under this section must be 16 years of age and must have a valid, non-intermediate driver’s license issued by the state of the person’s residence.
2. A person who has a revoked license under RCW 46.20.285 may not operate a golf cart as authorized under this section.
3. Any person operating a golf cart, as authorized under this section shall not transport more passengers than the manufacturer’s designed seating capacity. All occupants shall be seated during operation and the use of seat belts shall be mandatory while the golf cart is being operated.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 40
4. No person may operate a golf cart in the city unless the person is insured under a liability policy with liability limits of at least the amounts provided in RCW 46.29.090. Written proof of financial responsibility must be provided on the request of a law enforcement officer.
5. A golf cart may not be operated without first being registered with the City and the registration number conspicuously displayed upon the back of the golf cart.
C. All operators of golf carts shall adhere to all rules of the road applicable to motorized vehicles as set forth in Chapter 46.61 RCW and Chapter 308-330 WAC. Specific attention is to be paid to the intent of RCW 46.61.502, “Driving under the influence,” and to RCW 46.61.519, “Alcoholic beverages – Drinking or open container in vehicle.”
D. Golf carts shall not be operated on a street during one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise.
E. Golf carts shall not be operated on a street in a negligent manner. For the purpose of this subsection, “to operate in a negligent manner” is defined as the operation of a golf cart in such a manner as to endanger any person or property, or to obstruct, hinder, or impede the lawful course of travel of any motor vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of public streets, sidewalks, paths, trails, walkways, or parks.
F. Golf carts must be equipped with reflectors, seat belts, and rearview mirrors when operated upon streets and highways as authorized under this section.
G. Golf carts are exempt from vehicle licensing requirements.
10.85.030 Registration. All golf carts shall be registered with the City of Ephrata prior to the operation upon the public roadways within the City. The sole purpose of the registration is to identify the owners of the golf carts being operated as provided herein. Registration of a golf cart is not intended to and shall not operate to warrant or guarantee that the golf cart meets any particular standard or condition or that it may be safely operated upon the public roadways within the City of Ephrata. Registration shall be made in the manner that follows:
A. Application for a golf cart registration shall be made upon a form provided by the City of Ephrata.
B. A golf cart number will be issued upon the approval of the completed application and the payment of a one-time $60.00 registration fee.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 - 41
Replacement numbers will be provided for a $5.00 fee each time.
C. Such decal shall be firmly attached to the rear of the golf cart for which issued in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
10.85.040 Prohibitions. The following are prohibitions on the use of golf carts within the City of Ephrata:
A No person may operate or ride a golf cart in a negligent or unsafe manner, but must operate it with reasonable regard for his or her own safety and for the safety of others.
B. No person may occupy a golf cart unless that person is seated in a seat designed to carry a person. No person may tow any devices or persons behind a golf cart.
C. No person may operate a golf cart side-by-side in a single lane of traffic.
D. It is unlawful to operate a golf cart on a sidewalk or other area where it is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle.
E. It is unlawful to operate a golf cart in a park, except on a park drive or in a designated parking lot.
F. It is unlawful to operate a golf cart on any bicycle trail, any walking path, or in any marked bicycle lane.
G. It is unlawful to operate a golf cart on Beezley Hill, other than upon the main access road from the gate, when open, at Cyrus Road to the Autism Ribbon.
10.85.050 Violation—Penalty. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a traffic infraction and will be punished by the imposition of a C-9 penalty, exclusive of statutory assessments; provided, that conduct that constitutes a criminal offense may be charged as such and is subject to the maximum penalties allowed for such offenses.
(Ord. 16-09, 2016)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 1
Title 12
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapters:
12.02 Highway Access Management
12.04 Public Works Construction
12.08 Improvements
12.12 Street Lighting Utility Rates (repealed Ord 03-19, 2003)
12.14 Sidewalk Obstructions
12.16 Sidewalk Construction
12.18 Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
12.20 Right of Way Use by Telecommunication, Cable Providers and Open Video System Operators
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 2
Chapter 12.02
HIGHWAY ACCESS MANAGEMENT
Sections:
12.02.010 Purpose
12.02.020 Adoption by reference
12.02.010 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to implement RCW 47.50.030 for the regulation and control of vehicular access and connection points of ingress to, and egress from, the state highway system within the incorporated areas of Ephrata, Washington.
12.02.020 Adoption by reference.
Pursuant to the requirements and authority of RCW 47.50.030, there are hereby adopted by reference and provisions of WAC Chapters 468-51 and 468-52, as now adopted or hereafter amended, in order to implement the requirements of RCW 47.50.030.
(Ord. 07-13, 2007)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 3
Chapter 12.04
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Sections:
12.04.010 State law adopted.
12.04.020 Copies of adopted law filed.
12.04.010 State law adopted. All future public works construction, including but not limited to streets, sewers and water distribution system in the city shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Municipal Public Works Construction of the Washington State Chapter of the American Public Works Association published in 1969, together with any amendments hereinafter made thereto and the specifications are by this reference made a part thereof and incorporated herein as though fully set forth. (Ord. 771 '1, 1969).
12.04.020 Copies of adopted law filed. Three copies of the standard specifications set forth in Section 12.04-12.10 shall be on file in the office of the city engineer for use and examination by the public at all times. (Ord. 771 '2, 1969).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 4
Chapter 12.08
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
12.08.010 Definitions.
12.08.020 Permit required.
12.08.030 Application for permit.
12.08.040 Inspection fee.
12.08.050 Approval of application and issuance of permit.
12.08.060 Prohibited locations for driveway approaches.
12.08.070 Length of driveway approach apron.
12.08.080 Driveway approach requirements generally.
12.08.090 Driveway approach near alleys.
12.08.100 Driveway approach in limited improvement areas.
12.08.110 Private commercial use of street right-of-way.
12.08.120 Variance conditions.
12.08.130 Sidewalk, curb construction, conformance required.
12.08.140 One course concrete sidewalk.
12.08.150 Concrete construction, conformance to state law required.
12.08.160 One course concrete curb and gutter.
12.08.170 Sidewalk, curb minimum length.
12.08.180 Additional sidewalk requirements.
12.08.010 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Driveway" is an area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed to stand;
(2) "Driveway approach" is an area, construction or improvement between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to a definite area of the private property, such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven feet wide, intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or the curb return, and the sidewalk section;
(3) "Apron" is that portion of the driveway approach extending from the gutter flow line to the sidewalk section and lying between the end slopes of the driveway approach;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 5
(4) "End slopes" are those portions of the driveway approach which provide a transition from the normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the apron, either by means of a sloping surface or by means of a curb return together with the area between the projected tangents of the curb return;
(5) "Sidewalk section" is that portion of the driveway approach lying between the back edge of the sidewalk and the apron plus the end slopes measured at the front edge of the sidewalk;
(6) "Curb return" is the curved portion of a street curb at street or alley intersections or the curved portion of a curb in the end slopes of a driveway approach. (Ord. 566 '1, 1957).
12.08.020 Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall remove, alter, or construct any curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, pavement, or other improvement in any public street, alley or other property owned by or dedicated to or used by this city and over which it has jurisdiction to regulate the matters covered hereby, without first obtaining a permit from the building department, and no permit shall be granted until the applicant shall file with the building department for his approval two copies of a drawing showing the location and size of all such proposed improvements to serve the property affected. (Ord. 566 '2, 1957)(Ord. 95-22,1995).
12.08.030 Application for permit. Application for permits to construct such improvements shall be made to the building official on forms provided for that purpose. (Ord. 566 '3, 1957)(Ord. 95-22,1995).
12.08.040 Inspection fee. All fees shall be per Uniform Building Code.
12.08.050 Approval of application and issuance of permit. Before approving the drawing of such improvement and issuing the permit, the building official shall determine that the proposed improvement is in conformance with the provisions and standards hereinafter set forth and the uniform design drawings attached hereto.
12.08.060 Prohibited locations for driveway approaches.
(a) No driveway approach shall be permitted to encompass any municipal facility. Under the permit provided for herein, applicant may be authorized to relocate any municipal facility, including any within the limits of a curb return which may be encroached upon as allowed under subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(b) At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted between the limits of the intersection of the prolonged property lines and the curb, except as may be allowed under subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 6
(c) At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted between the limits of the intersection of the prolonged back edges of the sidewalks and the curb, except as may be allowed under subsection (d) of this section.
(d) On all curb returns at street intersections where the radius is twenty-five feet or more, driveway approaches, including end slopes, may encroach upon each end of the return for a distance equal to twelve and one-half percent of the total length of the arc of the curb return, thus leaving at least seventy-five percent of the length of the arc of the curb return face free from driveway encroachment.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, at street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted between the points of curvature of the curb return where the radius of the curve is twenty feet or less. (Ord. 566 '6, 1957).
12.08.070 Length of driveway approach apron. The length of driveway approach aprons shall not exceed the following dimensions:
(1) For residential driveways, fifteen (15) feet for single driveways and thirty (30) feet for double driveways;
(2) For commercial driveways, when one or more driveway approaches serve a given property frontage, no single apron shall exceed thirty feet in length if the property abuts a street where the speed limit is twenty-five miles or less per hour; or thirty-five feet in length where the speed limit is above twenty-five but under forty-five miles per hour; or forty feet where the speed limit is forty-five or more miles per hour; but any length in excess of thirty-five feet is subject to the approval of the city engineer. A safety island of not less than sixteen feet of full height curb shall in all cases be provided between driveway approaches serving any one property frontage;
(3) The number of driveways are as follows:
a) Residential: Two (2) driveway approaches per house unit. Any additional approaches must be approved by the Planning Commission after considering the lot width and location.
b) Commercial or Industrial: The number of driveway approaches is dependent on the speed limit at that location. (W.A.C. 468-52)
Class (3) 45 m.p.h. to 55 m.p.h. - 330 feet spacing.
Class (4) 35 m.p.h. to 45 m.p.h. - 250 feet spacing.
Class (5) 25 m.p.h. to 35 m.p.h. - 125 feet spacing.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 7
(4) Property frontage referred to herein includes approach areas directly in front of property owned or under the control of the applicant, and such area as may be opposite adjoining property which is used for approach purposes by right of easement or agreement with the adjoining property owner.
(Ord. 566 '7, 1957, Ord. 97-12, 1997)
12.08.080 Driveway approach requirements generally.
(a) All driveway approaches between the curb line and the property line shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete except as provided in Section 12.08.100. The concrete of the driveway approach, including the sidewalk section, shall be six inches thick for commercial approaches.
(b) The sidewalk section of the driveway approach shall be finished and scored as specified by the city engineer for typical sidewalk construction. Apron and end slope areas of the driveway approach shall be finished, after trawling smooth and scoring, with a fiber push broom drawn over the surface parallel to the curb line.
(c) Driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans for driveway approaches as filed with the city clerk, copy of which shall be furnished applicant at the time the application is filed.
(d) Curb cuts on existing curbs shall be bonded to the old concrete at least two inches below existing street surface. (Ord. 566 '8, 1957).
12.08.090 Driveway approach near alleys. Driveway approaches located within five feet of the existing curb return at an alley intersection may be merged with the alley intersection pavement, thus requiring the removal of the existing curb return; the total apron length plus the alley width, measured at the curb line of the apron to the opposite alley line, shall not exceed forty feet. (Ord. 566 '9, 1957).
12.08.100 Driveway approach in limited improvement areas.
(a) Where standard gutters and curbs or straight curbs have been installed but concrete sidewalks have not been, the permit may authorize the applicant to construct the driveway approach from the curb line to the applicant's premises of the same materials as those used for paving applicant's premises. Such driveway approach shall be constructed to establish grade and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. A gravel driveway will not be considered a paved driveway. The permit shall provide and the applicant shall agree that if and when thereafter concrete sidewalks are constructed the applicant or his successor shall install concrete driveway approaches.
(b) Where standard gutters and curbs or straight curbs have not been installed, the apron lengths set forth in Section 12.08.070 shall be measured along the property line and there shall be not less than sixteen feet of frontage between driveway approaches serving any one property. Permits shall not be issued for any surface
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 8
improvement or paving on the street right-of-way between driveway approaches unless a concrete curb or other physical obstruction, of a design satisfactory to the city engineer, is constructed and maintained by the applicant along his property line, so that the entrance and exit of vehicles to and from applicant's property will be restricted to the established driveway approaches. Pursuant to the permit provided for herein, applicant may surface the driveway approaches or other areas within the right-of-way by extending the same type of paving used on applicant's premises so that it merges with the street pavement, provided applicant's paving is adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried; extended paving between the property line and the street pavement shall be to established grade or other slope fixed by the city engineer to provide for proper run off. Paving between the property line and the street pavement may meet the street pavement at the point ahead of the curb opening in order to provide for safe deceleration of vehicles turning into the applicant's premises.
If applicant's paving is extended beyond the property line into a street right-of-way at an intersection or crossroad, the city engineer may require applicant to construct a suitable traffic island or curb to provide for the protection for such municipal facilities as may be necessary. (Ord. 566 '10, 1957).
12.08.110 Private commercial use of street rights-of-way. City street rights-of-way may not be used for private commercial purposes except as provided in Chapter 12.14. A permit for the construction of driveway approaches shall not be issued unless vehicles to be served or serviced can be parked entirely within the private property lines. (Ord. 87-6 '2, 1987: Ord. 566 '11, 1957).
12.08.120 Variance conditions. The city engineer is authorized to grant in writing variances from the regulations and requirements of this chapter, provided he first determines that the following conditions are present:
(1) The variance requested arises from peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city, or is due to the nature of the business or operation upon the applicant's property;
(2) The variance requested is not against the public interest, particularly safety, convenience and general welfare;
(3) The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants; and
(4) The terms of this chapter will work unnecessary hardship upon the applicant property owner or tenant. (Ord. 566 '12, 1957).
12.08.130 Sidewalk, curb construction, conformance required. When any sidewalks or curbs along any street, square, alley or other public place in the city, shall be constructed or renewed, it shall be constructed or renewed in accordance with the provisions
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 9
of this chapter. Provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those districts which are, or shall hereafter be, otherwise specially regulated by other ordinance. (Ord. 566 '13, 1957).
12.08.140 One course concrete sidewalk. One course concrete sidewalks shall be constructed with a cement mix of not less than one part cement to two parts sand to four parts gravel, and shall be laid on a slope extending back and upward from the curb at the rate of one-fourth inch in elevation to each foot back from the curb. The sand and gravel used in the mix shall be clean and well graded to meet the requirements for structural concrete construction. Pit run gravel shall be used only with the approval of the city engineer and after test has been made to show that it is clean and well graded. All sidewalks including the curb, shall be at least five feet in width and a minimum of four inches in thickness, and all sidewalks shall be located in accordance with the area designated for the construction of sidewalks as shown upon street plans on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 566 '14, 1957).
12.08.150 Concrete construction, conformance to state law required. The construction detail, placing and finishing concrete, marking, expansion joints and curing the concrete shall conform to the standard specifications and amendments of the state of Washington, 1948, as adopted by the city. (Ord. 90-55, 1990)
12.08.160 One course concrete curb and gutter. One course concrete curbs and curb and gutter shall be the same mix as for one course concrete sidewalks. The curb shall be six inches in width on top, eight inches in width on the bottom and sixteen inches in height. Curb and gutter shall be eighteen inches wide, twelve inches thick at back of curb, six inches thick at outer edge of gutter and six inches from the top of curb to gutter line. The curb is five and one-half inches wide at top and six and one-half inches wide at gutter line.
All outside corners except the bottom section shall have a radius of one half inch, the top inside corner of the curb shall have a one inch radius, and the radius at the gutter line shall be one inches. The bottom outer edge of the gutter section shall be one inch higher than the bottom edge at the back of the curb. Through expansion joints one-half inch thick shall be placed every thirty feet and at beginning and ending of all radius corners. The radius corners where the roadway is thirty-two to forty-four feet in width shall be eighteen feet, except at alleys where the radius shall be four feet. (Ord. 90-55, 1990).
12.08.170 Sidewalk, curb minimum length. Where sidewalks are built to the curb, one-fourth inch expansion joint material shall be placed between the walk and curb, the thickness of the concrete walk. The construction of walks and curbs shall not be permitted for a distance less than the total continuous length of property abutting any street owned by any applicant, providing, however, that if the property is located on the corner of an established city block, such permission
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 10
may be granted for the improvement of only one side of such property. (Ord. 566 '17, 1957).
12.08.180 Additional sidewalk requirements. Where driveways cross sidewalks, the thickness shall be six inches. Where an entrance ramp is installed with the sidewalk being located next to the curb, the rise from the street surface to the sidewalk elevation shall be made within a distance of eighteen inches from the curb face. The transition from the walk to the ramp shall be well rounded and provide the best possible conditions for pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 566 '18, 1957).
(Ord 03-19, 2003)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 11
Chapter 12.14
SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
Sections:
12.14.010 Prohibited.
12.14.020 Private commercial purposes.
12.14.030 Permitted obstructions.
12.14.040 Governmental exemptions.
12.14.060 Violation--Penalty.
12.14.010 Prohibited. Except as provided in this chapter, no person, firm or corporation other than the city may place obstructions upon the sidewalks of the city so as to hinder pedestrian traffic or otherwise reduce the usable sidewalk area. (Ord. 87-6 'l(part), 1987).
12.14.020 Private commercial purposes. City sidewalks may not be used for private commercial purposes except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 87-6 'l(part), 1987).
12.14.030 Permitted obstructions. Within those areas of the city zoned industrial or commercial, the following kinds of commercial uses of sidewalks may be allowed during times the business utilizing the sidewalk is open to the public. All such commercial uses of city sidewalks shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Portable signs or merchandise may be placed upon the sidewalks immediately adjacent to the business wishing to display a portable sign or merchandise so long as such portable signs shall be of a maximum width not to exceed thirty-two inches, a maximum height not to exceed forty-eight inches, and a maximum length not to exceed thirty-six inches, and so long as the height of such merchandise shall not exceed sixty inches;
(2) Any signs placed upon city sidewalks shall be structurally sound and able to withstand reasonable climatic conditions for the season of display;
(3) Any portable signs or merchandise placed upon city sidewalks shall be free from any protrusions or extensions which may impede or endanger pedestrians using the sidewalk;
(4) No portable sign or merchandise shall be placed within ten feet of the property line of the displaying merchant if such property line is adjacent to a street or alley
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 12
intersection. The AClear View Triangle@ may not be impeded in any way by a sign on a corner. Signs may not be placed in the areas where the extension of crosswalks would intersect upon the sidewalks and impede foot traffic; (Ord. 06-19, 2006)
(5) No merchandise or portable signs shall be placed on a sidewalk to leave unobstructed less than sixty inches of the sidewalk's surface as measured by a perpendicular line from the curb to the outermost protrusion of the portable sign or merchandise. (Ord. 87-6 'l(part), 1987).
12.14.040 Governmental exemptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city, state of Washington or the United States or the agencies of any of those entities from placing fixtures upon city sidewalks as are deemed necessary by the appropriate agencies. (Ord. 87-6 'l(part), 1987).
12.14.060 Violation--Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate Section 12.14.030 (5) and (6) and Section 12.14.050 and any person, firm or corporation violating said sections shall be subject to a C-7 penalty as provided by Chapter 1.04. (Ord. 87-6 'l(part), 1987).
(Ord 06-19, 2006)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 13
Chapter 12.16
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
Sections:
12.16.010 Sidewalk Specifications - Residential Zones
12.16.020 Curbs in Residential Zones
12.16.030 Sidewalk Specifications - Commercial Zones
12.16.040 Sidewalk, curb minimum length
12.16.050 Additional sidewalk requirements
12.16.060 Construction and reconstruction powers enabled
12.16.010 Sidewalk Specifications - Residential Zones. All sidewalks in the residential zones of the city shall be constructed of gray concrete unless the Council has previously approved the usage of alternate materials, five feet (5') in width on grade and in accordance to specifications issued by the City Engineer. All sidewalks in all residential zones shall be constructed adjacent to the curb. In existing developed areas sidewalk shall be constructed in conformance with existing sidewalk improvements unless the Council has previously approved a variation in conformity. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
12.16.020 Curbs in Residential Zones. All curbs in the residential zones shall be constructed of gray concrete unless the Council has previously approved the usage of alternate materials, and built to the established grade, constructed according to specifications issued by the City Engineer. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
12.16.030 Sidewalk Specifications - Commercial Zones.
(a) All sidewalks in the commercial zones of the city shall be constructed of gray concrete unless the council has previously approved the usage of alternate materials and in accordance to specifications issued by the City Engineer. All sidewalks in all commercial zones shall be built to the full dimension between the back of the curb and the abutting property line. Sidewalks shall be constructed so as to avoid physical obstructions unless the Council has previously approved the placement of physical obstructions such as, but not limited to, light poles, fire hydrants, planter boxes, trees, or tree wells in or on the area reserved for sidewalks.
(b) The council may, by resolution, define a portion of the sidewalks located within any commercial zone to be uniformly constructed of an alternate material. That alternate material is described and defined on the attached exhibit 1 which is incorporated into this ordinance by this reference as if such exhibit 1 were set
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 14
forth in full at this point. The sidewalk shall be constructed according to the city's standards. The sidewalk standards shall include but not be limited to specifications for the installation of sidewalks, tree wells, trees, irrigation system, electrical conduit for decorative and/or functional/pedestrian street lighting and sidewalk furniture (benches, garbage cans, newspaper racks, planters, etc.) Upon the adoption of such a resolution by the council, all sidewalks within the area affected by such resolution at the time they are to be reconstructed or at the time of new construction shall comply with the alternate standards established by the city council and as further established and controlled by the city engineer. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
12.16.040 Sidewalk, curb minimum length. Where sidewalks are built to the curb, one-fourth inch expansion joint material shall be placed between the walk and curb, the thickness of the concrete walk. The construction of walks and curbs shall not be permitted for a distance less than the total continuous length of property abutting any street owned by any applicant, providing, however, that if the property is located on the corner of an established city block, such permission may be granted for the improvement of only one side of such property. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
12.16.050 Additional sidewalk requirements. Where driveways cross sidewalks, the thickness shall be six inches. Where an entrance ramp is installed with the sidewalk being located next to the curb, the rise from the street surface to the sidewalk elevation shall be made within a distance of eighteen inches from the curb face. The transition from the walk to the ramp shall be well rounded and provide the best possible conditions for pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
12.16.060 Construction and reconstruction powers enabled. The provisions RCW Chapter 35.68, Chapter 35.69 and Chapter 35.70, as now enacted or hereafter amended, shall be deemed to be in full force and effect within the City of Ephrata. (Ord. 88-21 '1 (part), 1988)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 15
Chapter 12.18
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
Sections:
12.18.010 Sidewalk Service Required.
12.18.020 Property owner liable for maintenance and repairs.
12.18.030 Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way.
12.18.040 Notice to repair hazardous sidewalk.
12.18.050 Permit required.
12.18.060 Resolution and notice of required improvements.
12.18.070 Notice to describe property, construction.
12.18.080 Notification and publication.
12.18.090 Noncompliance with notice – Hearing.
12.18.100 Chargeable property.
12.18.110 Assessment roll hearing – Notice confirmation – Appeal.
12.18.120 Method of payment of assessments.
12.18.130 Collection of assessments.
12.18.140 Deviations
12.18.150 Violation
12.18.010 Sidewalk Service Required.
It shall be the duty of persons occupying property or the legal property owner, if the property is vacant, to provide sidewalk service for municipal sidewalks that are adjacent to their property. Sidewalk service includes keeping the municipal sidewalks free of snow, ice, winter sand, obstructions, and other objectionable things.
12.18.020 Property owner liable for maintenance and repairs.
Whenever any public right-of-way in the city shall have been improved by the construction of a sidewalk along either side thereof, the duty and expense of the inspection, maintenance, cleaning, repair and renewal of said sidewalk shall be upon the owner of the directly abutting property. All such repairs shall be made after application for and issuance of a proper street excavation permit therefor, as required by law, and all of such work to be duly inspected and approved by the public works department of the city.
12.18.030 Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way.
It is unlawful for the owner and/or any person occupying or having charge of control of any premises abutting upon any public street right-of-way or alley in the city to construct, place, cause, create, maintain, or permit to remain upon any part of said right-of-way any condition, structure, or object dangerous or hazardous to the use of said right-of-way by the members of the general public, including, but not limited to the following conditions:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 16
A. Defective sidewalk surfaces with vertical differences of one inch (1”) or greater or contiguous areas of spalling greater than four (4) square feet. Exposed aggregate in existing sidewalks shall be considered spalling when the surface wear measures one-quarter inch (1/4") or greater in differential elevation;
B. Defects in sidewalks or public ways caused or contributed to by the roots of trees or similar growth or vegetation located on private adjoining property; or
C. Defective conditions caused by tree limbs, foliage, brush or grass on or extending over such public sidewalks or rights-of-way.
12.18.040 Notice to repair hazardous sidewalk.
Whenever the city is notified that a hazardous condition exists, either by the public or through its sidewalk inspection program, the public works director shall cause a notice to be sent to the legal owner of the abutting property. Said notice shall describe the location of the hazardous condition and state that the property owner has 60 days to obtain a public works permit and complete said repairs.
12.18.050 Permit required.
Any person desiring to repair, change or relocate any sidewalk abutting their property shall make application in writing to the department of public works. Such application shall contain, among others, the exact location of such proposed change or relocation, the location of any new sidewalk to be laid and the connections and location of other sidewalks upon such street; no change or relocation of any sidewalk shall be made until the issuance of an appropriate permit therefor.
12.18.060 Resolution and notice of required improvements.
Whenever, in the judgment of the public works director, the public convenience or safety requires that a sidewalk or driveway be constructed, renewed or repaired (hereinafter called the improvement) along either side of any street or other public place therein, and the abutting property owner has not complied with the notice required in EMC.12.18.040, said public works director shall report the fact to the city council and if the council shall deem the improvement necessary or convenient for the public convenience or safety, it shall by resolution order said improvement and shall cause a notice in writing to be served on the owner of each lot, block or parcel of land immediately abutting upon that portion and side of such street or public place where said improvement is to be constructed, requiring that such improvement be constructed in accordance with such resolution.
12.18.070 Notice to describe property, construction.
The resolution and notice provided for in EMC 12.18.060 shall describe each lot, block or parcel of land immediately abutting on that portion of the street or other public place where said improvement is to be constructed, and shall specify the kind
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 17
of improvement required, the method and material to be used in the construction, and shall contain an estimate of the cost thereof. The notice shall state that unless the improvement is constructed in compliance with the notice and within the time therein specified said improvement will be constructed by the city and the cost and expense thereof assessed against the property abutting thereon.
12.18.080 Notification and publication.
If all or any portion of the cost of the improvement is to be assessed against the abutting property owner, or if the abutting property owner is required to construct the improvement, the resolution shall fix the time from and after its passage, and a place, for hearing on the resolution. The resolution shall be published for two consecutive weeks before the time of hearing in the official newspaper of the city and a notice of such hearing shall be given each owner or reputed owner of the abutting property by mailing to the owner or reputed owner of the property as shown on the tax rolls of the county treasurer, at the address shown thereon a notice of the date of hearing, such mailing to be at least 10 days before the date fixed for such hearing. The hearing may be postponed from time to time to a definite date until the hearing is held. At the time of the hearing the council shall hear persons who appear for or against the improvement, and determine whether it will make any changes in the original plan, and what the changes shall be. This action may be taken by motion adopted in the usual manner.
12.18.090 Noncompliance with notice – Hearing.
In case the notice provided for in EMC 12.18.060 shall not be complied with within the time therein specified, the public works director having charge of the maintenance of the streets and public places in the city shall proceed to construct the improvement and shall report to the council an assessment roll showing each lot, block or parcel of land immediately abutting upon said improvement, the name of the owner thereof if known, and the portion of the cost of such improvement to be assessed against each lot, block or parcel of land. The procedures for hearing and confirmation of assessment roll including procedures for notification, publication and appeal shall be identical with those set forth in EMC 12.18.110.
12.18.100 Chargeable property.
For the purpose of this chapter all property having a frontage on the side or margin of any street or other public place shall be deemed abutting property and such property may be chargeable as provided in this chapter, with all the costs of construction of any improvement between the margin of such street or other public place and the roadway lying in front of and adjacent to said property. The term “sidewalk” as used in this act shall be construed to mean and include any and all structures or forms of improvement included in the space between the street margin and roadway boundary and known as the “sidewalk area”.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 18
12.18.110 Assessment roll hearing – Notice confirmation – Appeal.
Where all or any portion of the costs are to be assessed against the abutting property, an assessment roll shall be prepared by the public works director or his or her designee and which shall describe the property assessed, the name of the owner, if known, otherwise stating that the owner is unknown and fixing the amount of the assessment. The assessment roll shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer, and when so filed the council shall by resolution fix the date for hearing thereon and direct the clerk-treasurer to give notice of such hearing and the time and place thereof. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the person whose name appears on the county treasurer’s tax roll as the owner or reputed owner of the property, at the address shown thereon, and shall be published before the date fixed for the hearing for two consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the city. The notice shall be mailed and first publication made at least 10 days before the hearing date. Following the hearing the city council shall by ordinance affirm, modify, or reject or order recasting of the assessment roll. An appeal may be taken to the superior court from the ordinance confirming the assessment roll in the same manner as is provided for appeals from the assessment roll by Chapters 35.43 to 35.54 RCW, inclusive, as now or hereafter amended.
12.18.120 Method of payment of assessments.
The city council shall by resolution provide whether the full amount of the assessment shall be paid in one payment or whether it may be paid in installments and shall prescribe the time and amount of such payments; and if more than one payment is provided for the city council may by resolution provide for interest on unpaid installments and fix the rate thereof.
12.18.130 Collection of assessments.
The assessment roll as affirmed or modified by the city council shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer for collection, and the amount thereof including interest, if any, shall become a lien against the property described therein from the date of such filing. Whenever any payment on any assessment or installment is delinquent and unpaid for a period of 30 days or more the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner and with the same effect as is provided by Chapters 35.43 to 35.54 RCW, inclusive, as now or hereafter amended.
12.18.140 Deviations.
The city council may grant a deviation to the standards set forth in this chapter upon the findings that the granting of a deviation is in the best interest and welfare of the community.
12.18.150 Violations.
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be a civil violation and shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.04 EMC. (Ord 13-09, 2013)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 19
Chapter 12.20
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE BY TELECOMMUNICATION, CABLE PROVIDERS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATORS
Sections:
12.20.010 Findings
12.20.020 Purpose
12.20.030 Definitions
12.20.040 Administration
12.20.050 Existing Licenses or Franchises
12.20.060 Existing Telecommunications Carriers or Operators Occupying the Rights-of-way without a License or Franchise
12.20.070 Registration Required
12.20.080 License or Franchise Application
12.20.090 Determination by City
12.20.100 Conditions
12.20.110 Applicability to Use of Rights-of-way
12.20.120 Amendment of Grant
12.20.130 Renewal of Grant
12.20.140 Revocation or Termination of Grant
12.20.150 Grantee Insurance and Bond
12.20.160 Release, Indemnity, and Hold Harmless
12.20.170 Applicability of Fees and Compensation
12.20.180 Penalties
12.20.190 Other Remedies
12.20.200 Severability
12.20.210 Interpretation of License and Franchise Terms
12.20.010 Findings.
A. Pursuant to provisions of the Revised Code of Washington, the Federal Communications Act of 1982 and 1996, and other lawful authority, the City has the authority to regulate the use of its streets and other City property.
B. The City Council finds that an increasing number of telecommunications carriers, open video system operators and cable operators have requested or may request access to and the use of rights-of-way and public property; and to the extent permitted by law, the City finds it is in the public interest to require the obtaining of business registration, licenses, franchises, cable franchises and leases from the persons or entities that use public property, easements and rights-of-way.
C. To ensure orderly and reasonable access to the rights-of-way and public
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 20
property for telecommunications carriers and cable operators while protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the City Council determines that it needs to include regulations and standards for the use of such property.
12.20.020 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to:
A. Permit and manage reasonable, fair, and equitable access to the public rights-of-way of the City for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
B. Establish predictable, enforceable, clear and nondiscriminatory local regulations, guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of Telecommunications Carriers, Open Video System Providers and Cable Operators;
C. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the City;
D. Assure that the City's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public rights-of-way and/or public property are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
E. Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
F. Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.
G. To reasonably and fairly compensate the City for use of and disruption to right-of-way.
12.20.030 Definitions. Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:
A. “Affiliate” means a Person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another Person.
B. “Business Registration” means a requirement of all Telecommunications and Cable Providers who are not otherwise required to license or franchise with the City.
C. “Cable Acts” means the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by portions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 21
1996, and as hereafter amended.
D. “Cable Facilities” see “Facilities”
E. “Cable Operator” shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts.
F. “Cable Service” shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts.
G. “City” means City of Ephrata.
H. “City Council” means the Ephrata City Council.
I. “City Manager” means the office of the Ephrata City Manager or designee.
J. “Development Standards” are the City’s Community Development Standards.
K. “Director” means the City’s Public Works Director or designee.
L. “Excess Capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhold or other utility facility within the right-of-way that is or will be available for use for additional Telecommunications or Cable Facilities.
M. “Facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics, cables, wires, plant, and other appurtenances and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way of the City and used or to be used for the purpose of providing Utility Services or transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or offering Telecommunications Services.
N. “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, Services and Cable Operators on a national level.
O. “Franchise” an agreement required with any Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate Facilities in rights-of-way and to also provide Telecommunications or Cable Services to persons or areas in the City.
P. “Grantee” means Telecommunications Carriers and Cable Operators granted rights and bound by obligations as more fully described herein.
Q. “License” is an agreement with any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate Telecommunications Facilities in rights-of-way and to also provide Telecommunications Services exclusively to persons and areas outside the City.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 22
R. “Open Video System” means those systems defined and regulated as Open Video Systems by the Federal Communications Commission, pursuant to Section 653 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. '573.
S. “Ordinance” means this ordinance, Chapter 12.20 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
T. “Overhead Facilities” means Telecommunications and/or Cable Facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
U. “Person” means corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, other entities and individuals.
V. “Rights-of-Way” includes the surface of and space above and below any real property in the City in which the City has any interest whether in fee, easements, or otherwise, or interest as a trustee for the public, as they now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all public streets, highways, avenues, roads, reservoirs, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, parks, trails, or any other public place, area or property under the control of the City.
W. “Service Connection” means a connection made to a Telecommunications Facility and/or Cable Facility for the purpose of providing Telecommunications or Cable Services.
X. “State” means the State of Washington.
Y. “Surplus Space” means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission, to allow its use by a Telecommunications Carrier for a pole attachment.
Z. “Telecommunications Carrier” for purposes of this Chapter includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment, structures, or property within the City, used or to be used for the purpose of offering Telecommunications Service. Provided, however, this does not include lessees that solely lease bandwidth (and do not own Telecommunications Facilities within the City of Ephrata).
AA. “Telecommunications Facilities” see “Facilities”
BB. “Telecommunications Service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic or video programming information or service(s) between or among
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 23
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, provided, however, for the purposes of this Chapter, Cable Service shall not be considered a telecommunications service.
CC. “Underground Facilities” means Telecommunications and/or Cable Facilities located under the surface of the ground, alone or in combination, direct buried or in utility tunnels or conduits, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
DD. “Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission” or “WUTC” means the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized under Title 80 of the Revised Code of Washington to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, Services and Telecommunications Providers in the State of Washington to the extent prescribed by law.
EE. “Work” means all construction, alteration, enlargement, improvement, repair, and/or demolition of a Facility which has not been previously authorized by franchise, lease, or permit.
12.20.040 Administration. The City Manager is authorized to administer this Chapter and to establish further rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this Chapter.
12.20.050 Existing Licenses or Telecommunications or Cable Franchises. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, and to the extent provided by law, this Chapter shall have no effect on any license or telecommunications or cable franchise existing as of the date of adoption of this Chapter until the expiration of said license, franchise or cable franchise; or an amendment to an unexpired license, franchise or cable franchise, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. The City does not recognize the existence of any Telecommunications Carrier which is exempt from the obligation to acquire a franchise or license from the City.
12.20.060 Existing Telecommunications Carriers and/or Cable Operators Occupying the Rights-of-way without a License or Franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of this Chapter shall apply to any Telecommunications Carrier, Open Video System Operator or Cable Operator who currently occupies rights-of-way without a license, franchise, cable franchise or other agreement with the City. Any such Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator shall register or apply for a license, telecommunication franchise or cable franchise as provided by this Chapter within 120 days of the effective date of this Chapter. This Chapter shall not apply to lessees that solely lease bandwidth (and do not own Telecommunications Facilities within the City) so long as the lessor has complied with the requirements of this Chapter.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 24
12.20.070 Registration Required.
A. Business Registration. All Telecommunications Carriers or Cable Operators having Facilities within the City that offer or provide Telecommunications, Open Video or Cable Service within the City who are not otherwise required to acquire a license or franchise, shall register with the City as set forth in Chapter 5.60 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
B. Exception to Registration. A person that provides Telecommunications or Cable Services solely to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or between closely located buildings under common ownership or control, provided that such person does not use or occupy any rights-of-way of the City or other ways within the City, is excepted from the registration requirements pursuant to this Chapter.
12.20.080 License or Franchise Application. To the extent permitted by law, any Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator who currently occupies or desires in the future to occupy any rights-of-way with any Facilities for the purpose of providing Telecommunications or Cable Services shall file an application on a form provided by the City Manager for one or more of the following:
A. License. Required if the Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator provides or intends to provide services exclusively to persons or areas outside the City.
B. Telecommunications Franchise. Required if the Telecommunications Carrier provides or intends to provide service to any person or area within the City.
C. Cable Franchise. Required if the Cable Operator provides or intends to provide cable services to any person or area in the City. Services similar to cable service, such as Open Video Systems, shall also be subject to this Chapter, and subject to substantially similar terms and conditions as those contained in franchise agreement(s) issued to Cable Operator(s) in the City with respect to franchise fee obligations, public, educational, and governmental access programming obligations, and all other franchise obligations to the extent provided by law.
12.20.090 Determination by the City. Within 120 days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the City Council shall make a determination on behalf of the City granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for denial. The following criteria shall apply when determining whether to grant or deny the application:
A. The applicant must have current registration issued by the FCC and WUTC.
B. The applicant must demonstrate the willingness and ability to mitigate and/or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 25
repair damage or disruption, if any, to public or private facilities, improvements, services, travel or landscaping if the application is granted.
C. The grant to use the rights-of-way will serve the community interest.
D. Applicable Federal, State and local laws, regulations, rules and policies will be met.
12.20.100 Conditions. The following conditions apply to each license or franchise granted hereunder.
A. Area and Location. As part of the construction permitting process for specific routes requested within each license or telecommunications or cable franchise, a determination will be made whether sufficient capacity is available in the rights-of-way. Alternate routes or locations for the proposed facilities may be considered if feasible.
B. License Route. A license granted hereunder shall be limited to a grant of specific rights-of-way and defined portions thereof, as may be indicated in the license agreement.
C. Franchise Territory. A telecommunications or cable franchise granted hereunder shall encompass all territory within the corporate limits.
D. Facilities Maps. Upon request by the City Manager or the Manager=s designee, the Grantee shall provide the City with maps in a format agreed to by the Grantee and the City, identifying the location of all Telecommunications and Cable Facilities within the rights-of-way except individual Service Connections.
E. Leased Capacity. A grantee shall have the right to offer or provide excess conduit capacity to another Telecommunications or Cable Provider with prior City notification, provided that:
1. Grantee shall furnish the City sixty (60) days advance written notice of any such proposed lease or agreement;
2. The proposed lessee shall comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter prior to providing Telecommunications or Cable Service.
F. Consistency within class. All licenses and telecommunications and cable franchises granted pursuant to this Chapter shall contain substantially similar terms which, taken as a whole and considering relevant characteristics of applicants, are substantially consistent with those required of other licensees and telecommunications and cable franchisees.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 26
G. Limitations.
1. No grant shall convey any right, title or interest in rights-of-way but shall be deemed a license or franchise only to use and occupy the rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
2. No grant shall authorize or excuse a licensee or franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, permits or other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use rights-of-way.
3. No grant shall expressly or implicitly authorize a licensee or franchisee to provide service to, or install a system on private property without owner consent, or to use publicly or privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners and to the extent provided by law.
4. No grant shall confer any exclusive right, privilege or license to occupy or use the rights-of-way for delivery of Telecommunications or Cable Services or for any other purposes.
5. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the City's power of eminent domain.
H. Term. Unless otherwise specified in a license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise agreement, the term shall be for no more than ten (10) years.
12.20.110 Applicability to Use of Rights-of-way. The terms of this Chapter shall apply to all Grantees.
A. General Duties.
1. All Grantees, before commencing any construction in the rights-of-way, shall acquire appropriate permits and comply with all requirements of the Ephrata Municipal Code and the City of Ephrata Development Guidelines. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and the Ephrata Development Guidelines, the Ephrata Development Guidelines shall control.
2. All Grantees shall have no ownership rights in rights-of-way, even though they may be granted a license, franchise or cable franchise to construct or operate their facilities.
3. Nothing herein shall limit or otherwise affect the authority of the City to require a lease for any use, occupation, construction, installation, maintenance or location upon any property owned in fee by the City.
B. Physical Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise required in current or future
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 27
City ordinances regarding underground construction requirements, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with hierarchy of the following terms and conditions:
1. Telecommunications and Cable Facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility and permission can be obtained reasonably from the installer of such duct or conduit.
2. Whenever one or more existing Telephone, Electric Utilities, Cable Systems or Telecommunications Facilities are located underground within rights-of-way, a licensee or franchisee shall occupy the same trench where reasonable and practical.
3. When sufficient capacity is not available under 1 or 2 above, the Telecommunications or Cable Facility shall be installed underground within the rights-of-way.
4. A franchisee or licensee with written authorization to install overhead facilities shall install its Telecommunications or Cable Facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
5. When a franchisee or licensee has been granted authority to install overhead facilities as in Section 4 above and the City directs such facilities to be relocated to allow construction or reconstruction within the right-of-way, a licensee or franchisee that occupies the same rights-of-way shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground at its expense.
C. Conduit Occupancy. In furtherance of the public purpose of reduction of rights-of-way excavation, it is the goal of the City to encourage both the shared occupancy of underground conduit as well as the construction, whenever possible, of excess conduit capacity for occupancy of future rights-of-way occupants.
1. City Use. At the option of the City, whenever new conduit is laid by the licensee or franchisee, the City shall be provided access to the open trench or bore hole and space shall be made available for purposes of installing one two-inch conduit for city use. There shall be no cost to the City associated with the trenching, backfilling, boring or surface restoration involved with these activities. While not an inclusive list, such option will be exercised primarily on arterial streets or near environmentally sensitive areas.
2. Use by Others. When the City reasonably determines such construction is in an area in which another Telecommunications or Cable Provider may
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 28
also construct Telecommunications or Cable Facilities in the future, the City may require the franchisee or licensee to construct or install excess conduit capacity in the rights-of-way, provided the expense of such excess conduit capacity shall be borne by the City or other such person who contracts with the City to bear the expense (calculated as the difference between what Grantee would have paid for the construction of its conduit and the additional cost only of the excess conduit. Grantee may manage the excess conduit itself and be permitted to charge a reasonable market lease rate for occupancy of the additional conduit space, provided such lease revenues shall be first applied to reimburse the City for its actual contribution to the construction of the excess conduit plus interest compounded at the Washington State Local Government Investment Pool rate during the time in question.
D. Occupancy of City Owned Conduit. In furtherance of the same objectives of C, above, if the City owns conduit in the path of Grantee's proposed Facilities, and provided it is technologically feasible for Grantee to occupy the conduit owned by the City, Grantee shall be required to occupy the conduit owned by the City in order to reduce the necessity to excavate the rights-of-way. Grantee shall pay to the City a reasonable fee for such occupancy.
E. Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City, a Grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, place underground, change or alter the position of any Telecommunications or Cable Facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Director shall have determined that such removal, relocation, undergrounding, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
1. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvement in or upon the rights-of-way;
2. The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the rights-of-way.
F. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.
1. A telecommunications or cable facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
a. Upon expiration or termination of the Grantee's license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise unless otherwise provided by law.
b. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way.
c. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 29
issuance of a required encroachment or utility permit, license, telecommunications franchise, or cable franchise.
d. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the Grantee's license, franchise or cable franchise.
e. To the extent permitted by law, any such other reasonable circumstances affecting public health, safety and welfare deemed necessary by the City Manager.
2. The City Manager may exercise discretion to allow an unauthorized facility to come into compliance with this chapter upon written request of the unauthorized Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator made within thirty (30) days after said Carrier or Operator is notified that the facility is unauthorized pursuant to this chapter. Notice shall be given in accordance with EMC 12.20.130. The City Manager shall make the determination of whether to allow said Carrier or Operator to cure by using the standards of review set forth in EMC 12.20.130.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the City Manager may, if deemed appropriate, allow a Grantee or other person who may own, control or maintain a Telecommunications or Cable Facilities within the rights-of-way of City to abandon such facilities in place. No facilities of any type may be abandoned in place without the express written consent of the City Manager. Any plan for abandonment or removal of such facilities must be first approved by the City Manager and all necessary permits must be obtained prior to commencement of such work. Upon permanent abandonment of any Telecommunications or Cable Facilities of such persons in place, the facilities shall become the property of the City, and such persons shall submit to the City Manager an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring ownership of such facilities to the City. The provisions of this Section shall survive the expiration, revocation or termination of any license, franchise or cable franchise granted under this Chapter.
G. Noncomplying Work. Upon order of an authorized representative of the City, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed.
12.20.120 Amendment of Grant.
A. Adding or modifying services. Additions or modifications to initial route(s) identified for licenses which are determined to be significant by the Director will require a new license.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 30
B. Relocation of services. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its Telecommunications or Cable Facilities in rights-of-way not included in a previously granted license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise, the City shall grant a license or franchise amendment without further application.
C. Assignments or Transfers. All assignees or transferees of interest in a License, Franchise, or Cable Franchise of any Telecommunications Carrier or Cable Operator must comply with the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the license, telecommunications franchise, or cable franchise agreement, the requirements of the FCC, and the requirements of the WUTC. If said assignee or transferee fails to comply with such requirements, the license, telecommunications franchise, or cable franchise assigned or transferred is subject to revocation.
12.20.130 Renewal of Grant.
A. Renewal application. A licensee or franchisee that desires to renew its license or franchise hereunder shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 120 days before expiration of the current license or franchise, file an application with the City for renewal of its license or franchise.
B. Renewal Determination. Within 90 days after receiving an application hereunder, the City Manager shall make a determination on behalf of the City granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal. The criteria enumerated in this Chapter shall apply when determining whether to grant or deny the application, and the City may further consider the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the license or franchise agreement.
C. Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No license or franchise shall be renewed until any on-going violations or defaults in the licensee's or franchisee's performance of the license or franchise agreement, of the requirements of this Chapter, and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee or franchisee has been approved by the City Manager. Failure to comply with the terms of an approved plan shall be grounds for non-renewal or revocation of the license or franchise.
12.20.140 Revocation or Termination of Grant. A license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise granted by the City to use or occupy rights-of-way may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of EMC Sections 12.20.100F, 12.20.110C, 12.20.120C, or for any of the following reasons:
1. Construction or operation in the City without a franchise or permit.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 31
2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
3. Unauthorized transfer of control of the Person subject to this chapter.
4. Unauthorized assignment of a franchise or permit.
5. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of all of a franchisee's or permittee's assets, or a substantial interest therein.
6. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a Person in any application upon which the City relies in making any decision herein.
7. Abandonment of Facilities in the public ways.
8. Failure to relocate or remove Facilities as required in this chapter.
9. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due.
10. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the franchisee or permittee.
11. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
12. Violation of the material terms of a permit or franchise agreement.
A. Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the City Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, written notice shall be given of the apparent violation or noncompliance, including a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance. The Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to furnish evidence:
1. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
2. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
3. That it would be in the public interest to impose some monetary damages, penalty or sanction less than revocation.
B. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If persuaded that the Grantee has violated or failed to comply with a material provision of this Chapter or of a license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise or applicable codes, statutes, or rules and regulations, the City Manager shall make a preliminary determination whether to revoke the license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise, and issue a written order, or to impose monetary damages, a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 32
penalty, or other such lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
1. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
2. Whether substantial harm resulted.
3.Whether the violation was intentional.
4. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
5. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
6. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
C. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the granting or denying of a telecommunications license, telecommunications franchise or cable franchise or the renewal thereof pursuant to this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council as follows:
1. All appeals filed pursuant to this Section must be filed in writing with the City Manager within fifteen (15) working days of the date of the decision appealed from;
2. All appeals filed pursuant to this Section shall specify the error of law or fact, or new evidence that was not reasonably available at the time of the City Manager's decision, which shall constitute the basis of the appeal;
3. Upon receipt of a timely written notice of appeal, the City Manager shall advise the City Council of the pendency and schedule a date for a hearing.
12.20.150 Grantee Insurance, Bond and Security Fund. Each Grantee shall secure and maintain insurance and bond as set forth below:
A. Insurance required.
Commercial General Liability Insurance, and, if necessary, Umbrella Liability Insurance, which will cover bodily injury, property damage, and any other exposure which be reasonably identified as potentially arising from the Grantee's activities within the rights-of-way. The limit of liability shall not be less than two million dollars ($2,000,000) for each occurrence. The City, its elected and appointed officers, officials, employees, agents, and representatives shall be named as additional insured with respect to activities occurring within its rights-
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 33
of-way. Coverage shall be comprehensive with respect to the Grantee's activities within the rights-of-way and shall include completed operations, explosions, collapse, and underground hazards. Such insurance shall name the City as additional insured and provide a certificate of insurance with a 45-day cancellation notice.
B. Bond required.
The grantee or the contractor for the grantee shall post with the city a bond with surety qualified to do a bonding business in this state, a cash deposit or an assigned savings account or other security acceptable to the city in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the cost of the work as estimated by the Director or in an amount as set forth in the franchise agreement. Such bond, deposit or other security shall be conditioned upon the grantee or its contractor performing the work pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, including the restoration and/or replacement of the street, sidewalk, or other rights-of-way within the time specified by the Director. Such bond, deposit or other security shall be approved by the City Attorney before being accepted by the City.
Security fund.
A. The City reserves the right to require of any Person subject to this chapter that such Person deposit into a bank account, established by the City, and maintain for such term as is reasonable under the circumstances with interest running to such Person, a sum of money in an amount reasonably determined by the City as security for the faithful performance by such Person of all the provisions of its franchise or permit, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the City, and for the payment of any claims, liens and taxes due the City or liquidated damages imposed by the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of such Person's system. Within 30 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the City from the security fund pursuant to the foregoing, such Person shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount in the account at the time of withdrawal.
B. If such Person fails after 10 days' notice to pay the City any delinquent fees, taxes or other amounts due and unpaid; or, fails to repay to the City, after such 10 days' notice, any damages, costs or expenses which the City shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of such Person; or fails after 45 days' notice of such failure by the City to comply with any provision of its franchise or permit which the City reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the City may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the City shall notify such Person of the amount and date thereof.
C. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 34
property of the City in the event that a franchise or permit is canceled by reason of the default of the Person subject to this chapter or revoked for cause. Such Person, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund or portion thereof which remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the permit or franchise, or upon termination of the permit or franchise at an earlier date, upon payment of all sums then due to the City.
12.20.160 Release, Indemnity, and Hold Harmless.
A. Additional requirements. In addition to and distinct from the insurance requirements of this Chapter, Grantee releases and shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless City from any and all claims, losses, costs, liabilities, damages, and expenses (except those damages caused solely by the negligence of the City), including, but not limited to, those of the Grantee's lessees, and also including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees arising out of or in connection with the Telecommunications or Cable Facilities, the performance of any work, the operation of any Telecommunications or Cable Facilities, or the Grantee's system, or the acts or omissions of the Grantee or any of its suppliers or contractors of any tier, or anyone acting on the Grantee's behalf in connection with said installation of Telecommunications or Cable Facilities, performance of work, or operation of Telecommunications or Cable Facilities or Grantee's system.
B. Inclusions. Such indemnity, protection, and hold harmless shall include any demand, claim, suit, or judgement for damages to property or injury to or death of persons, including officers, agents, and employees of any person including payment made under or in connection with any Worker's Compensation Law or under any plan for employees' disability and death benefits, which may arise out of or be caused or contributed to directly or indirectly by the erection, maintenance, presence, operation, use, or removal of Grantee's Telecommunication, Open Video System or Cable Facilities, including any claims or demands of customers of the Grantee with respect thereto.
C. Indemnification. A Person subject to this chapter shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, and in its capacity as such, the officers and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage or otherwise (except those arising wholly from negligence on the part of the City or its employees) (a) for actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of such Person or its officers, agents, employees, or contractors or to which such Person or its officers', agents', employees' or contractors' acts or omissions in any way contribute, and whether or not such acts or omissions were authorized or contemplated by the permit or franchise or applicable law; (b) arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 35
for such Person's invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation of infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; and/or (c) arising out of or alleged to arise out of such Person's failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or applicable policy of the United States, State of Washington or any local agency applicable to such Person in its business. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the City, its officers, or its employees from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at such parties' expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve a Person subject to this chapter from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against the City, its officers, or its employees.
D. Application. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, the foregoing release, indemnity and hold harmless provisions shall apply to and be for the benefit of the City.
E. Successors and assigns. All provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the successors and assigns of the Grantee.
12.20.170 Applicability of fees and compensation.
A. Fees.
The fees to be paid to the city at the time of application for registration, license, or franchise or construction permits shall be established by resolution of the City Council. All fees paid shall be nonrefundable. Fees may include business registration, application, rights-of-way compensation, utility permit and inspection, and other regulatory fees.
B. Compensation to City.
Each license granted hereunder is subject to the City's right, to the extent permitted by law, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for use of property pursuant to the license or franchise, provided nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a licensee or franchisee from agreeing upon the compensation to be paid or services to be provided. In the absence of such an agreement, such compensation shall be in an amount reasonably established by the City Council. Provided that the compensation required from any telecommunications provider or carrier engaged in the telephone business as defined in RCW 82.04.065 shall be consistent with RCW 35.21.860.
C. Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.
The fees, charges, and fines provided for in this Chapter and any compensation charged and paid for the rights-of-way provided herein, whether fiduciary or in-kind, are separate from, and additional to, any and all Federal, State, local, and City taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 - 36
provider, its customers, or subscribers or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of telecommunications services.
12.20.180 Penalties. Any person found violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction. Upon a judicial determination the infraction was committed by any person violating any provision of this Chapter such person shall be subject to a penalty of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus assessments and penalties. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
12.20.190 Other Remedies. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any other remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of Chapter 12.20 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the City may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices and abate any conditions that constitute or will constitute a violation of this Chapter.
12.20.200 Severability.
A. Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Chapter, or its application to any Person is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
B. Conflict. If any provision of this Chapter is held to be in conflict with any statutory provision of the State of Washington or applicable Federal law, said provision which may conflict therewith shall be deemed inoperative and null and void insofar as it may be in conflict therewith, and shall be deemed modified to conform to such statutory provision.
12.20.210 Interpretation of License or Franchise Terms.
A. Conflict. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and a license or franchise, the provisions of the license or franchise shall control.
B. Construction. The provisions of this Chapter and a license or franchise will be liberally construed in accordance with generally accepted rules of construction to promote the public interest.
C. Consistency. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
(Ord. 01-09, 2001)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 1
Title 13
WATER AND SEWERS
Chapters:
13.04 Water System
13.08 Sewer System
13.16 Water System--Backflow Protection and Cross-connections
13.20 Reclaimed Water
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 2
Chapter 13.04
WATER SYSTEM
Sections:
13.04.005 Connection mandatory.
13.04.007 Application for service.
13.04.010 Installation charges.
13.04.020 Repair of service equipment.
13.04.030 Connection compliance with chapter required.
13.04.032 Main Connection Charges - General.
13.04.034 Main Connection charges - Service by Reservoir Five.
13.04.040 Permission required for service to additional premises.
13.04.050 Double charge for unauthorized service.
13.04.060 Service connection removal.
13.04.070 Service reinstallation after discontinuance.
13.04.080 Shutoff by city.
13.04.090 Meters required.
13.04.100 Meter location.
13.04.110 Water rate schedule.
13.04.112 Connection Fee.
13.04.130 Right of entry.
13.04.140 Shutoff for refusing entry.
13.04.150 Meter test for accuracy.
13.04.160 Interference with city equipment prohibited.
13.04.165 Service Outside City Limits
13.04.168 Contract for Service Outside City Limits
13.04.170 Permission required for connection.
13.04.180 Construction water rate.
13.04.185 Water leaks and meter failures
13.04.190 Shutoff for delinquent charges.
13.04.200 Unpaid charges--Lien conditions.
13.04.210 Violation--Penalty.
13.04.005 Connection mandatory. The City of Ephrata municipal water system is the water system for the city of Ephrata and connection to the system for water service is mandatory. No other purveyor of water service, potable or otherwise, shall be permitted to provide water service within the city. The City may allow certain government or public institutions to provide irrigation service to publicly owned lands, provided:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 3
a. There is no interconnection between the City’s water system and the new irrigation system;
b. That the new irrigation system is regularly available for inspection by Ephrata Public Works;
c. That the City determines the new irrigation system is not detrimental to the City’s existing water system.
(Ord. 90-10, 1990, Ord 94-11, 1994, Ord. 96-40, 1996, Ord. 06-31, 2006).
13.04.007 Application for service.
(a) It is the intent of the city that all utility deliveries, whether water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall be deliveries of services and/or utilities to the property served. All such delivery of utilities and/or services shall be a claim against the property and a claim against the owner of that property served/or furnished utilities and/or services. It shall be the responsibility of each property owner served by city utilities to determine the extent of utility services and deliveries being made and/or furnished to the owner's property. It shall be the responsibility the property owner to pay all claims, charges, penalties and/or costs imposed by the city for the furnishing and/or delivery of utilities and/or services to the owner's property. The property owner's responsibility shall exist independent of any claim of lien the city may have or make pursuant to any statute, rule or regulation. The fact the owner has directed or allowed the billings for utilities furnished and/or services delivered to the owner's property to be delivered to a tenant or other third person does not in any way reduce or extinguish the property owner's responsibility for water, sewer and/or garbage billings, charges, costs or penalties imposed by the city. All delinquent charges for water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by law.
(b) All applications for residential water service shall be made by the property owner of the property to be delivered water service, and responsibility for billing payment shall be borne by the property owner. All charges for water service will be sent directly to the property address unless the property owner directs otherwise. No charge will be made for meter reading for closing accounts, except as provided in this chapter.
(c) Applications for industrial and commercial water service may be by the property owner, lessee or other consumer; provided, however, where multiple industrial or commercial establishments are tenants in a single building and are served by a common water meter, applications for water service shall be made by the property owner.
(d) Upon a failure to pay the charges for water service, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the real property furnished the service as provided by law. (Ord. 90-11, 1990; Ord. 18-11, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 4
(e) All utility accounts are due and payable when received. All utility accounts shall become past due by the twentieth (20th) day after they are issued. If any portion of a utility billing in arrears remains unpaid following the tenth (10th) day after the month it is issued, a late fee as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be added to said utility billing. For the purposes of this section “arrears” shall be 30 days or more delinquent. When received all utility billings shall be applied to the utility accounts servicing the property in question in this order: garbage, sewer and water.
(Ord. 99-6, 1999, Ord. 00-17, 2000; Ord 12-09, 2012)
13.04.010 Installation.
(a) All services shall be installed by a licensed contractor with approval of the Water Distribution Manager/Building Official and be built to the 2005 Community Street and Utility Standards at the expense of the property owner. (Ord. 96-30, 1996)
(b) Upon acceptance of service connection by the city for the installed service, said service shall be the property of the city. The property owner shall be responsible for connection and maintenance from the service to its use.
(c) Where street or alley patching is required for the installation of water service, the property owner shall:
(1) Provide 3" depth asphalt patch within 30 days of completion of service or approved time frame as allowed by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 94-11, 1994, Ord 96-30, 1996, Ord 97-26, 1997, Ord. 06-31, 2006)
13.04.020 Repair of service equipment. The water pipes, connections and other apparatus within the premises to be delivered water service must be kept in good repair and protected from freezing at the expense of the owner, who will be responsible for all damages resulting from leaks or breaks; but no person, except under direction of the city, shall be allowed to dig into any street or sidewalk for the purpose of laying, moving or repairing any service. (Ord. 1110 §4, 1984: Ord. 716 §2, 1965)
13.04.030 Connection compliance with chapter required. The water distribution manager shall specify how connections shall be made until all rules contained in this chapter for the same shall have been complied with. ( Ord. 716, 1963, Ord. 96-30, 1996).
13.04.032 Main Connection Charges - General.
(a) There shall be two types of water utilities referred to:
(1) Sub-divider (Developer) - installed water utilities; or
(2) Publicly funded installed water utilities. These shall be maintained and repaired by the city. All costs and expense of connecting the service line to the water main and installing the meter shall be borne by the property owner requesting water services.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 5
(b) Where water utilities have been installed at the expense of the sub-divider or private owners through or adjacent to property not within the boundaries of the subdivision for which water was required, the sub-divider may request to enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city as provided by state law. If such an agreement is entered into, the city shall not permit other property owners to connect to that sub-divider installed main without payment of the compensation set forth in that agreement for the term of that agreement.
(c) Where water utilities have been installed with public funds through or adjacent to platted areas, the property through which the water mains are extended or which are adjacent thereto shall be permitted a connection to the city main only after payment has been made to the city in accordance with the schedules established in this chapter.
(d) Where water utilities have been installed with public funds through or adjacent to unplatted areas, the platter of those unplatted areas shall be required, as part of the platting procedure, to reimburse the city for that portion of the water main through or adjacent to the property to be platted. That reimbursement shall be in accordance with the schedules established in this chapter.
(Ord. 98-1, 1998)
13.04.034 Main Connection Charges - Service by Reservoir Five. Connections to water mains serviced by Reservoir Five between contours 1680' through 1450' in Section 9, Township 21, Range 26 EWM and any adjoining property served from that reservoir shall pay an additional connection charge of two thousand eight hundred twenty three dollars and ninety-four cents ($2,823.94) for each residential lot to be subdivided or served by a water connection. Non-residential lots shall be charged a rate based on equivalent residential units (ERU) of water consumption by the use to be located on the property; provided, that in no event shall the lot be charged less than one ERU.
(Ord. 98-1, 1998, Ord 01-05, 2001)
13.04.040 Permission required for service to additional premises. It is unlawful for any person whose premises are supplied with water to furnish water to additional premises unless such person first makes application in writing to do so and permission is granted by the city council. (Ord. 716 §4, 1965)
13.04.050 Double charge for unauthorized service. When additional premises are connected or furnished with water without the application prescribed in Section 13.03.040, such premises may be charged at double the rate for the time they are in use, and service may be shut off by the City and a charge as established in Chapter 3.35 for shutting off and turning on the service. In the event that water is turned off as provided in this section the same shall not be turned on again until after all charges against the premisses have been paid in full. (Ord. 96-30, 1996; Ord 12-09, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 6
13.04.060 Service connection removal. When it is desired by the property owner to change the location of the old service connection a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making application and paying for a new tap at the actual cost involved. Where a service connection to any premises is abandoned for twelve months, or if the service is no longer in use, or if the City has not received any payment for twelve consecutive months, the city may shut off and remove the service connection, after which, should a service connection be required to the premises, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making application and paying for a new tap at the actual cost involved. (Ord. 1110 §6, 1984: Ord. 716 §6, 1965. Ord. 99-04; Ord. 15-04, 2015)
Until such time as a water service connection is removed either by owner request or city action on an abandoned connection, the property shall incur a minimum connection charge each month as set forth in section 110. To qualify for the minimum connection charge, the property owner must request discontinuance of service in writing to the City Clerk. (Ord. 99-04)
13.04.070 Service reinstallation after discontinuance. When service has been discontinued from any premises, upon the application of the owner thereof, or for nonpayment of water charges, or for any other causes, it is unlawful for any person to again connect the premises with water until all arrearage for the premises have been paid, and application made for reinstallation of service, and other cause or causes corrected to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 1110 §7, 1984: Ord. 716 §7, 1965)
13.04.080 Shut off by city. The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, emergencies or any other reason, and the city shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure; the breaking of any pipes or fixtures, stoppages or interruption of water supply or any other damage, resulting from the shutting off of the water. (Ord. 716 §8, 1965)
13.04.090 Meters required. All water shall be furnished through meters which may be sealed by the water department personnel. (Ord. 716 §9, 1965)
13.04.100 Meter location. Whenever it is possible and practicable, all meters shall be installed in the parking strip of the property served and no branch pipe shall be taken off the service between the meter and the street. (Ord. 716 §10, 1965)
13.04.110 Water rate schedule.
A. The charge for basic and additional water use per month shall be as follows:
1. Residential Class: As Established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 12-09, 2012)
2. Multi-Family Class: As Established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 12-09, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 7
3. Commercial Class: See Section C & D: As Established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 12-09, 2012)
4. Irrigation Class: As Established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 12-09, 2012)
a) To be charged the rate assessed in this class, the customer shall install a separate meter to determine the amount of water actually being used for irrigation purposes.
b) In the event that a temporary water shortage exists as determined by the City Public Works Department, the city may temporarily interrupt delivery of water for irrigation purposes under this subsection. (Ord. 96-30, 1996).
5. Industrial Water Rates: As Established in Chapter 3.35 (Ord 12-09, 2012)
To receive the rates listed within this section, both the following two conditions must be fulfilled:
1) The structure is located within one of the following zones: I-1, I-2, AA, AC, AF, AI-1, AI-2, AU
2) The structure’s operations must be predominately industrial in nature; activities that are primarily the processing of materials or the manufacture, assembly, service, repair, storage, packaging, warehousing, or transportation of materials, goods or equipment generally for an external market.
6. Reclaimed Water Class: As Established in Chapter 3.35
(Ord. 96-30, 1996, 97-2, 1997, Ord. 97-26, 1997, Ord. 02-06, 2002, Ord 06-26, Ord. 07-07; Ord 08-08, 2008; Ord. 08-10, 2008; Ord 11-21, 2011; Ord 12-09, 2012)
B. Minimum charge for water connection without active utility service, including garden and irrigation meters, shall be charged an inactive fee as established in Chapter 3.35.
(Ord. 99-4, 1999; Ord 12-09, 2012)
C. Each business establishment in a building served by an individual or a common meter shall pay the minimum charge, plus excess.
(Ord. 97-26, 1997)
D. Each motel or hotel shall pay the minimum monthly charge, plus an additional fee for each hotel or motel room as established in Chapter 3.35. (Ord 97-2, 1997, Ord. 97-26, 1997, Ord 02-06, 2002; Ord 12-09, 2012)
13.04.112 Connection Fee.
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any portion of the water system or appurtenance thereof without first making application and receiving written permission from the City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 8
Public Works office. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
(b) The applicant for the plumbing permit shall notify the building official when the building water is ready for inspection and connection to the public water system. The connection shall be made under supervision of the city building official or his representative.
(c) Any person found to have violated any provision of this section shall be subject to a C-5 penalty. (Ord 12-09, 2012)
(d) Potable Water meters, 2” and less, shall be provided and installed by city personnel. All meters for reclaimed water shall be provided and installed by owner. (Ord 11-17, 2011)
(e) Water meters larger than 2" shall be provided and installed by owner.
(f) A connection fee as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be remitted with a permit application.
(Ord. 96-30, 1996: Ord. 96-30, 1996, Ord. 97-26, 1997, Ord. 06-31, 2006, Ord. 08-08, 2008; Ord. 11-17, 2011; Ord 12-09, 2012)
(g) Water Connection Fee Waiver for Low-Income Housing.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, “low-income housing” is defined as follows: Individuals or families with a gross annual income less than eighty (80%) percent of the median income for working families in Grant County.
(2) This subsection only applies to “private or public nonprofit organizations” defined as follows: Nonprofit corporations established solely for the purpose of providing low-income housing, recognized under the United States Internal Revenue Code as qualified recipients of tax deductible charitable contributions and limited to those organizations having received approval from the Internal Revenue Service of such status upon the filing of all forms as required for recognition as a 501(c)(3) corporation. For an entity to qualify under the provisions of this subsection, upon making a written request for water connection fee waiver, the entity shall provide sufficient proof of such status, including such documentation as the city council may deem necessary. To qualify for water connection fee waivers, the project development must include “sweat equity”, defined as labor contributed by the prospective homeowner and/or volunteer labor contributed through community donation such as Habitat for Humanity as that organization operated at the time of the adoption of this provision.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 9
(3) Upon the approval of the city council, the collection of the water connection fees under the provisions of this Chapter to serve single-family residences may be waived at the request of a qualified nonprofit organization which is developing or constructing a low-income single-family residence for a low-income family or individual. All waiver requests shall be made in writing to the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the levy of the water connection fee. Such requests may be granted within the discretion of the city council, and only at such times as the city has established and funded a water connection fee waiver fund as described below. The city council shall approve such requests by resolution, adopted at a regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) In order to approve water connection fee waiver requests, the city council shall establish, on an annual basis through adoption of the city budget, a water connection fee waiver fund or account, funded by general fund revenues and not from funds received from payment of water rates (other than taxes assessed thereon). On an annual basis, and at such other times as the city council deems appropriate, upon consideration of the number of potential requests for low-income single-family water connection fee waivers, the city council may determine by resolution or ordinance the appropriate amount available for water connection fee waivers. Based upon this consideration, the city council may determine that a given percentage of the amount available for water connection fee waivers may be subject to waiver. Upon the city council making its determination regarding the total amount and percentage of water connection fees subject to waiver, water connection fee waivers shall be available on a “first-come, first-served” basis. Upon the city council’s approval of water connection fee waiver requests, the water connection fee waivers shall be paid into the appropriate fund or account designated for deposit of the water connection fee waivers, from the general fund revenues. Waivers can only be granted to the extent funds are available in the stated account.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 10
(5) All water connection fee waiver amounts for low-income single-family housing applicants pursuant to this subsection shall be reimbursed to the city’s water connection fee waiver fund or account upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a qualified low-income person or family or a nonprofit organization as defined above. Repayment of waived water connection fees shall be secured with a real estate security instrument as approved by the city attorney. Such instrument shall be senior to all other security instruments securing loans on the property, unless the city council determines that the city receives adequate security for repayment from a junior security instrument. All such security instruments shall contain a “due on sale” clause, reimbursement of waived water connection fees to the city upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a qualified low-income person or family or a nonprofit organization as defined above. Waived water connection fees shall likewise be repaid to the city upon any refinancing of loans secured by senior real property security instruments.
(6) Upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a low-income person or family or nonprofit organization as defined above, prior to transfer of the property to the purchaser, the seller shall reimburse the city in the full amount of the waived water connection fees, plus interest thereon at a rate commensurate with the annual one year U.S. Treasury notes and bonds, adjusted for constant maturities, as published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin or otherwise available from the Federal Reserve Bank, from the year the water connection is made to the city water, computed annually on unpaid balances. Interest calculated pursuant to this section shall not be compounded. Alternatively, at the option of the seller, the reimbursement to the city may be at the then-existing water connection fee rates for comparable development on properties within the City of Ephrata for water connection to the City’s water system, provided that in no circumstances shall the reimbursement to the city be less than the amount of the water connection fees originally waived.
(Ord. 00-13, Ord. 06-31, 2006)
13.04.130 Right of entry. It is unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to give the city or its duly authorized representative free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of buildings or premises supplied with water by the city for the purpose of inspecting the conditions of pipes and fixtures, noting the amount of water used and the manner in which it is used. (Ord. 1116 §9, 1984: Ord. 716 §13, 1965)
13.04.140 Shut off for refusing entry. If any owner or occupant on any premises supplied with city water violates any provision of Section 13.04.130, the city may shut off the service; and the owner or occupant shall be required to pay all delinquent and unpaid charges against the premises, together with a charge as established in
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 11
Chapter 3.35 for shutting off and turning on the water before service may again be turned on. (Ord. 90-52, 1990: Ord. 96-30, 1996; Ord 12-09, 2012)
13.04.150 Meter test for accuracy. Where the accuracy of the water meter is questioned, it shall be removed at the property owner's request and shall be tested. If the test discloses an error against the property owner of more than three percent of the meter's registry, the excess of the consumption on the three previous readings shall be credited to the property owner's meter account, and the water department will bear the entire expense of the test, and the deposit required as hereinafter prescribed shall be returned. On the other hand, where no error is found, the person who had requested the test shall pay the charge fixed for the test. Before making a test of any meter, the person requesting a test shall, at the time of filing his request with the city, make a deposit as established in Chapter 3.35 with the city treasurer. It is unlawful for any person to remove or in any way disturb or break any seal, except in the presence or under the direction of the water department personnel. (Ord. 90-52, 1990: Ord. 96-30, 1996; Ord 12-09, 2012)
13.04.160 Interference with city equipment prohibited. It is unlawful for any person except when duly authorized by the city, to open, operate, close, turn on, turn off, interfere with, damage or attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything with any fire hydrant, stop valve or stop-cock belonging to the city. (Ord. 1116 §12, 1984: Ord. 716 §6, 1965: Ord. 96-30, 1996)
13.04.165 Service outside City Limits
(a) Policy. It shall be the policy of the City of Ephrata that water services shall not be provided by the City to locations beyond Ephrata City Limits.
(b) Exception to Policy. Variance or exception to the general policy of the City for provision of water services may be granted upon application to the City and approval of the City Council. The City may provide water services outside the City Limits in the following situations:
1. The applicant is an owner or occupant of a single family dwelling at the site to which water service is to be granted.
(Ord. 96-30, 1996)
2. Applicant must be within Urban Growth Area (U.G.A.)
(Ord. 97-26, 1997)
13.04.168 Contract for service outside City Limits. In accordance with the provisions of RCW. 35.95.200, the City shall enter into a written contract with any successful applicant for water services outside the city limits, fixing rates for such service as provided for in this chapter, and may incorporate such other terms and conditions as are approved by the City Council, including, but not limited to the following:
1. A water system to be built and connected to the city water system will be built to city standards and code specifications.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 12
2. The application is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
3. The grant of the application will not have a detriment impact on the integrity of the city’s water and/or sewer system.
4. That additional conditions may be required by the city which are just and necessary to protect the interests of the City under the particular circumstances of the applicant.
(Ord. 96-30, 1996)
13.04.170 Permission required for connection. It is unlawful for any person to make connection with any fixture or connect any pipe with any water main or water pipe belonging to the municipal water supply system, without first obtaining permission to do so from the water department personnel. (Ord. 716 §17, 1965).
13.04.180 Construction water rate.
A. A permit is required for the use of any and all construction water.
1. The rate charged for water at building sites where a City water meter has been installed shall be as established in Chapter 3.35.
2. Water furnished from the City Shop shall be charged as established in Chapter 3.35.
3. Any and all hydrant meters must be checked out, or approved by the City of Ephrata Water Department prior to use. A daily rental rate as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be charged for all City water hydrant meters. Water is charged as established in Chapter 3.35. Only pre-approved contractor owned hydrant meters are allowed.
4. A flat fee as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be charged for the flushing and disinfection of new waterlines, per the City of Ephrata Construction Standards. (Ord 12-09, 2012)
B. Violation of any provision of this article shall be a civil infraction. The violation shall be subject to a C-1 penalty for each infraction.
(Ord. 1110 §14 (C), 1984: Ord. 716 §18, 1965, Ord. 96-30, 1996, Ord. 97-2, 1997, Ord. 02-06, 2002, Ord. 08-08, 2008; Ord 08-10, 2008; Ord 12-09, 2012)
13.04.185 Water leaks and Meter failures. Water leaks and water meter failures represent a difficulty in creating fair and accurate billing. The goal of the City is to equitably balance the responsibilities of the property owner with the actual water consumed.
The following shall apply in a situation where a water leak has occurred, provided the responsible party has notified the City promptly as to the leak:
a) Once a water leak has been repaired, the City shall issue a new bill for that period’s water usage.
b) The revised bill shall be calculated based on the last three- year’s average usage for that same period.
c) Any dispute of this revised bill may be appealed to the Mayor or City Administrator in writing within 10-days of the issuance of the revised bill.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 13
The following shall apply in a situation where a water meter has failed:
a) Once the water meter has been repaired, the City shall issue a new bill for that period’s water usage.
b) The revised bill shall be calculated based on the last three-year’s average usage for that same period.
c) Any dispute of this revised bill may be appealed to the Mayor or City Administrator in writing within 10-days of the issuance of the revised bill. (Ord 15-04, 2015)
13.04.190 Shut off for delinquent charges. In case of nonpayment of fees and charges for water, within thirty days after they are due, the water may be shut off and a charge as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be added to cover the expense of turning the water off and on, and in no case shall water be turned on again until the amount has been paid in full. (Ord. 90-10, 1990; Ord 12-09, 2012).
13.04.200 Unpaid charges--Lien conditions.
(a) The city shall have a lien against the premises receiving water services, for unpaid charges required by Chapter 13.04 of this code, for four months' charges due or to become due provided the owner of the premises or the owner of a delinquent mortgage thereon may give written notice to the city to cut off service to such premises, accompanied by payment or tender of payment of the then-delinquent and unpaid charges for such services against the premises, together with the shutoff charge (if any), whereupon the city shall have no lien against the premises or charges for services thereafter furnished, nor shall the owner of the premises or the owner of a delinquent mortgage thereon be held for payment thereof.
(b) The lien for charges for water service may be enforced only by cutting off services until the delinquent and unpaid charges are paid. In the event of a disputed account and tender by the owner of the premises of the amount he/she claims to be due for the service is cut off, the right to refuse service to any premise shall not accrue until suit has been entered by the city and judgment entered in the case. (Ord. 1110 §16, 1984).
13.04.210 Violation--Penalty. The commission of any unlawful act proscribed in this chapter shall be a civil infraction, and any person found guilty of violation thereof shall be subject to a C-5 penalty. (Ord. 1110 §17, 1984; Ord 12-09, 2012).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 14
Chapter 13.08
SEWER SYSTEM
Sections:
13.08.005 Connection mandatory.
13.08.007 Application for service.
13.08.010 Discharges prohibited.
13.08.020 Inspector right of entry.
13.08.030 Building sewers.
13.08.040 Air conditioning and refrigeration.
13.08.050 Connection fee.
13.08.055 Main Connection Charges-Service by Sewer Lift Station #3.
13.08.060 Street restoration.
13.08.070 Exception to connection requirements.
13.08.072 Inspection of Exempted Systems.
13.08.075 Septic tank effluent disposal.
13.08.080 Sewer rates.
13.08.090 Industrial rates.
13.08.100 Payment of accounts.
13.08.110 Temporarily vacant or unoccupied premises.
13.08.120 Service outside city limits.
13.08.130 Contract for service outside city limits.
13.08.140 Private wastewater disposal systems
13.08.005 Connection mandatory. The owner(s) of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city, or within the area served by the city sewer system, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required at the owner or owners’ expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided, that the property line to be served is not located more than 200 feet from a public sewer. (Ord. 1111 §1, 1984, Ord 10-05, 2010, Ord 15-16, 2015).
13.08.007 Application for service. (a) It is the intent of the city that all utility deliveries, whether water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall be deliveries of services and/or utilities to the property served. All such delivery of utilities and/or services shall be a claim against the property and a claim against the owner of that property served/or furnished utilities and/or services. It shall be the responsibility of each property owner served by city utilities to determine the extent of utility services and deliveries being made and/or furnished to the owner's property. It shall
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 15
be the responsibility of the property owner to pay all claims, charges, penalties and/or costs imposed by the city for the furnishing and/or delivery of utilities and/or services to the owner's property. The property owner's responsibility shall exist independent of any claim of lien the city may have or make pursuant to any statute, rule or regulation. The fact the owner has directed or allowed the billings for utilities furnished and/or services delivered to the owner's property to be delivered to a tenant or other third person does not in any way reduce or extinguish the property owner's responsibility for water, sewer, and/or garbage billings, charges, costs or penalties imposed by the city. All delinquent charges for water, sewer, garbage or some combination thereof, shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by law.
(b) All applications for sewer service shall be made by the property owner or someone acting on behalf of the owner of the property to be provided sewer service, unless the service is installed by the city in order to correct an improper sewer connection or to make a connection to protect the public health, welfare and safety, and responsibility for billing payment shall be borne by the property owner. All charges for sewer service will be sent directly to the property address unless the property owner direct's otherwise, or in the event of a combined utility billing, the billing shall be sent to the address maintained by the city for such combined billing.
(c) Upon a failure to pay the charges for sewer service, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the real property furnished the service as provided by law. (Ord. 90-12, 1990)
13.08.010 Discharges prohibited.
(a) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
(b) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(1) Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;
(2) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
(4) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, petroleum products, anti-freeze, wood, paunch, manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 16
(5) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths or higher than eight and five-tenths or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
(6) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewer treatment plant;
(7) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;
(8) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(c) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
13.08.020 Inspector right of entry. The duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspecting, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 767 §2, 1968).
13.08.030 Building sewers.
(a) The owner shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of all building sewers including connection to a mainline. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building: Except, that separate buildings which are an integral part of a single business or industry may be served by a single sewer. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
(b) Building sewers which are connected to the city system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City Construction Standards and Uniform Plumbing Code. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
(c) Where no properly located "Y" branch is available, a connection may be made by installing a city approved “sewer saddle” as per city standards. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
(d) Drainage piping serving fixtures which have flood level rims located below the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 17
elevation of the next upstream manhole cover of the public or private sewer serving such drainage piping shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved type backwater valve. Fixtures above such elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve. Where existing services are not in compliance with this section, the city shall not be responsible for any backflow damages.
(Ord. 96-31, 1996)
13.08.040 Air conditioning and refrigeration. All commercial and industrial air conditioning and refrigeration units that are installed, replaced, or that have capacity increased after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall be required to install recirculating units or to discharge their wastewater into a storm sewer system. Disposal may not be accomplished by discharging into the sanitary system. (Ord. 1111 §2, 1984: Ord. 767 §4, 1968).
13.08.050 Connection fee.
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any portion of the sewer system or appurtenance thereof without first making application and receiving written permission from the city Public Works office. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. (Ord 96-31, 1996)
(b) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building official or his representative. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
(c) Any person found to have violated any provision of this section shall be subject to a C-5 penalty. (Ord 12-10, 2012)
(d) A connection fee as established in Chapter 3.35 shall be remitted with a permit application: (Ord. 96-31, 1996; Ord 12-10, 2012)
(Ord. 1111 §3, 1984: Ord. 1030 §1, 1981: Ord. 767 §5, 1968 Ord. 92-19, 1992 Ord. 96-31, 1996: Ord 97-25, 1997; Ord 12-10, 2012)
(e) A connection fee shall be waived for any existing septic system, within 200 feet of an existing mainline, and where the septic is in documented satisfactory working order, that voluntarily connects to the City’s sewer system. New construction shall not constitute an existing mainline. (Ord. 11-03, 2011)
(f) Sewer Connection Fee Waiver for Low-Income Housing.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, “low-income housing” is defined as follows: Individuals or families with a gross annual income less than eighty (80%) percent of the median income for working families in Grant County.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 18
(2) This subsection only applies to “private or public nonprofit organizations” defined as follows: Nonprofit corporations established solely for the purpose of providing low-income housing, recognized under the United States Internal Revenue Code as qualified recipients of tax deductible charitable contributions and limited to those organizations having received approval from the Internal Revenue Service of such status upon the filing of all forms as required for recognition as a 501(c)(3) corporation. For an entity to qualify under the provisions of this subsection, upon making a written request for sewer connection fee waiver, the entity shall provide sufficient proof of such status, including such documentation as the city council may deem necessary. To qualify for sewer connection fee waivers, the project development must include “sweat equity”, defined as labor contributed by the prospective homeowner and/or volunteer labor contributed through community donation, such as Habitat for Humanity as that organization operated at the time of the adoption of this provision.
(3) Upon the approval of the city council, the collection of the sewer connection fees under the provisions of this Chapter to serve single-family residences may be waived at the request of a qualified nonprofit organization which is developing or constructing a low-income single-family residence for a low-income family or individual. All waivers requests shall be made in writing to the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the levy of the sewer connection fee. Such requests may be granted within the discretion of the city council, and only at such times as the city has established and funded a sewer connection fee waiver fund as described below. The city council shall approve such requests by resolution, adopted at a regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) In order to approve sewer connection fee waiver requests, the city council shall establish, on an annual basis through adoption of the city budget, a sewer connection fee waiver fund or account, funded by general fund revenues and not from funds received from payment of sewer rates (other than taxes assessed thereon). On an annual basis, and at such other times as the city council deems appropriate, upon consideration of the number of potential requests for low-income single-family sewer connection fee waivers, the city council may determine by resolution or ordinance the appropriate amount available for sewer connection fee waivers. Based upon this consideration, the city council may determine that a given percentage of the amount available for sewer connection fee waivers may be subject to waiver. Upon the city council making its determination regarding the total amount and percentage of sewer connection fees subject to waiver, sewer connection fee waivers shall be available on a “first-come, first-served” basis. Upon the city council’s approval of sewer connection fee
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 19
waiver requests, the sewer connection fee waivers shall be paid into the appropriate fund or account designated for deposit of the sewer connection fee waivers, from the general fund revenues. Waivers can only be granted to the extent funds are available in the stated account.
(5) All sewer connection fee waiver amounts for low-income single-family housing applicants pursuant to this subsection shall be reimbursed to the city’s sewer connection fee waiver fund or account upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a qualified low-income person or family or a nonprofit organization as defined above. Repayment of waived sewer connection fees shall be secured with a real estate security instrument as approved by the city attorney. Such instrument shall be senior to all other security instruments securing loans on the property, unless the city council determines that the city receives adequate security for repayment from a junior security instrument. All such security instruments shall contain a “due on sale” clause, reimbursement of waived sewer connection fees to the city upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a qualified low-income person or family or a nonprofit organization as defined above. Waived sewer connection fees shall likewise be repaid to the city upon any refinancing of loans secured by senior real property security instruments.
(6) Upon the sale of the property to any purchaser who is not a low-income person or family or nonprofit organization as defined above, prior to transfer of the property to the purchaser, the seller shall reimburse the city in the full amount of the waived sewer connection fees, plus interest thereon at a rate commensurate with the annual one year U.S. Treasury notes and bonds, adjusted for constant maturities, as published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin or otherwise available from the Federal Reserve Bank, from the year the connection is made to the city sewer, computed annually on unpaid balances. Interest calculated pursuant to this section shall not be compounded. Alternatively, at the option of the seller, the reimbursement to the city may be at the then-existing sewer connection fee rates for comparable development on properties within the City of Ephrata for connection to the City’s sewer system, provided that in no circumstances shall the reimbursement to the city be less than the amount of the sewer connection fees originally waived.
(Ord. 00-12)
13.08.055 Main Connection Charges - Service by Sewer Lift Station #3. Connections to sewer mains serviced by Sewer Lift Station #3 (which is located within the Plat of Fitzburg) shall pay an additional connection charge based on $7.74 per gallon per day of usage for each residential lot to be subdivided or served by a sewer connection. Said Residential connection shall be based on 280 gallons per day
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 20
usage which is one (1) Equivalent Residential Unit (E.R.U.). Non-Residential lots shall be charged a rate based on (E.R.U.) of sewer usage by the use to be located on the property; provided, that in no event shall the lot be charged less than one (1) (E.R.U.). (Ord. 01-13).
13.08.060 Street restoration. Where it is necessary to remove existing street pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalk or graveled streets, to install sewer service lines, the property owner shall obtain and observe all necessary permits and requirements in accordance with EMC 21.02. (Ord. 767 §6 1968; Ord. 11-03, 2011).
13.08.070 Exceptions to connection requirement.
A. The following shall constitute exceptions to the requirement of Section 13.08.005.
1. Any property which receives city water but upon which there are no buildings;
2. Any property which receives city water and upon which there are buildings that are not used for domestic purposes and to which the water system is not connected;
3. Any property which receives city water and upon which there are buildings to which the city water is connected but which do not require connection to the city sewerage system; provided, however, said lots shall only be exempt from the requirements of Section 13.08.005 after application has been made to the city council and a sufficient showing made to the council as to why the property should not be required to be connecting to the city sewerage system.
4. Construction of a building to be served by sanitary sewer service where the property line is located more than 200 feet from a public sewer, or where special circumstances, certified by the Public Works Director, would impose a similar hardship. (Ord. 15-16, 2015)
B. Any property which is exempted from the requirements of Section 13.08.005 shall be assessed a rate of $0.00 per month. Funds collected from such assessment shall be placed in the Water-Sewer Construction Fund/Fund 425, for future improvements and/or expansion of the City’s sewer system. Future improvements and/or expansions shall be at the discretion of the City Council and may or may not directly impact properties assessed under this section. (Ord. 11-03, 2011)
C. In determining whether or not to grant such an exemption, the city council shall consider the effect such exemption would have upon city revenue, health, sanitation, and/or for comprehensive planning.
D. If an exempted septic system fails, either the tank or drain field, and where the property line is greater than 200 feet of the City’s system at the time of failure, the owner shall request a new exemption from the City, per this chapter. (Ord. 11-03, 2011, Ord. 15-16, 2015)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 21
E. All septic systems shall be constructed, maintained, and abandoned in accordance with EMC 13.08.140 and WAC 246-272 as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord 10-05, 2010; Ord 11-03, 2011)
F. All existing septic systems within 200 feet of the City sewer, as measured from the sewer line to the nearest point of the property line, shall be required to connect within 90 days of the transfer of ownership or sale of the property.
1. An additional 90 days to connect may be granted, upon written request to the Public Works Director; where inclement weather prevents connection within the required time period, or if the cost of the connection would exceed $7,000.00.
2. If the City installs a sewer main, all properties falling within the 200 foot limit of that new line, as measured from the sewer line to the nearest point of the property line, shall connect within 1 year of the commencement of that installation.
(Ord 11-3, 2011; Ord 15-16, 2015)
13.08.072 Inspection of Exempted Systems.
All owners of septic systems exempted under 13.08.070 shall submit to inspection by the Grant County Health District. If an exempted septic is not in satisfactory working condition, that septic shall be abandoned within 30 days of notification. Abandonment shall be in accordance with WAC 246-272A-0300 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
A. Commencing in 2013, all exempted septic systems shall be inspected, and simultaneously pumped if necessary, at the sole cost of the property owner, by the Grant County Health District every 10 years, and/or shall submit proof of inspection and pumping by a licensed contractor to the City. (Ord 11-03, 2011)
B. Certain enterprises that use significant volumes of water may be required to inspect and pump on a different schedule; to be determined by the Grant County Health District, in conjunction with the City Public Works Director. (Ord. 11-03, 2011)
13.08.075 Septic tank effluent disposal.
(a) Special permission may be granted to effluent haulers to dispose of effluent at the Ephrata Municipal Treatment Plant under the direct supervision of the city of Ephrata.
(b) The charge for disposal of effluent shall be as established in Chapter 3.35.
(1) Over two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons shall not be accepted. (Ord. 1111 §6, 1984; Ord 96-31, 1996; Ord 12-10, 2012).
13.08.080 Sewer rates. Based on Equivalent Residential Units (E.R.U.).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 22
A. Sewer rates inside the city limits shall be as established in Chapter 3.35.
(Ord. 96-31, 1996, Ord. 97-3, 1997, Ord. 99-05, 1999; Ord. 02-07, 2002, Ord. 02-32, 2002; Ord. 11-03, 2011, Ord. 12-07, 2012; Ord 12-10, 2012)
B. Monthly sewer rates within U.G.A. shall be as established in Chapter 3.35.
(Ord. 90-53, 1990, Ord. 92-19, 1992, Ord. 96-31, 1996, Ord 97-3, 1997, Ord. 97-25, 1997, Ord. 02-07, 2002, Ord.12-07, 2012; Ord 12-10, 2012)
C. Determining Residential Equivalent Unit (E.R.U.):
The E.R.U. value will be determined annually by calculating all residential water usage during the previous four (4) month winter use period (November, December, January and February). The total amount of water usage will be divided by 1,000 then divided by 4 months divided by the number of residences. This will be the E.R.U. value for each subsequent year. The effective date of the new E.R.U. value will be April 1 of each subsequent year. (Ord 03-14, 2003)
D. All other classes of building (i.e. other than single family residences and duplexes) will be determined on an individual basis. Each account will be calculated annually by using the previous four month winter use period (November, December, January and February) to determine their particular number of ERU’s. The total amount of water usage will be divided by 1,000 then divided by 4 months, then divided by the Residential ERU value, then multiplied by the monthly rate to determine the monthly charge. Provided that in no event shall any account be charged less than one (1) E.RU.
(Ord. 02-07, 2002 Ord. 03-14, 2003) (Ord. 02-32, 2002; Ord 12-10, 2012)
13.08.090 Industrial rates. Sewer rates for commercial, industrial or processing plants may be separately determined by the city council, based upon both volume and chemical characteristics of the sewage. The city council reserves the privilege to require pretreatment of any material discharged into the sewerage system or to prohibit discharge into the system of industrial wastes that, because of either volume or concentration, will overload existing sewerage facilities. (Ord. 767 §9, 1968).
13.08.100 Payment of accounts.
(a) Sewer bills shall be the responsibility of, and billed directly to, the property owner or occupier of the premises and shall be due and payable on or before the tenth day of each month. Sewer bills shall become delinquent on the tenth day of each month. The city reserves the right to turn off the water supply from the premises if the sewer charge is delinquent. In the event the water supply is turned off, the same shall not be turned on again until all delinquent charges have been paid in full. (Ord. 96-31, 1996)
(b) The city shall have a lien against the premises for unpaid sewer charges as
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 23
provided by state law. (Ord. 767 §10, 1968).
(c) If the water connection has been removed for non-payment or abandonment, per EMC 13.04.060, the sewer connection shall likewise be considered as severed.
Should sewer service be required to the premises, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making application and paying for a new connection per EMC 3.35.
Until such time as sewer service is considered severed, either by owner request or city action, or on an abandoned connection, the property shall incur a minimum connection charge each month as set forth in EMC 3.35. (Ord. 15-06, 2015)
13.08.110 Temporarily vacant or unoccupied premises. The minimum sewer charge shall continue until a request in writing to discontinue water service has been given the city by the owner of the property served. Following receipt of a request to discontinue water service or to discontinue sewer service for customers without a water service, a monthly charge shall be made in the amount set forth in section 13.08.080. Such charge shall apply to any property identified as having a sewer connection so long as the connection to the sewer system continues without an active utility service account to the property. (Ord. 1111 §4, 1984: Ord. 767 §11, 1968, Ord 99-05, 1999).
13.08.120 Service outside City Limits.
a. Policy. It shall be the policy of the City of Ephrata that sewer services shall not be provided by the City to locations beyond Ephrata City Limits.
b. Exception to Policy. Variance or exception to the general policy of the City for provision of sewer services may be granted upon application to the City and approval of the City Council. The City may provide sewer services outside the City Limits in the following situations:
1. The applicant is an owner or occupant of a single family dwelling at the site to which sewer service is to be granted.
2. Applicant must be within Urban Growth Boundary (U.G.A.)
(Ord. 96-31, 1996, Ord. 97-25, 1997)
13.08.130 Contract for service outside City Limits. In accordance with the provisions of RCW 35.95.200, the City shall enter into a written contract with any successful applicant for sewer services outside the city limits, fixing rates for such service as provided for in this chapter, and may incorporate such other terms and conditions as are approved by the City Council, including, but not limited to the following:
1. A sewer system to be built and connected to the city sewer system will be built to city standards and code specifications.
2. The application is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
3. The grant of the application will not have a detrimental impact on the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 24
integrity of the city's water and/or sewer system.
4. That additional conditions may be required by the city which are just and necessary to protect the interests of the City under the particular circumstances of the applicant. (Ord. 1111, 1984)
13.08.140 Private wastewater systems.
A. Except as provided in EMC 13.08.070, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
B. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provision of EMC 13.08.070, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the regulations of the Grant County Health District and subject to the following:
1. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Grant County Health District;
2. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City, in compliance with Grant County Health District regulations;
3. At such time as the City’s sewer service is within 200 feet of a building served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with WAC 264-272A-0300 as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord 10-05, 2010; Ord 11-03, 2011)
4. Commencing in 2013, all septic systems exempted under 13.08.070 shall submit to inspection by the Grant County Health District (EMC 13.08.070). If an exempted septic is not in satisfactory working condition, that septic shall be properly abandoned within 30 days of notification. (Ord 11-03, 2011)
5. Any owner of an exempted septic system, who does not comply with inspection, fails inspection, or does not provide proof of inspection, shall abandon the septic system in accordance with EMC 13.08.070 and WAC 246-272A-0300 as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord. 11-03, 2011)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 25
Chapter 13.16
WATER SYSTEM--BACKFLOW PROTECTION
AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Sections:
13.16.010 Definitions.
13.16.020 Cross-connections--Prohibition.
13.16.030 Cross-connections--Service discontinuance for violation.
13.16.040 Cross-connections--Inspection--Removal.
13.16.050 Air-gap separations.
13.16.060 Double check valve assemblies.
13.16.070 Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices.
13.16.080 Backflow prevention devices--Location.
13.16.090 Backflow prevention devices--Required when.
13.16.100 Backflow prevention devices--Determination of type required.
13.16.110 Backflow prevention devices--Installation supervision and approval.
13.16.120 Backflow prevention devices--Standards and approval.
13.16.130 Backflow prevention devices--Inspections, test and repairs--Requirements.
13.16.140 Backflow prevention devices--Inspections, tests and repairs--Service discontinuance for cooperation failure.
13.16.150 Backflow prevention devices--Inspection charge.
13.16.160 Interconnection.
13.16.010 Definitions. As used in this chapter:
(1) "Backflow" means the flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids or substances into the public water system.
(2) "Backflow prevention device" means an assembly or device approved by the State of Washington, Department of Health and the city. (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
(3) "Back pressure" means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure.
(4) "Back siphonage" means a form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure within a water system.
(5) "Cross-connection" means any physical arrangement whereby the public water system is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 26
which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections.
(6) "Domestic water" or "domestic water system" means that water, and water system in which it is carried, which is for human consumption and normal household and business or industrial uses provided from the city's supply.
(7) "Hazard to health" means any conditions, devices or practices in the water supply system and its operation which create, or in the judgment of the city Water Distribution Manager may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
(8) AWater Distribution Manager@ means the City’s Water Distribution Manager or his designee. (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.020 Cross-connections--Prohibition. Cross-connections between the domestic water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited except when and where, as approved by the Water Distribution Manager, suitable protective devices as approved by the Water Distribution Manager are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. (Ord. 887 §9, 1975)(Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.030 Cross-connections--Service discontinuance for violation. Failure on the part of persons to discontinue the use of any and all cross-connections and to physically separate such cross-connections or install a suitable protective device when ordered to do so by the Water Distribution Manager will be sufficient cause for the discontinuance of water service to the premises on which the cross-connection exists. (Ord. 887 §10, 1975)(Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.040 Cross-connections--Inspection--Removal. The Water Distribution Manager and such other persons as he may designate are delegated the authority to inspect, approve and disapprove backflow prevention assemblies; to require corrections, modifications, repairs or maintenance on backflow prevention assemblies and to inspect all premises of city water systems customers where backflow prevention assemblies may be required. A minimum standard for the maintenance and installation of backflow prevention assemblies shall be those set forth in the AAccepted Procedures and Practices in the Cross-Connection Control Manual@ latest edition, as published by the Pacific Northwest Section of the American Waterworks Committee. The Water Distribution Manager is authorized to establish higher standards for the installation and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies where he finds that good engineering practice, industry standards or the protection of public health requires such higher standards. The Water Distribution
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 27
Manager shall document the reason for requiring such higher standards. (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.050 Air-gap separations. An air-gap separation is an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle, and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case shall the gap be less than one inch. (Ord. 887 §12, 1975).
13.16.060 Double check valve assemblies. A double check valve assembly is an assembly composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve. (Ord. 887 §13, 1975).
13.16.070 Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device is a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves less than the pressure on the water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere thereby providing an air-gap in the device. (Ord. 887 §14, 1975).
13.16.080 Backflow prevention devices--Location. Backflow prevention devices where required shall be installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises when meters are not used, or at a location designated by the Water Distribution Manager. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and where no part of the device will be submerged. (Ord. 887 §15, 1975). (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.090 Backflow prevention devices--Required when.
(a) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where in the judgment of the Water Distribution System Manager the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the premises would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time the backflow prevention device is required to be installed. (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
This shall include, but not be limited to, the following situations:
(1) Premises having an auxiliary water supply; (Ord. 96-43, 1996)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 28
(2) Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist;
(3) Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist;
(4) Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished;
(5) Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters;
(6) Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled such that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard may result.
(b) The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these facilities unless the Water Distribution Manager determines no hazard exists:
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics;
(2) Laboratories;
(3) Piers and docks;
(4) Sewage treatment plants;
(5) Food or beverage processing plants;
(6) Chemical plants using a water process;
(7) Metal plating industries;
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants;
(9) Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
(10) Irrigation or sprinkler systems;
(11) Others specified by the Water Distribution Manager.
(Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.100 Backflow prevention devices--Determination of type required. The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
(1) An air-gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the water supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which would cause a health or system hazard.
(2) In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous to
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 29
health, a double check valve assembly, air-gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed. (Ord. 887 §17, 1975).
13.16.110 Backflow prevention devices--Installation supervision and approval. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed pursuant to a permit issued by the city and an inspection by the city. (Ord. 887 §18, 1975)(Ord 96-43, 1996)
13.16.120 Backflow prevention devices--Standards and approval. Any protective device shall be a model listed by the State of Washington, department of Health, and approved by the Water Distribution Manager. (Ord 96-43, 1996)
13.16.130 Backflow prevention devices--Inspections, tests and repairs--Requirements. Backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and tested annually, or more often where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. The devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. Inspections, tests and repairs and records thereof shall be done under the purveyor's supervision. (Ord. 887 §20, 1975).
13.16.140 Backflow prevention devices--Inspections, tests and repairs--Service discontinuance for cooperation failure. Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required in this chapter shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises or the requirements for an air-gap separation. (Ord. 887 §21, 1975).
13.16.150 Backflow prevention devices--Inspection charge. Whenever the inspection of a backflow prevention device is made, the property owner or owner of the device being inspected shall be responsible for all charges. (Ord. 888 §1, 1975)(Ord. 96-43, 1996)
13.16.160 Interconnection.
(a) The city strictly prohibits interconnection of other water supplies or sources with the city’s distribution system. Auxiliary water supplies (private wells, piped irrigation sources, etc.) Are a major cross-connection control hazard and must be effectively and completely isolated from the city’s domestic water supply at all times.
(b) The city’s cross connection control policies and requirements for customers with private wells are as follows:
(1) No backflow protection is required if the source is verified to be permanently inactivated. In such cases, formal abandonment or decommissioning in accordance with the requirements of the Washington Department of Health shall be accomplished by the owner and proof of compliance provided to the city.
(2) If the well remains active and the piping system is verified to be physically separated and permanently disconnected from the City’s distribution system, an approved double check valve assembly is required at the service connection to provide a measure of protection against inadvertent
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 30
interconnection of water supplies.
(3) Requests for new service connections to the city’s water system shall be locked off until compliance with the city’s rules and regulations is verified by the city personnel making a visual inspection of the piping on any property retaining an active private well.
(Ord. 96-43, 1996)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 31
Chapter 13.20
RECLAIMED WATER
Sections:
13.20.010 Preamble
13.20.020 Reclaimed Water Reuse Policy
13.20.030 Definitions
13.20.040 Cross-connection Control and Use Area Requirements
13.20.050 Allowable Uses
13.20.060 Connection Policy
13.20.080 Reclaimed Water Rates
13.20.090 Unauthorized Work on Reclaimed Water System
13.20.100 Inspection
13.20.110 Penalty
13.20.120 Ownership
13.20.125 User Agreements
13.20.130 Severability
13.20.010 Preamble.
A. The State Legislature has declared, in RCW Chapter 90.46, that the people of this state have a primary interest in the development of facilities to provide reclaimed water to replace potable water in nonpotable applications, to supplement existing surface and groundwater supplies, and to assist in meeting future water requirements of the state.
B. The state legislature, in RCW Chapter 90.46, has established a reclaimed water demonstration program that includes the reuse of the City’s wastewater to provide a sustainable water supply for approved purposes.
C. The state Departments of Health and Ecology, in fulfillment of RCW Chapter 90.46, have published Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards guiding the reuse of reclaimed wastewater.
13.20.020 Reclaimed Water Reuse Policy. It is the policy of the city that reclaimed water shall be used within its jurisdiction wherever feasible, and consistent with legal requirements, preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare, and the environment.
13.20.030 Definitions.
“Beneficial Use” means the use of reclaimed water, which has been transported from the point of production to the point of use without an intervening discharge to
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 32
waters of the State, for a beneficial purpose.
“Landscape Impoundment” means a body of reclaimed water which is used for aesthetic enjoyment or which otherwise serves a function not intended to include public contact. Example may include, but are not limited to: golf course water pond/hazards, landscape ponds and vegetative landscape ponds, e.g. Alily ponds@.
“Potable Water” means water which conforms to the federal, state, and local standards for human consumption.
“Reclaimed Water” for the purposes of this ordinance, means reclaimed water that, at a minimum, is at all time an oxidized, coagulated, filtered, disinfected wastewater. The wastewater shall be considered adequately disinfected if the mean number of total coliform organisms in the wastewater after disinfection does not exceed 2.2 per 100 milliliters, as determined from the bacteriological results of the last 7 days for which analyses have been completed, and the number of total coliform organisms does not exceed 23 per 100 milliliters in any sample. Reclaimed water meeting or exceeding these criteria is classified by the State of Washington as Class A reclaimed water.
“Reclaimed Plant” means an arrangement of devices, structures, equipment, processes, and controls which produce reclaimed water suitable for the intended reuse.
“Reuse” means the use of reclaimed water, in compliance with the Washington Departments of Health and Ecology regulations and the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards, for a direct beneficial use.
“Sewage” means water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial and commercial establishments, or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration, surface waters, or industrial wastewater as may be present.
“Use Area” means any facility, building, or area approved for reuse and permitted by the Washington Departments of Health and Ecology.
13.20.040 Cross-connection Control and Use Area Requirements.
A. Prior to connecting a use to the reclaimed water system, the public potable water supply shall be protected by installation of an approved cross-connection control assembly in accordance with Chapter 13.16 of this Code and the Water Reclamation and Reuse Standards published jointly by the Washington State Departments of Health and Ecology (1997), or subsequent revisions.
B. The reclaimed water distribution system shall include special considerations to avoid cross-connections with the potable water system, in accordance with Chapter 13.16 of this Code. The following features shall be included in reclaimed water
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 33
systems to protect the public health:
(1) Reclaimed water distribution systems shall be constructed with purple pipe (Pantone 522 or other shades of purple acceptable to review agencies) and embossed or integrally stamped or marked “CAUTION: RECLAIMED WATER-DO NOT DRINK” or be installed with a purple (Pantone 512 or other shades of purple-acceptable to review agencies) identification tape or polyethylene vinyl wrap. The warning shall be stamped on opposite sides of the pipe and repeated every three feet or less.
(2) Square valve box covers painted purple (Pantone 522 or other shade of purple acceptable to review agencies) to distinguish from potable water system valve boxes.
(3) Purple strip on street curb to identify reclaimed water customer.
(4) Reclaimed water meters color coded with tape to distinguish from potable water meters (where applicable). Meters, covers and meter box covers should be cast to indicate reclaimed water.
13.20.050 Allowable Uses.
A. The City shall develop and maintain a reclaimed water Master Plan. Such plan shall receive City Council approval and shall include:
(1) Designated uses for reclaimed water, including allocated quantities for specific uses.
(2) Designated areas of the City within which construction and use of a reclaimed water system shall be encouraged.
(3) The location of a pipeline transmission system as a basis of supply for a local reclaimed water distribution system.
B. Use of reclaimed water is intended to limit potable water requirements within a residential development to that used in swimming pools, household laundries, kitchens, bathroom tubs, showers, and lavatories. Use of water-saving devices on fixtures and a public attitude to avoid waste will result in a significant reduction in the use and consumption of potable water.
C. Use of reclaimed water may include any and/or all of the following uses that do not require potable water.
(1) Irrigation of golf courses and other recreational areas.
(2) Lawn, garden, and landscaping irrigation (includes commercial,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 34
residential, institutional).
(3) Industrial (boiler feed water, cooling water, or wash-down).
(4) Construction (dust control, compaction density control, concrete mixing).
D. The use of reclaimed water shall be separately metered for each connection, as is the case for potable water.
E. The City plans to develop sources and supply reclaimed water to local distribution systems within the developed areas for irrigating lawns, gardens, trees, shrubbery, golf courses, and open space in and adjacent to the City.
F. Commercial and industrial customers presently using potable water will be encouraged to use reclaimed water wherever such use is safe and practicable, not only for landscape irrigation but in processes not requiring the use of potable water. To assist commercial and industrial uses in evaluating possible uses of reclaimed water, the City will provide appropriate reclaimed water quality analysis.
13.20.060 Connection Policy. Within individual new development areas, a separate reclaimed water distribution system shall be installed in accordance with City engineering and construction standards when, in the opinion of the City, such installation is beneficial to satisfy current planning for the distribution and use of reclaimed water as established by the Reclaimed Water Master Plan, or subsequent revisions. Costs for the installation of a nonpotable water distribution system shall be borne by the owner/developer. All entities, individuals, or businesses desiring reclaimed water shall submit a request to the City for a Reclaimed Water User Agreement.
(Ord 08-09, 2008)
13.20.080 Reclaimed Water Rates. In accordance with RCW 90.46.120, revenues obtained from the reclaimed water shall be used only to offset the cost of operation of the wastewater utility fund or other applicable source of system wide funding. Charges for Reclaimed Water, and associated connection fees, are contained within EMC 13.04.
(Ord 08-09, 2008)
13.20.090 Unauthorized Work on Reclaimed Water System.
A. No person, unless expressly authorized by the Public Works Director shall tamper with, work on, or in any way alter or damage any city reclaimed water facility. Tampering with or working on shall include, but not be limited to, opening or closing of valves, or causing of any reclaimed water to flow from the system. No unauthorized person shall cut into or make any connection with the system. The offending person shall be liable for the cost of all charges attributable to the correction of such tampering, including legal expenses, but payment of or correcting
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 35
such damage shall not relieve the offending person from civil or criminal penalties the City and/or court of law may impose for a violation of a city ordinance.
B. The service valve located between the customer’s reclaimed water system and the City’s distribution system may be operated by the customer when his private cutoff valve, required on the customer’s premises, requires repair.
13.20.100 Inspection.
A. To ensure that the provisions of City ordinances, regulations, and procedures are being observed, the City reserves the right and privilege of inspecting, removing, and/or securing any or all devices installed by the customer which connect to or control the reclaimed water.
(1) Inspections without cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at reasonable times and shall not exceed a reasonable frequency.
(2) Inspections where there is reasonable cause to believe that an ordinance or regulation is being violated shall be at such times and shall occur with such frequency as is necessary to establish that an ordinance is or is not being violated.
B. Each customer of reclaimed water shall give prior written consent to entry upon his premises for the purposes of inspecting the reclaimed water system, and thereby waives any other written notice for such inspection. Failure to the city to obtain such a written waiver shall not affect the right of the City to proceed pursuant to this article.
C. Refusing to permit an authorized City agent or employee to enter onto the premises for the purposes of inspecting the customer’s reclaimed water system pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be grounds for immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water service by the City to proceed pursuant to this article.
13.20.110 Penalty. Violation of any provision of this article shall be a civil infraction. The violation shall be subject to a C-1 penalty and revocation of the Reclaimed Water User Agreement.
(Ord 08-09, 2008)
13.20.120 Ownership. All constructed reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances, other than indoor plumbing and irrigation systems, shall be accepted by the City, and shall become and remain the property o the City. No person shall by payment of any charges provided herein, or by causing any construction of the facilities accepted by the City, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities, or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having their property connected thereto for reclaimed water services in accordance with this article.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 36
13.20.125 Reclaimed Water User Agreements. On a case-by-case basis, following request for a User Agreement to use reclaimed water on a property, the City Council, following a recommendation from staff, shall make a determination, considering volumes, availability, and other such things, whether the subject property shall be served with reclaimed water. Based upon that determination, the request for the User Agreement shall be denied, or accepted and processed. The City Council has no duty, implied or otherwise, to supply reclaimed water for private or public use.
A. If accepted, the Agreement shall specify the design, construction, restrictions, volumes, operation, maintenance, time limits, and monitoring requirements for the applicant’s planned use, based upon the regulations adopted pursuant to the Ordinance, and shall require compliance with the Washington State Departments of Ecology and Health requirements. Staff shall review plans for the reclaimed water distribution system for the use intended, and a field inspection shall be conducted prior to an Agreement is granted.
B. All applications for reclaimed water service shall be made at the City public works department. Every such application shall be made by the owner of the property to be furnished reclaimed water, or by its authorized agent, and the applicant shall state fully and truly all the purposes for which the reclaimed water may be used. Reclaimed water service shall only be granted for uses meeting the water reclamation and reuse standards and upon the execution of a reclaimed water user agreement.
C. Following a recommendation from staff, the City Council shall approve or deny all User Agreements.
D. When a permit has been obtained for the installation of reclaimed water service, the city shall then allow the premises described in the application to be connected with the reclaimed water system by a service pipe extending from the reclaimed water main to the property line and a shutoff valve and reclaimed water meter placed within the right-of-way. Every separate user and premises shall have its own separate meter. All connections to city’s reclaimed water service shall conform to the standard specifications and regulations of the city.
E. Reclaimed water lines shall be installed by and at the expense of the owner(s) of the premises to be served thereby, pursuant to plans reviewed by the city and approved by the city engineer.
F. Agreements for the use of reclaimed water are governed by applicable State regulations and the five-year permit cycle with the Department of Ecology, and as such, are subject to modification and/or termination, upon changes from the State of Washington.
G. Constant delivery of reclaimed water is not guaranteed. The City Wastewater
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 - 37
Treatment Facility is occasionally put into bypass-mode due to emergency incidents or for maintenance. During such periods, reclaimed water will not be available.
H. The City shall have the right to terminate Agreements for cause, as specified in the User Agreement.
(Ord 08-09, 2008)
13.20.130 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter.
(Ord. 01-01, 2001)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 1
Title 14
CEMETERIES
Chapters:
14.04 Administration
14.08 Restrictions
14.12 Interments
14.16 Monuments, Landscaping
14.20 Graves
14.24 Endowment Care Fund
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 2
Chapter 14.04
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:
14.04.010 Transfer of property, funds to city.
14.04.020 Plat to be recorded.
14.04.040 Park Foreman.
14.04.010 Transfer of property, funds to city. The conveyance and transfer, by the Ephrata Cemetery Association of the property and funds of the Ephrata Cemetery to the city is approved and accepted by the city. (Ord. 631 §1, 1960).
14.04.020 Plat to be recorded. A map, or plat, of the Ephrata Cemetery, showing the sections, plots, avenues, walks, or other subdivisions, with descriptive names or numbers, shall be filed in the office of the county auditor, together with a written declaration of dedication of the property delineated on the map, or plat, dedicating the property exclusively to cemetery purposes. (Ord. 631 §3, 1960).
14.04.040 Park Superintendant.
(a) The direction of funerals, while within the cemetery, and the care and maintenance of the cemetery shall be under the control of the Park Foreman and the Park Superintendant shall maintain order, enforce the rules and regulations of the City Council, state laws and the ordinances necessary to protect the cemetery property. (Ord. 90-20, 1990)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 3
Chapter 14.08
RESTRICTIONS
Sections:
14.08.010 Disorderly conduct prohibited.
14.08.020 Speed limit.
14.08.040 Signs prohibited.
14.08.050 Pets prohibited.
14.08.060 Malicious mischief.
14.08.070 Hours.
14.08.080 Recreational activities prohibited.
14.08.010 Disorderly conduct prohibited. All persons disturbing the quiet or good order of the cemetery by noises or disorderly or improper conduct, or who shall violate any of the rules and regulations pertaining to the cemetery, or cemeteries, of the city, contained herein or hereafter made, will be ejected from the cemetery. (Ord. 90-21, 1990)
14.08.020 Speed limit. No vehicles shall be driven in any part of the cemetery except on the driveways laid out for that purpose. Automobiles shall not be driven in the cemetery at a speed exceeding five miles per hour. (Ord. 1162 §1, 1986: Ord. 631 §5(b), 1986).
14.08.040 Signs prohibited. Signs and advertisements are prohibited in any part of the cemetery, except those signs which are posted by the city. (Ord. 1162 §3, 1986: Ord. 631 §5(d), 1960).
14.08.050 Pets prohibited. Pets are prohibited in the Ephrata city cemetery. (Ord. 1162 §4, 1986: Ord. 631 §5(e), 1960; Ord 12-18, 2012).
14.08.060 Malicious mischief. Every person is guilty of gross misdemeanor who unlawfully or without right, willfully does any of the following:
(1) Destroys, cuts, mutilates, effaces, or otherwise injures, tears down or removes any tomb, plot, monument, memorial, or marker in a cemetery, or any gate, door, fence, wall, post or railing, or any enclosure for the protection of a cemetery or any property in a cemetery;
(2) Destroys, cuts, breaks, removes or injures any building, statuary, ornamentation, trees, shrubs, flowers, or plants within the limits of a cemetery;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 4
(3) Disturbs, obstructs, detains or interferes with any person carrying or accompanying human remains to a cemetery or funeral establishment, or engaged in a funeral service, or an interment. (Ord. 631 §6, 1960).
14.08.070 1. Hours. No person shall be in the Ephrata cemetery between one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before dawn. (Ord. 1162 §5, 1986).
2. Weekday burials starting after 3:00 p.m. shall be charged the weekend/overtime rate found in EMC 3.35. (Ord. 17-01, 2017)
14.08.080 Recreational activities prohibited. Recreational activities in the cemetery are prohibited. Recreational activities, for the purpose of this section shall include, but not be limited to, picnics, any type of ball playing, golf playing, playing with frisbees, racing, etc. (Ord. 1162 §6, 1986).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 5
Chapter 14.12
INTERMENTS
Sections:
14.12.010 Lot price.
14.12.020 Lots for human dead only.
14.12.030 Burial permit required.
14.12.040 Interment, cremation record required.
14.12.050 Proof of lot ownership.
14.12.060 Lot transfer.
14.12.070 Disinterments.
14.12.080 Interments by city.
14.12.010 Lot price. Lots may be purchased at the office of the city administrator. Interments will not be permitted in lots not paid for. Lots shall be sold at prices fixed by the city council. (Ord. 90-58, 1990).
14.12.020 Lots for human dead only. Lots are sold for the purpose of burial of the human dead only. (Ord. 631 §7(b), 1960).
14.12.030 Burial permit required. No burial will be permitted in the cemetery without a proper burial permit as required by state laws. (Ord. 631 §7(c), 1960).
14.12.040 Interment, cremation record required. A record shall be kept of all remains interred or cremated. In each case, the date of interment or cremation, and the name and address of the funeral director, in addition to the information mentioned above, shall be kept as part of the record of the interment. (Ord. 631 §7(d), 1960).
14.12.050 Proof of lot ownership. On the death of any owner of a lot, or lots, in the cemetery the heirs, assignees, or devises of the decedent must furnish to the city satisfactory proof of ownership of any such lot, or lots. (Ord. 631 §7(e), 1960).
14.12.060 Lot transfer. No transfer of any lot or lots, or interest therein, will be valid without the consent of the city first being had and endorsed upon the transfer, and the transfer shall be endorsed on the books of the city. (Ord. 631 §7(f), 1960).
14.12.070 Disinterments. No disinterment will be allowed without a permit from the registrar of the district in which the Ephrata Cemetery is located, and the permission of the city, the lot owner, his heirs or assignees, and of the nearest of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 6
kin to the deceased, and all such disinterments shall be under the direction and supervision of the park superintendant, except when such disinterment is made by the order of the court when proper receipt for the remains must be given. (Ord. 90-58, 1990)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.12.080 Interments by city. All interments shall be done under the direction and supervision of the park superintendant or other designated city employee. (Ord. 90-58, 1990)(Ord 12-14,2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 7
Chapter 14.16
MONUMENTS LANDSCAPING
Sections:
14.16.010 Compliance to planting plan required.
14.16.020 Grade of lot.
14.16.030 Lot enclosures prohibited.
14.16.040 Location of memorial.
14.16.050 Removal by city.
14.16.060 Alteration of walks, avenues.
14.16.070 Flat markers required.
14.16.071 Columbarium inscriptions
14.16.080 Permit required for placement.
14.16.090 Concrete marker provided by city.
14.16.100 Flower receptacles.
14.16.110 Notification
14.16.010 Compliance to planting plan required. In order to secure the best general appearance, the city requires that all plantings shall be done only in accordance with the established plan under the direction of the park superintendent. (Ord. 90-24, 1990)(Ord. 12-14, 2012)
14.16.020 Grade of lot. No lot shall be raised above the contour of the surrounding ground. To insure the proper development of the grounds the grade of lots will be determined by the city. (Ord. 631 §10(b), 1960).
14.16.030 Lot enclosures prohibited. No coping or any kind or enclosure will be permitted. Boundaries of lots will be marked by cornerstones which will be set by the city, with the centers upon the lines bounding the lots. Cornerstones must not project above the ground and must not be altered or moved. (Ord. 631 §10(c), 1960).
14.16.040 Location of memorial. No ironworks or wirework, and no seats or benches, trees, shrubs, roses, or other plants, will be allowed on lots. However, if someone wishes to place a bench, fountain, tree, shrub, plant, or other suitable memorial in the cemetery, that may be done only with the permission of the Park Superintendant, who shall decide where the same is to be located. (Ord. 631 §l0(d), 1960)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.16.050 Removal by city. The city reserves the right to exclude or remove from any lot any headstone, monument or other structure, tree, plant or any object whatever which may conflict with the regulations, or which the city may consider injurious to the general appearance of the grounds. (Ord. 631 §l0(e), 1960).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 8
14.16.060 Alteration of walks, avenues. The city reserves the right to lay out, alter, or vacate avenues, or walks, to establish the grades of avenues, walks, and lots, and to charge those rules and regulations as may be deemed requisite and proper by the city, to secure and promote the general objectives and best interests of the cemetery, and no notice of such intended action shall be required. (Ord. 631 §l0(f), 1960).
14.16.070 Flat markers required. All monuments or markers hereafter placed upon any grave or lot in the cemetery shall be what is commonly referred to as a "flat marker" of a size not to exceed 12" by 20" for an infant marker, 20" by 32" for a single marker or 20" by 44" and shall be set flush with the contour of the ground. Standard size markers shall have a foundation. Standard sizes are as follows:
Infant 8" X 16"
Single 12" X 24"
Double 12" X 36"
(Ord. 93-5 1993)
14.16.071 Columbarium Inscriptions. Inscriptions for Columbarium Niches will be of a uniform size and font and will include the name, date of birth and date of death of the deceased. Additional engravings, such as military seals or other artwork performed by the City’s contractor, may be included as space allows for an additional fee, but can be no larger than 3”x3” overall. (Ord. 15-11, 2015)
14.16.080 Permit required for placement. No monument company nor any other person or persons, including relatives of persons buried in the Ephrata Cemetery, shall place any grave marker or monument, on any grave nor any other point in the cemetery without the permission of the Park Superintendent. (Ord 93-5,1993)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.16.100 Flower receptacles. Any receptacles for flowers or other decorations must be approved by the city and shall be set flush with the contour of the ground in four inches of concrete with a one-inch border. The city shall not be responsible for anything removable that may be placed or left on any grave or lot. (Ord. 1166 §1, 1986: Ord. 1162 §8, 1986: Ord. 631 §10(I), 1960, Ord 93-5, 1993)).
14.16.110 Notification. The City of Ephrata requires a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours notification prior to a burial.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 9
Chapter 14.20
GRAVES
Sections:
14.20.010 Dimensions.
14.20.020 Burial charges.
14.20.030 Vaults or liners required.
14.20.040 Payment of charges required prior to interment.
14.20.060 Change of charges.
14.20.070 Burial of nonresidents on welfare.
14.20.080 Ownership records.
14.20.090 Deed or certificate of ownership.
14.20.010 Dimensions. Grave plots for burial of adults shall be eight feet long and four feet wide and allow for one adult casket and one cremains per space or four cremains per space. Grave plots for infant burials and cremains shall be four feet long and four feet wide and allow for one infant casket or two infant cremains per space. Grave plots for cremains shall be four (4) feet long and four (4) feet wide and allow for placement of two (2) urns per standard cremains plot. There shall be one cremation urn per Columbarium Niche. (Ord. 1154 §2(a), 1986: Ord. 911 §2 (part), 1986: Ord. 793 §2(a), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(a), 1960: (Ord. 90-14 §1, 1990),(Ord. 93-6 §14, 1993, Ord. 98-6, 1998)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.20.020 Burial charges. The charges for sale of spaces, perpetual care and burial charges shall be as established in Chapter 3.35:
Resident fees shall apply to any individual who resides within the corporate limits of the City of Ephrata or owns taxable property within the incorporated area of the City of Ephrata.
(Ord 17-05, 2017)
(Ord. 1154 §2(b), 1986: Ord. 911 §2(part), 1976: Ord. 793 §2(b), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(a), 1960: Ord. 90-14, §1, 1990):(Ord. 93-6 §14 1993) (Ord. 96-32, 1996)(Ord. 98-6, 1998)(Ord. 05-05, 2005)(Ord. 10-12, 2010)(Ord. 12-05, 2012)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.20.030 Vaults or liners required.
(a) The use of vaults or liners shall be required for all burials in the cemetery of the city. All vaults or liners shall be Wilbert Precast 30G graveboxes; or, upon
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 10
prior approval of Ephrata Public Works, conform to the following specifications:
1. Manufacturer holds current “NPCA Precast Concrete Requirements”
certificate and has been audited in the last 24 months.
2. Dimensionally; 2’9” x 7’5” x 2’3.5”, with a 2.5” interlocking lid that includes beveled edges and 4 500lb lifting handles. Box shall include 2 1.5” centerline holes.
3. Construction of gravebox shall include 4x4 14-gage wire mesh reinformcement throughout, lid shall include a 6x6 wire mesh and a pencil rod mat. (Ord. 18-02, 2018)
(b) The use of a baby casket-vault combination in lieu of concrete liners for infants is permitted. (Ord. 1154 §2(c), 1986: Ord. 911 §2(part), 1976: Ord. 793 §2 (C), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(c), 1960).
(c) The use of a cremains urn is required for burials in the Columbarium Niche. Urn may not exceed 9"H x 9"W x 2 1/2"D. (Ord. 05-05, 2005)
14.20.040 Payment of charges required prior to interment. The charges for opening and closing the grave, the grave space, the endowment care of the grave, and the cost of the liner shall all be paid in full before any interment shall be permitted.
(Ord. 1154 §2(d), 1986: Ord. 911 §2(part), 1976: Ord. 793 §2(d), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(d), 1960)(Ord. 10-12, 2010)
14.20.060 Change of charges. The charges for grave space, for opening and closing a grave and for endowment care set forth in Section 14.20.020 may be changed from time to time by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 1154 §2(f), 1986: Ord. 911 §2(part), 1976: Ord. 793 §2(f), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(f), 1960).
14.20.070 Burial of nonresidents on welfare. Non-resident burials for individuals on welfare shall not be permitted in the city's cemetery. (Ord. 1154 §2(g), 1986: Ord. 911 §2(part), 1976: Ord. 793 §2(g), 1970: Ord. 631 §11(g), 1960).
14.20.080 Ownership records. The city shall keep an accurate and permanent record of the ownership of plots in the cemetery which have been conveyed by the city, and of all transfers of plots in the cemetery. The city shall also endeavor to establish the ownership of the lots in the cemetery that were sold before the cemetery was conveyed to the city, and shall keep an accurate record of the ownership of all such lots. The records shall be kept by the city clerk or their designee.
(Ord. 631 §8, 1960, Ord 93-6, 1993; Ord. 10-12, 2010).
14.20.090 Deed or certificate of ownership. Upon the payment in full of charges for grave space, and the endowment care of the grave, the city shall give to the purchaser a deed or certificate of ownership to the burial plot in question. In the deed or certificate of ownership the city shall agree to furnish endowment care to the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 11
grave in the plot described in the deed or certificate of ownership. (Ord. 631 §14, 1960; Ord 10-12, 2010).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 - 12
Chapter 14.24
ENDOWMENT CARE FUND
Sections:
14.24.010 Deposit of moneys.
14.24.020 Principal to remain inviolable.
14.24.030 Investment.
14.24.040 Expense fund.
14.24.010 Deposit of moneys. The amounts received for endowment care of a grave, as set forth in Chapter 3.35, shall be deposited with the city clerk or their designee and placed in the endowment fund. (Ord. 631 §12(a), 1960)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.24.020 Principal to remain inviolable. The principal of all funds for endowment care shall remain irreducible and inviolable, and be maintained separate and distinct from all other funds, except that the same may be invested as provided in Section 14.24.030. (Ord. 631 §12(b), 1960).
14.24.030 Investment. It shall be the duty of the city clerk, with the approval of the council, to invest all sums set aside from the sale of lots for endowment care, and all sums received from the endowment care of graves that were in the cemetery at the time it was turned over to the city. The income from the investments shall be held in trust for the endowment care of the graves in the cemetery for which the care has been paid; provided, however, that all investments shall be made in municipal, county, school, or state bonds, or invested in the Local Government Investment Pool or the Grant County Investment Pool. All investments shall be approved by the city council. All income received from the investment of the endowment care fund shall be deposited with the city clerk, kept in a fund known as the Cemetery Fund, and paid out by the clerk only for purposes authorized by the city council. (Ord. 631 §12 (c), (d) and (e), 1960; Ord 93-7 §14 1993)(Ord 12-14, 2012)
14.24.040 Expense fund. All funds coming into the hands of the city clerk for the cemetery, except for the purpose of endowment care, shall be kept by the city clerk, in a fund which shall be used for the purpose of operating, maintaining and improving the cemetery. (Ord. 631 §13, 1960; Ord. 93-7 §14 1993; Ord 12-14, 2012)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 1
Title 16
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:
16.04 Building Code
16.08 Unfit Buildings
16.20 Building Moving
16.24 Construction in Flood-hazard Areas
16.30 Undergrounding of Utilities
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 2
Chapter 16.04
BUILDING CODE
Sections:
16.04.010 Short title.
16.04.020 Adoption of building codes.
16.04.030 Amendments.
16.04.040 Administration and enforcement official.
16.04.050 Enforcement.
16.04.070 Compliance required.
16.04.077 Platting deemed insufficient when -
16.04.080 Violation--Penalty.
16.04.090 Fee Refunds.
16.04.100 Fees.
16.04.110 Investigation Fees - Work Without a Permit.
16.04.120 Key Box Required
16.04.130 Fire Department Connections
16.04.140 Commercial Kitchens
16.04.150 International Building Code Appendixes Adopted
16.04.010 Short title. This chapter shall be known as the building code of the city of Ephrata. (Ord. 894 §1, 1975).
16.04.020 Adoption of building codes.
All building and building-related codes as currently adopted, or as shall be adopted in future enactments by the State of Washington pursuant to RCW19.27.031 together with all amendments as currently enacted, or as shall be enacted by the State of Washington, are hereby adopted as, and are herein referred to as, the building codes for the City of Ephrata; provided, that all additions, deletions, and amendments as set forth in this title of the Ephrata Municipal Code (EMC) are also adopted.
The City of Ephrata shall adopt the following building codes consisting of the latest published editions of the following except as where amended:
A. Chapter 51-11 WAC – Washington State Energy Code
B. Chapter 51-50 WAC – State Building Code Adoption and Amendment of
the International Building Code; including Appendix Chapters (C ), (G),
(H), (I) and (J) of the International Building Code, and ICC ANSI A
117.1.
C. Chapter 51-51 WAC – State Building Code Adoption and Amendment of
the International Residential Code; including Appendix Chapter H.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 3
D. Chapter 51-52 WAC – State Building Code Adoption and Amendment of the International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code.
E. Chapter 51-54 WAC – State Building Code Adoption and Amendment of the International Fire Code.
F. Chapter 51-56 WAC – State Building Code Adoption and Amendment of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
G. International Existing Building Code (IEBC), published by the International Code Council.
H. International Swimming Pool & Spa Code (ISPSC) published by the International Code Council.
I. Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction (English Version)
J. National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and FEMA regulations as applied to Flood Plain Management.
(Ord. 92-9, Ord. 97-4, Ord. 97-24, Ord. 99-16; Ord. 11-19, 2011; Ord 14-17, 2014; Ord 18-04, 2018)
16.04.025 Permit fees. All fees for permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be established in Chapter 3.35. (Ord. 99-16; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.04.030 Amendments. The following amendments to the State Building Code are adopted and apply within this jurisdiction:
(1) Instructions for the installation of Manufactured Homes shall be per WAC 296-150M-0610, WAC 296-150M-0700, and WAC 296-150M-0710 and any additional requirements found in Chapter 19 (Zoning) of the Ephrata Municipal Code. (Ord. 97-4, 1997)
(2) Section 3202.3.1 of Chapter 32 of the International Building Code is amended to provide: (Ord. 97-4, 1997; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
Projections and Clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than 5 feet.
A marquee projecting more than two thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall be not less than 8 feet above the ground or pavement below.
A marquee projecting less than two thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall be not less than 8 feet above the ground or pavement below.
(3) Section 3202.3.2 of Chapter 32 of the International Building Code is amended to provide:
Projection. Awnings may extend over public property not more than 7 feet from the face of a supporting building, but no portion shall extend nearer than 5 feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no case
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 4
shall the awning extend over public property greater than two thirds of the distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the building site. (Ord. 97-4, 1997 Ord 11-19, 2011)
(4) Section 113 of Chapter 1 of the International Building Code is amended to provide:
(a) General. All references to the Board of Appeals in this Code are replaced with references to the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative tot he application and interpretation of this code. Any request for an appeal shall be accompanied by the required fees for the Hearing Examiner as established in other ordinances of the city. The Hearing Examiner shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. (Ord. 94-23, Ord. 97-4, 1997; Ord 11-19, 2011)
(b) Limitations of Authority. The Hearing Examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the Hearing Examiner be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
(Ord. 97-4, 1997)
(5) The snow load within the City of Ephrata shall be 30 p.s.f. (Pounds per square foot) (Ord. 97-24)
(6) Registered Professional Engineer or Architect stamped drawings will be required for any construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, or repairs of or to a structure of any occupancy of four-thousand (4000) square feet or larger. (RCW 18.08.410) (Ord. 97-24)
(7) Registered Professional Engineer or Architect stamped drawings will be required for any masonry or concrete wall or retaining wall in excess of Four (4) feet measured from the bottom of the footing. (Ord. 97-24; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
(8) Because the City of Ephrata is subject to wind driven snow and roof ice buildup. All roofs shall follow the severe climate application of underlayment found within Chapter 15 of the International Building Code. (Ord. 97-24; Ord 11-19, 2011)
(9) Building permit fees for the construction, remodeling, alteration and repairs of single-family or duplex dwellings shall be waived when all of the following conditions apply:
a) The residential structure is intended for and owned by low-income families, as defined by the Grant County H.U.D. income limits schedule.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 5
b) The construction of the structure involves primarily volunteer labor which includes the owner.
c) The structure is being constructed by an organization classified as a 501-C-3 non-profit organization by the Internal Revenue Service.
(Ord.00-11)
(10) Section 108.3, of the IRC and Section 109.3 of the IBC, are amended to read as follows:
Building Permit Valuations. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the building official using the ICC valuation data. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.04.035 Other code Amendments. The following amendments to the various codes adopted in section 16.04.020 are adopted and apply within this jurisdiction:
A. The Uniform Sign Code section 403(f) is amended to provide:
Clearance from Streets. Signs shall not project within 5 feet of the curb line.
B. The Uniform Sign Code Table Number 4-B is amended to provide:
CLEARANCE MAXIMUM PROJECTION
Less than 8' Not permitted
8' 5' from face of curb
8' to 16' 5' from face of curb
Over 16' 5' from face of curb
C. The Uniform sign code Section (602) is amended to provide; Height signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height.
D. 105.2 (R105.2) Work Exempt from Permit.
Subsections (1) and (2) of Section 105.2 (R105.2) Building are hereby amended to provide:
1. One-Story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet residential or 120 square feet commercial/industrial, are exempted from the requirements for a building permit. A permit for location placement of such exempt structures shall be issued by the City of Ephrata prior to construction or erection of these structures. The location
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 6
placement permit shall be based upon a scalable site plan provided by the applicant and shall show all existing structures on the property together with the distances from all structures to property lines and to other structures, all existing easements and property lines, and all new structures or building proposals. The location placement permit shall be binding upon the applicant for location placement of the structure for all purposed and requirements of Title 16 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. Fees associated with any other aspect of the structure or building proposal including, but not limited to, right-of-way construction permits, shall be as currently enacted in the Ephrata Municipal Code.
2. Fences not over seven (7) feet high and retaining walls not over (4) feet high are exempted from the requirements for a building permit. A permit for location placement of all fences and retaining walls up to (4) feet high shall be issued by the City of Ephrata prior to construction or erection of any fence or retaining wall. The location placement permit shall be based upon a scalable site plan provided by the applicant for said permit and shall show all existing structures on the property, all existing easements and property lines, and all new fence/retaining wall proposals. The location placement permit shall be binding upon the applicant for all purposes and requirements of Title 19 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. Fees associated with any other aspect of the fence/retaining wall proposal including, but not limited to, right-of-way construction permits, shall be as currently enacted in the Ephrata Municipal Code.
E. 105.2 (R105.2) Electrical. This entire subcategory, including repairs
and maintenance, radio and television transmitting devices, and temporary testing systems, shall not be adopted. All electrical permits and permit exemptions shall be as set forth by the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries.
F. 105.8 (R105.8) This subsection shall be amended to add the following
paragraph:
All contractors shall have a valid and current business license to conduct business with in the City of Ephrata pursuant to Title 5 of the Ephrata Municipal Code and shall have a valid and current contractors license and registration with the State of Washington, Department of Labor and Industries, prior to commencing any actual construction work within the City of Ephrata. (Ord. 18-04, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 7
16.04.040 Administration and enforcement official. The state building code and this code shall be administered and enforced by the building official or designee of the city of Ephrata. (Ord. 894 §4, 1975 Ord. 92-91, 1992; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.04.050 Enforcement. The building official or designee of the city of Ephrata shall be deemed to be the building official as defined in Section 202 of the International Building Code and in Section 104 of the International Mechanical Code. The chief of the fire department shall be deemed to be the "chief" or "chief of the fire department" for purposes of enforcing and administering all provisions of the International Fire Code. The building official or designee shall also be deemed the "administrative authority" as such term is defined in Section 202 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, for purposes of enforcing and administering the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code. The city council may, upon notice and hearing, promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the enforcement of this code. (Ord. 894 §5, 1975 Ord. 92-9, 1992, Ord. 97-4, 1997; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.04.070 Compliance required. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the state building code or this chapter. (Ord. 894 §8, 1975 Ord. 92-9, 1992).
16.04.075 Unplatted Areas: Building permits shall be issued only for structures located within recorded plats except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 92-9, 1992)
A. Building permits may be issued in unplatted areas, only in the following cases:
1. Remodeling of an existing building which conforms to the then current zoning;
2. Construction of a temporary structure;
3. Construction of an addition to a structure which complies with all regulations and codes applicable to structures constructed within the city if the lot upon which the structure is to be located has been surveyed and a record of survey has been or will be recorded prior to the beginning of construction, and that surveyed parcel conforms to lot size requirements including setbacks. Additionally, the parcel must be served by city utilities, have adequate fire flows and hydrants and have in place streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and lighting. If utilities already serve the parcel and streets and street lighting are in place, permission to build on unplatted land may be issued conditioned on the installation of curbs, gutters and/or sidewalks prior to the occupancy or use of the structure built. If the parcel does not have available adequate fire flows and hydrants, any permission to build must be conditioned upon the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 8
installation of necessary infrastructure to establish the required fire flows and hydrants prior to occupancy of the addition being constructed. (Ord. 99-3)
B. No building permit, or other development permit, shall be issued for any lot, tract or parcel of land divided in violation of RCW Chapter 58.17 or the platting ordinances and regulations of the city unless the Planning Commission finds that the public interest will not be adversely affected by the issuance of such a permit. The standards to determine if the public interest will be adversely affected includes but is not limited to consideration of the installation or existence of adequate sewer and water, conformance to lot size requirements, existence or requirement of street, sidewalk and curb improvements, all as respects the proposed building site and the surrounding area. The Planning Commission may condition the issuance of a building permit on unplatted land on the installation or completion of such utility, street and sidewalk improvements as the Planning Commission upon recommendation of staff shall deem, appropriate. The Planning Commission shall make the grant of the privilege to build on unplatted land personal to the applicant and such privilege shall expire if a building permit is not obtained within 60 days of the adoption of the resolution provided for herein. The Planning Commission shall only direct the issuance of such a permit by a resolution of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 99-3)(Ord. 99-12)
C. Building permits shall not be issued for any structure located within a preliminary plat except for building permits requested by the Grant County Housing Authority, or other public housing authority authorized by law to operate or provide public housing within the city, for housing units where such request shall be accompanied by security in a form acceptable to the City Attorney equal to the engineer’s estimate of the cost of installation of the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, water and sewer. Any buildings constructed pursuant to permits issued under this exception shall not be permitted to be occupied nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued until all public improvements are constructed and accepted by the city. (Ord. 92-9, 1992)(Ord. 99-12)
16.04.077 Platting Deemed Insufficient - When Property located within the city which is presently platted and which property was platted without the extension or of provision of city water, city sewer, storm sewer, streets or other improvements through some or all the lots of the plat shall be deemed to unplatted for purposes of the issuance of any development permit or building permit. Any lot so affected shall be permitted to develop and a building permit will be issued upon the installation of city water, city sewer, storm drains, streets and other improvements to community standards, including fire protection devices, or upon the posting of security in an amount approved by the Public Works Director, which is equal to the estimated cost of the extensions and/or improvements remaining to be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 9
installed through the lot, in a form acceptable to the city attorney to insure the construction of the required improvements and extensions at the same time as construction of the building for which the building permit was issued or at the time of the improvement of the affected lot.
16.04.080 Violation--Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. (Ord 92-9, 1992; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.04.090 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize the refunding of:
A. 100% of any fee erroneously paid or collected.
B. Up to 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
C. Up to 80% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permitee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
16.04.100 Fees. All fees for permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be established by a resolution of the city council if not established elsewhere in this Chapter.
16.04.110 Investigation Fees - Work Without A Permit.
A. Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
B. Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in the resolution adopting fees for permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. This fee is an additional, punitive fee and shall not apply to any permit fee that may subsequently be issued. Payment of the investigative fee does not vest the illegal work with any legitimacy, nor does it establish any right to a permit for continued development of that project. If the work done remains illegal for 90 days after service of the Stop Work Order, it shall be considered hazardous.
C. Payment. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. 04-27, 2004)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 10
16.04.120 Box Required.
Ephrata Fire Department approved key boxes are mandatory on all new construction requiring automatic fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, or automatic fire extinguishing systems. On buildings that are retro-fitted with required automatic fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, or that require automatic fire extinguishing systems, an Ephrata Fire Department approved key box is likewise required. All key boxes are to be installed on the exterior of the building at a location specified by the Fire Chief or their designee.
16.04.130 Fire Department Connections.
On all new construction and in buildings retro-fitted with required automatic fire sprinkler systems, or that require automatic fire extinguishing systems, Ephrata Fire Department connections shall be located not less than forty feet (40') from the protected building at a location approved by the Fire Chief or their designee. Where practical difficulties preclude the remote placement of Ephrata Fire Department connections, the Fire Chief or their designee may grant a waiver and authorize placement at a location reviewed and approved by the Ephrata Fire Chief.
Ephrata Fire Department connections shall be fitted with Knox® FDC screw-in type caps. The top of the Ephrata Fire Department connection shall be not more than forty-four inches (44") nor less than thirty-six inches (36") above the immediate local grade. All Ephrata Fire Department connection riser piping shall be painted red from grade to just below the threaded connection for the hose cap.
16.04.140 Commercial Kitchens.
All kitchens in Occupancy groups A, B, E, I, and R-1 (hotels) shall be defined as commercial kitchens. In all commercial kitchens, food-processing equipment which produces grease laden vapors shall be protected by an approved hood and ventilation system equipped with an automatic fire extinguishing system complying with UL Standard 300. Ventilation fans shall be connected to the fire suppression system in accordance with the fire system manufacturers instructions. A single residential cooking kitchen shall be exempt from this requirement. A facility with two (2) or more residential cooking units, in the same room, shall be inspected by the Ephrata Fire Department and a determination shall be made whether or not a fire suppression system will be required.
Inn kitchens with required automatic fire suppression systems, which do not comply with UL Standard 300 fire suppression systems shall be retro-fitted upon the next six (6) year system maintenance; or upon the discharge of the systems in response to a fire, or when a system has been out of service for more than six (6) months.
16.04.150 International Building Code Appendixes Adopted.
Appendix B “Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings”, Appendix C “Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution” and Appendix D “Fire Apparatus Access Roads” of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 11
the International Building Code are adopted now, or as hereafter forever amended, as requirements of the City of Ephrata Building Code and the International Building Code. (Ord 05-31, 2005)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 12
Chapter 16.08
UNFIT BUILDINGS
Sections:
16.08.010 Findings of City Council.
16.08.020 Definitions.
16.08.030 Duties of the Building Official.
16.08.040 Unfit Buildings Declared Nuisance.
16.08.050 Standards for Repair, Vacation, or Demolition.
16.08.060 Notice of Unfit Building.
16.08.070 Complaint by Building Official.
16.08.080 Unfit Building Hearing.
16.08.090 Unfit Building Order.
16.08.100 Appeals.
16.08.110 Abatement and Costs.
16.08.120 Emergency Cases
16.08.130 Penalties.
16.08.140 Permits Required.
16.08.150 Provisions of Chapter Cumulative.
16.08.010 Findings of City Council. The City Council finds that there exist in the city certain dwellings which are unfit for human habitation and buildings and structures which are unfit for other uses, due to dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities, inadequate ventilation, uncleanliness, inadequate light or sanitary facilities, inadequate drainage, overcrowding, or due to other conditions which are inimical to the health and welfare of city residents.
16.08.020 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them in this section:
Building Official means the building official of the city or his or her designee.
Building, or Structure means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
Hearing Examiner means the hearing examiner of the city or his or her designee.
Owner means any person having any interest in the real estate in question as shown upon the records of the office of the Grant County auditor, or who establishes his or her interest before the building official or the hearing examiner. For the purpose of giving notice, the term “owner” also includes any person in physical possession.
16.08.030 Duties of the Building Official.
The Building Official is the enforcement officer for the purposes of this chapter, and his or her duties and powers include:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 13
A. Investigation of all buildings and structures which he or she has reasonable grounds to believe may be in violation of the provisions of this chapter;
B. Preparation, service and posting of notices and complaints against buildings or structures believed to be in violation;
C. Presiding over the hearing on the complaint by administering oaths and affirmations, examining witnesses, and receiving evidence, and issuing an order; and
D. Doing all things necessary and proper to carry out and enforce this chapter.
16.08.040 Unfit Buildings Declared Nuisance.
All unfit buildings are declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as provided in this chapter. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects are deemed “unfit buildings”:
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three percent (33%), or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Those which have become damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein.
G. Those having inadequate facilities to egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of exit.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fail and injure members of the public or property.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 14
I. Those which have been constructed, exists, or are maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Building Code or any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings.
J. Those which because of their condition are unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city.
16.08.050 Standards for Repair, Vacation, or Demolition. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building Official and Hearing Examiner in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition of any unfit building.
A. If the unfit building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired by the Building Official or Hearing Examiner.
B. If the unfit building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated by the Building Official or the Hearing Examiner.
C. If the unfit building is fifty percent (50%) damaged, decayed, or deteriorated in value, it shall be demolished. Value as used in this subsection shall be the valuation placed upon the building for purposes of general taxation.
D. If the unfit building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be demolished.
E. If the unfit building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished, providing the fire hazard is not eliminated by the owner or other interested persons within a reasonable time.
16.08.060 Notice of Unfit Building. After a preliminary investigation, the Building Official shall notify, personally or by regular and certified mail, the owner of any unfit building that the property is in violation of this code. The owner shall be given fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the notice to respond to the Building Official to negotiate a voluntary correction agreement for the repair or demolition of the unfit building. The voluntary correction agreement shall include:
A. The name and address of the owner or person bound under the contract;
B. The street address and a legal description sufficient to identify the premises;
C. A description of the violation and a reference to the provisions of this code or other regulation that has been violated;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 15
D. The corrective action to be taken, and a date and time by which the corrective action must be completed;
E. An agreement by the owner that the City of Ephrata may abate the violation and recover its costs and expenses pursuant to this chapter if all terms of the voluntary agreement are not met;
F. A waiver by the owner of the right to any administrative or legal review of the violations, the appropriate corrections, and all other rights except those in the agreement;
G. The administrative costs to be paid and by whom;
H. Permission by the owner for the city to enter upon the property at any time or, in the case of occupied property, at reasonable times until the violation is abated; and
I. An acknowledgement.
The Building Official may grant extensions to the time schedule if the owner has been diligent and has made substantial progress but has been unavoidably delayed, upon written request. Such requests must be filed with the Building Official prior to the deadlines set for the completion of the repairs or demolition.
16.08.070 Complaint by Building Official.
A. Unfit Building Complaint. In the event that the owner does not respond to the notification or the City and owner cannot agree on a voluntary correction agreement for the repair or demolition of the unfit building, the Building Official shall prepare an Unfit Building Complaint against the property and owner.
B. Content of Complaint. The complaint shall contain, among other things, the following information:
1. Name of owner.
2. Street address and legal description of the property on which the building is located.
3. General description of type of building, wall, or structure deemed unfit.
4. A complete, itemized statement or list of particulars which caused the building, wall, or structure to be an unfit building as defined in Section 16.08.040.
5. Whether or not the building should be vacated by its occupants, and the date of such vacation.
6. Whether or not the statement of list of particulars, as provided for in Subsection 4 can be removed or repaired.
7. Whether or not the building constitutes a fire menace.
8. Whether or not it is unreasonable to repair the building and whether or not the building should be demolished.
9. A notice that a hearing shall be held before the Building Official at the City Hall, Ephrata, Grant County, Washington, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of such complaint, or in
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 16
the event of publication, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the first publication and that all parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear in person or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint.
C. Service.
1. The complaint issued by the Building Official must be in writing and shall be sent either by certified and regular mail or served personally upon all persons having any interest in and to the property, as shown by the records of the Grant County Assessor of any building or structure found by the Building Official to be an unfit building within the standards set forth in Section 16.08.040.
2. If the whereabouts of such persons having an interest in the property are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Building Official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the Building Official makes an affidavit to that effect, then the complaint shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the city.
3. The complaint shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the property.
4. Service by mail of any complaint, notice, order, notice of appeal, or other paper under this chapter shall be deemed complete at the end of the third business day following its deposit in the U.S. Mail, correctly addressed, with postage prepaid.
D. Filing with Auditor. A copy of such complaint shall also be filed with the Grant County Auditor, which filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
16.08.080 Unfit Building Hearing. The hearing provided for in section 16.08.070 shall be conducted by the Building Official at the time and place provided for in the complaint, or at such time or place to which the hearing is adjourned or continued. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Building Official.
16.08.090 Unfit Building Order.
A. If, after the required hearing, the Building Official determines that such building or structure is not an unfit or dangerous building as defined in this chapter, the Building Official shall enter in writing findings of fact to that effect and shall enter an order dismissing the complaint and shall file a copy of such order with the auditor of Grant County, Washington.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 17
B. If, after hearing, the Building Official determines that such building or structure is an unfit or dangerous structure as defined in this chapter, the Building Official shall enter in writing findings of fact to that effect and shall enter an appropriate order in accordance with the standards set out in this chapter, which findings of fact and order shall provide as follows:
1. Name of owner.
2. Street address and legal description of the property on which the building is located.
3. General description of type of building, wall, or structure deemed unfit or substandard.
4. A complete itemized statement of the violations of Section 16.08.040 which resulted in the classification of the building or structure as unfit.
5. Whether or not the violations as outlined in Section 16.08.040 structure can be removed or repaired.
6. Whether or not the building or structure constitutes a fire hazard.
7. A statement that the City of Ephrata has incurred costs in processing the Unfit Building Abatement action and that pursuant to RCW 35.80.030(1)(h), all costs incurred by the City for this purpose, including demolition, if necessary, shall be assessed against the property and shall be collected thereafter by the County Treasurer as a part of the general taxes.
8. A requirement that the property shall be nuisance-free at all times.
9. The order shall provide specific instructions on whether the building or structure is to be demolished, repaired, or maintained, and a timeframe for doing so.
C. The findings of fact and order shall be served on each owner in the manner provided for the service of the unfit building complaint under Section 16.08.070.
D. If no appeal is filed as provided in this chapter, a copy of the order shall be filed with the Grant County Auditor, and shall be a final order.
16.08.100 Appeals.
A. The owner or party in interest may file an appeal of the Building Official’s Order with the Hearing Examiner within thirty (30) days after the posting and service of the Building Official’s Order. The filing of the notice of appeal shall stay the Order of the Building Official except for temporary measures required to protect against immediate danger to the public health and safety. Any applicable fees, per EMC 3.35, shall be paid prior to the appeal hearing.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 18
B. The Hearing Examiner or designee shall set the appeal hearing within not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the appeal has been filed and shall notify the appellant.
C. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a full and fair review of the record of the proceedings before the Building Official, and the action taken. The hearing shall be on the record and not de novo.
D. The Hearing Examiner may affirm, modify, reverse, or return with directions, the action or decision appealed in the event he or she finds an error of law or the record is not supported by substantiated evidence.
E. At the conclusion of the hearing the Hearing Examiner shall issue a written decision describing the decision or action appealed, making written findings of fact and stating the reasons for his or her decision, and making an appropriate order or orders, notify the appellant in writing of his or her action, and file the decision, findings, and orders with the Grant County Auditor. A transcript of the Hearing Examiner’s decision, findings, and orders shall be made available to the appellant, on demand. The decision, findings, and orders of the Hearing Examiner shall be reported in the same manner and shall bear the same legal consequences as if issued by the Building Official.
F. The Hearing Examiner shall enter his or her final decision within sixty (60) days of the filing of the notice of appeal unless the appellant consents to a continuance.
G. The Hearing Examiner may promulgate additional written rules of procedure for the conduct of proceedings, to ensure a prompt and thorough review of appeals.
H. The owner or party in interest may petition the Grant County Superior Court for an injunction restraining the City from carrying out the provisions of the order by filing an action within thirty (30) days after the posting and service of the Hearing Examiner’s Order. In all such proceedings the court is authorized to affirm, reverse, or modify the order and such trial shall be heard de novo.
16.08.110 Abatement and Costs.
A. If the owner, following exhaustion of his or her rights of appeal, fails to comply with the final order to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove or demolish the unfit building, or to take other required action, the Building Official may direct or cause such unfit building to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, and closed, removed, or demolished, and to take such further steps as may be reasonable and necessary to prevent access to the unfit building, for public health or safety reasons, pending abatement. The Building Official, with the assistance of the City Attorney, may apply to the Superior Court for any legal or equitable remedy to enforce his or her order.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 19
B. The amount of the cost of the abatement of the unfit building for such repairs, alternations, or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the Building Official, shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount has been paid previously, and such cost shall be certified by the City Finance Director to the County Treasurer as an amount due and owing to the City, pursuant to RCW 35.80.030 , to be entered by the County Treasurer as an assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and to become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as is provided in RCW 84.56.020 as now or hereafter amended, for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the credit of the City’s general fund.
C. If the unfit building is removed or demolished by the Building Official, the officer shall, if possible, sell the materials at a public auction or by sealed bids pursuant to notice published in the City’s official newspaper or at least ten days prior to the auction. The proceeds of the sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition, and if there is any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the Building Official, after deducting costs incident to the sale.
D. As provided in RCW 35.80.030, the assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county, and municipal taxes.
E. Whenever a building or structure is found to be unsafe or unfit and the cost of demolition or other abatement must be incurred by the City, there shall be charged against the property the costs of all administrative proceedings before the Building Official and the Hearing Examiner including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, benefits, material, equipment rental, and other expenses incurred for inspecting, conducting hearings, or otherwise determining the status of the property.
F. The Building Official or Hearing Examiner may modify the time or methods of payment of such expenses as the condition of the property and the circumstances of the owner may warrant. In cases of extreme hardship, such expenses may be waived pursuant to an appropriate written finding by the Hearing Examiner.
16.08.120 Emergency Cases. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless an unfit building as defined in Section 16.08.020 is immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the Building Official shall cause the immediate repair, vacation, or demolition of such unfit building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation, or demolition of such unfit building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in this chapter.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 20
16.08.130 Penalties. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to knowingly:
A. Occupy or suffer to be occupied any building or structure ordered vacated;
B. Fail to comply with any order issued pursuant to this chapter; or
C. Obstruct any officer or agent of the City of Ephrata or other governmental unit in the enforcement of this chapter.
Violation of any provision of this section shall be a civil infraction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Each violation shall be subject to a C-10 penalty.
16.08.140 Permits Required. Any work including demolition, construction, repairs, or alterations required under this chapter shall be subject to permitting requirements pursuant to the Ephrata Municipal Code.
16.08.150 Provisions of Chapter Cumulative. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power of the city or any department thereof to enforce any provision of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and any powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to powers conferred by other laws, nor shall this chapter be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or in any other manner provided by law.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 21
Chapter 16.20
BUILDING MOVING
Sections:
16.20.010 Permit required.
16.20.020 Date, time, route approval.
16.20.030 Cleanup bond required.
16.20.040 Cleanup approval.
16.20.010 Permit required. No structure of any sort shall be moved within or from the city without first having obtained a permit from the city treasurer's office. The permit fee shall be as established in Chapter 3.35 Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services. (Ord. 726 §1, 1966; Ord. 11-19, 2011)
16.20.020 Date, time, route approval. Before any structure is removed either within or out of the city, the city engineer shall approve a date, time and route to be taken by the owner or mover. Moving shall be done only on weekdays, excluding holidays and weekends and during daylight hours. No structure shall be allowed to block a street overnight. (Ord. 726 §2, 1966).
16.20.030 Cleanup bond required. In the event a structure is moved within or removed from the city, the owner or mover must deposit a cleanup bond in the amount as established in Chapter 3.35, either in cash, certified check or performance bond with surety approved by the city, to assure faithful performance and cleanup of each lot. The owner or mover shall be required to return the property to as near its original condition as possible and all aboveground concrete shall be taken down to ground level and all basements or crawl spaces filled to ground level. There shall be no burning of scrap lumber or other debris. All existing sewer lines into structure shall be sealed with concrete. (Ord. 1966). 726 §3, 1966; Ord. 11-19, 2011).
16.20.040 Cleanup approval. The city engineer or his delegated representative shall approve all property from which structures have been removed prior to release of the cleanup bond. The cleanup of each lot or premises shall be completed within thirty days after a structure has been removed. Upon failure of the owner or mover to clean up the lot within the thirty day period, the bond shall be immediately forfeited and the city authorized to do the necessary work to complete the cleanup as provided herein. (Ord. 726 §4, 1966).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 22
Chapter 16.24
CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD-HAZARD AREAS
Sections:
16.24.010 Building permit review--Specifications.
16.24.020 New development proposal review.
16.24.025 Development Permit Required
16.24.030 Water, sewage and waste disposal system requirements.
16.24.010 Building permit review--Specifications. The building official or designee shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites are in the special flood hazard area as indicated on the FEMA FIRM mapping. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with current FEMA standards;
(2) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage if applicable, and/or elevate structure in accordance with current FEMA standards and Chapter 19.11 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage in accordance with FEMA standards and Chapter 19.11 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. (Ord. 891 §1, 1975; Ord 11-19, 2011).
16.24.020 New development proposal review. The building inspector shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(4) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 891 §2, 1975).
16.24.025 Development permit required. See Chapter 19.11 of the Ephrata Municipal Code
for development permit requirements in the Special Flood Hazard areas.
(Ord18-05, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 23
16.24.030 Water, sewage and waste disposal system requirements. The building inspector shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 891 §3, 1975).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 24
Chapter 16.30
UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
Sections:
16.30.010 Underground Utility Policy
16.30.020 Definitions
16.30.030 Underground Installation Required
16.30.040 Cost
16.30.050 Variances
16.30.010 Underground Utility Policy. With the increased use of the properties and streets within the city, the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city require that electrical, telephone, and TV cable facilities be located or relocated underground as soon as practical.
16.30.020 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the term electrical or communication facilities means electric power, telephone, telegraph, and cable television facilities, provided, however that the terms shall not include the following facilities:
A. Electric utility substations, surface mounted transformers and switching facilities;
B. Street lighting standards;
C. Telephone pedestals and other equivalent communication facilities;
D. Police and fire sirens or any similar municipal equipment, including traffic control equipment.
16.30.030 Underground Installation required.
A. All electrical and communication facilities other than electrical or communication services located on private property shall be installed underground by the utility owning said facility in the following cases:
1. When it becomes necessary to remove or relocate existing overhead facilities for a distance of five hundred feet (500') or more because of a roadway widening project or other similar reason.
2. When existing overhead facilities for a distance of over five hundred (500') are to be replaced, provided, however, this provision shall not apply to replacements due solely to casualty damage nor to replacement of wire or cable only.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 25
3. When any electrical or communication facilities are extended beyond those facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter.
4. When another utility having facilities along the same street or easement places its facilities underground for a distance of over five hundred feet (500').
B. All undergrounding of facilities within public right-of-way initiated by utilities and covered by this ordinance must have approval of the City Council or its representatives prior to undertaking such project.
C. All electrical and communication services located on private property shall be installed underground by the owner of the property in the following cases:
1. All new electrical and communication services from an underground facility to service connections shall be installed underground. All new electrical and communication services from an overhead facility to service connections may be installed overhead, however, the property owner may elect to have the service installed underground.
2. All rebuilt or relocated electrical or communication service lines from an underground facility to service connections shall be installed underground. All rebuilt or relocated electrical communication service lines from an overhead facility may be installed overhead, however, the property owner may elect to have the service installed underground.
3. All existing electrical and communication services shall be converted to underground by the owner or owners of the property upon which said services are located within ninety (90) days after notification by the city in accordance with RCW 35.96.050 that underground facilities are available.
16.30.040 Cost. The cost and expense of relocating the existing facilities, or installing new facilities, underground, shall be borne by the serving utilities and/or the owners of the real property served and/or persons applying for such underground service in accordance with the applicable filed tariffs, or the rules and regulations, or the published policies of the respective utilities furnishing such service or as may be contractually agreed upon between the utility and such owner or applicant.
16.30.050 Variances:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 - 26
A. A variance from the underground installation requirements of this chapter may be granted by the Ephrata City Council upon application of the utility or property owner concerned if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Ephrata City Council that the variance is in the interests of the general health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the City of Ephrata and traveling public and one of the following conditions exists:
1. It is technologically unsound to require undergrounding of a particular location; or
2. That the costs of the underground installation, when compared to overhead installation, is disproportionate in comparison to the benefit to be gained by the property and/or public and is disproportionately high when compared to other properties or locations; or
3. Where the area in which undergrounding is required has not established a sufficient growth pattern to permit the determination of ultimate facility requirements to major transmission routes.
B. When granting a variance, the Ephrata City Council may attach conditions to the granting of said variance including placing a time limit on the duration of such variance.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 1 Land Development
Title 17
LAND DEVELOPMENT
17.01 Administration of Development Regulations
17.02 Procedures for Amendments to Comprehensive Plan
17.05 Application Fees and Charges
17.13 Enforcement
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 2 Land Development
Chapter 17.01 ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
17.01.010 Purpose and applicability.
17.01.020 Definitions.
17.01.025 Abbreviations.
17.01.030 Application processes and classification.
17.01.040 Project permit application framework.
17.01.050 Exemptions from project permit application processing.
17.01.060 Joint public hearings.
17.01.070 Process VI legislative actions.
17.01.080 Pre-application conference.
17.01.090 Project permit applications.
17.01.100 Submission and acceptance of application.
17.01.105 Application vesting.
17.01.110 Procedure for complete, but “incorrect applications.”
17.01.120 Referral and review of project permit applications.
17.01.130 Public notice – Generally.
17.01.140 Notice of application.
17.01.145 Notice of public hearing.
17.01.150 Consistency with development regulations and SEPA.
17.01.155 Code of conduct.
17.01.160 Open record hearings.
17.01.170 Notice of decision.
17.01.180 Time limitations.
17.01.190 Open record appeal.
17.01.195 Closed record appeal.
17.01.200 Judicial appeals.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 3 Land Development
17.01.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a set of processes to be used for land use and development proposals subject to review under the following portions of the EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE (EMC):
A. Ch. 16.04 EMC Building Codes;
B. Ch. 18 EMC Subdivisions;
C. Ch. 19 EMC Zoning;
D. Ch. 20.04 EMC Environmental Policy Act; and
E. Ch. 20.08 EMC Protection and Development Regulations of Critical Areas and Resource Lands
17.01.020 Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.
A. Closed record appeals are administrative appeals under Chapter 36.70B RCW which are heard by the city council or hearing examiner, following an open record hearing on a project permit application when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appeal arguments allowed.
B. Judicial appeals are appeals filed by a party of record in Grant County Superior Court.
C. Open record hearing means a hearing held under Chapter 36.70B RCW and conducted by a single hearing body or officer authorized by the local government to conduct such hearing, typically the Planning Commission or Hearing Examiner who is authorized by the city to conduct such hearings, that creates the city’s record through testimony and submission of evidence and information, under procedures prescribed by the city by ordinance or resolution. An open record hearing may be held prior to the city’s decision on a project permit to be known as an “open record pre-decision hearing.” An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an “open record appeal hearing,” if no open record pre-decision hearing has been held on the project permit.
D. Parties of record means:
1. The applicant;
2. The property tax payer as identified by the records available from the Grant County Assessor’s office;
3. Any person who testified at the open record public hearing on the application; and/or
4. Any person who submitted written comments during administrative review or has submitted written comments concerning the application at the open record public hearing (excluding persons who have only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters).
E. Project permit means any land use or environmental permit or license required from the City of Ephrata for a project action, including but not limited to building permits, site development permits, land use preparation permits, subdivisions, binding site plans, planned unit developments, conditional uses, development plan review, site specific rezones authorized by the comprehensive plan; but excluding adoption or amendment of the comprehensive plan and development regulations, zoning of newly annexed land, area-wide
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 4 Land Development
rezones, and zoning map amendments except as otherwise specifically included in this subsection.
F. Planning director means the Community Development Director of the City of Ephrata or his/her designee.
G. Public meeting means an informal meeting, hearing, workshop, or other public gathering of persons to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed project permit prior to the city’s decision. A public meeting may include, but is not limited to, a design review meeting, a special committee meeting, such as the short subdivision committee, or a scoping meeting on a draft environmental impact statement. A public meeting does not include an open record hearing. The proceedings at a public meeting may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the city’s project permit application file.
17.01.025 Abbreviations.
The abbreviations used in this document are:
Ch. Chapter
DS Determination of Significance
DNS Determination of Non-Significance
EIS Environmental Impact Statement
EMC Ephrata Municipal Code
MDNS Mitigated Determination of Non-Significance
SEPA State Environmental Policy Act
RCW Revised Code of Washington
WAC Washington Administrative Code
(Ord. 13-07, 2013)
17.01.030 Application processes and classification.
A. Application processes. Project permit applications for review pursuant to this chapter shall be classified as a Process I, Process II, Process III, Process IV, or Process V action. Process VI actions are legislative. Project permit applications and decisions are categorized by type as set forth in EMC 17.01.040 (See Table 1 and Table 2).
B. Determination of proper process type. The Community Development Director shall determine the proper process types for all applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate process type, the Community Development Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher process type number. Process I is the lowest and Process VI is the highest.
C. Optional consolidated permit processing. An application that involves two (2) or more process types may be treated collectively under the highest numbered process type required for any part of the application or treated individually under each process type identified by the chapter. An applicant may ask that his or her application be treated collectively or individually. If the application is administered under the individual process option, the highest numbered process procedure must be finalized prior to the subsequent lower numbered process being finalized. If the application is processed under the individual procedure option, there shall be no more than one (1) open record hearing and no more than one (1) closed record appeal for all application processes. Open record hearings and closed record appeals must be consolidated under the higher process type number.
D. Decision maker(s). Applications processed in accordance with subsection (C) of this section which have the same highest numbered process type but are assigned different hearing bodies shall be heard collectively by the highest decision maker(s). The City Council is the highest, followed by the Hearing Examiner, Planning Commission, and then the Short Subdivision Committee and the Community Development Director. Joint public hearings with other agencies shall be processed according to EMC 17.01.060, Joint public hearings.
E. Environmental review. Process I, II, III, IV, and V permits which are subject to environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) are subject to the provisions of this chapter. An environmental checklist shall be submitted in conjunction with the submittal of a project permit application. One (1) environmental threshold determination shall be made for all related project permit applications. The city will not issue a threshold determination, other than a DS, prior to the submittal of a complete project permit
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 5 Land Development
application and the expiration of the public comment period for the notice of application pursuant to EMC 17.01.140, but may utilize the public notice procedures as outlined in EMC 20.04.410(A)(1) to consolidate public notice.
17.01.035 Application Fees.
Application fees for all Type I, II, III, IV, V and VI process applications shall be as defined in the Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services. (Ord. 13-07, 2013)
17.01.040 Project permit application framework.
A. Process types. The following table lists the process types, the corresponding applications, and parenthetically, the corresponding final decision maker and appellate body.
B. Process procedures. The following table lists the process types and the corresponding procedures.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 6 Land Development
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 7 Land Development
Table 1: Project Process Type
The first number that appears in parenthesis next to the development permit process type indicates the individual or board that makes the final decision on a project review. The second number shown in parenthesis indicates the individual or board that would review and decide on an appeal to said decision. Numbers as shown relate to the list immediately following the table. (Ord. 13-07, 2013)
Process I
Process II
Process III
Process IV
Process V
Process VI
Administrative Consistency Review (1), (7)
Short Subdivision Type I (4), (7)
Conditional Use Permit (5), (8)
Preliminary Plat (6), (10)
Final Plat (6), (10)
Zoning of newly annexed lands (6), (10)
Building Permits (3)
Short Subdivision Type II (4), (7)
Variance Requests to Zoning Requirements (5), (8)
Site Specific Rezones (6), (10)
Appeals of Community Development Director actions pursuant to Section 20.08.070 (6)
Area Wide Rezones to Implement new City Policies (6), (10)
Administrative Interpretation (1), (8)
Major amendments or modifications to Preliminary or Final Short Subdivisions (4)
Variance to Non-Conforming Use Standards (6), (10)
Comprehensive Plan Amendments (6), (10)
Boundary Line Adjustments (1), (7)
Binding Site Plan of 9 lots or less (4), (7)
Appeals of SEPA Determinations (5)
Major amendments or modifications to Preliminary or Final Plats (6), (10)
Development Regulations (6), (10)
Time Extension Review (1)
Special Use Permits (1), (8)
Appeals of Zoning Code Enforcement (5)
Appeal of Hearing Examiner Decision (6)
Zoning Map Amendments (6), (10)
Minor Administrative Amendments (1)
Appeals to Landscaping Requirements (5)
Binding Site Plan of more than 10 lots (6), (10)
Zoning Text Amendments/Area Wide Rezones (6), (10)
Home Occupation Applications (1), (7)
Appeal of Staff Decision regarding Insufficient Platting (5)
Planned Unit Development
Development Plan Review (1)
Consolidated Application for Manufactured Housing Communities (5), (8)
Special Use Combining District (6), (10)
Annexation (6), (10)
Landscaping Requirements (1), (9)
Major amendments or modifications to Binding Site Plans (5), (8)
Off-Street Parking Requirements (1), (9)
Sign Variances (5), (8)
Sign Permit (3), (7)
Segregation for conveyance plat (1)
Critical Area Review (1), (8)
Administrative Variance (1)
Site Plan Review (1) or (3)
(1)Final decision by Community Development Director (6) Final decision made by City Council
(2)Final decision by Planning Commission (7) Appeal to Hearing Examiner
(3)Building Official (8) Appeal to City Council
(4)Final decision made by Short Subdivision Committee (9) Appeal to Planning Commission
(5)Final decision made by Hearing Examiner (10) No administrative appeals
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 8 Land Development
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 9 Land Development
Table 2: Project Process Procedures
(Ord. 13-07, 2013)
Process I
Process II
Process III
Process IV
Process V
Process VI
Requires Pre-Application conference:
Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review
Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review
Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review
Yes
No
No
Notice of Application:
Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review
Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Recommendation made by:
N/A
N/A
N/A
Planning Commission
N/A
Planning Commission
Final Decision made by:
Community Development Director, Public Works Director, Building Official as applicable
Community Development Director/Short Subdivision Committee as applicable
Hearing Examiner
City Council, based upon record made before Planning Commission
City Council
City Council
Open Record Appeal:
Yes, if appealed, then before hearing examiner
Yes, if appealed then before hearing examiner
No
No
No
No
Open Record Hearing:
No
No
Yes, before hearing examiner to make final decision
Yes, before Planning Commission to make recommendation to council
No
Yes, before Planning Commission to make recommendation to City Council and/or before City Council
Reconsideration:
No
No
Yes, of Hearing Examiner’s decision
Yes, of Planning Commission’s recommendation
No
No
Closed Record Appeal:
No
No
Yes, before City Council
No
No
No
Judicial Appeal:
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 10 Land Developmen t
17.01.050 Exemptions from project permit application processing.
A. General exemptions. The following permits or approvals are specifically excluded from the procedures set forth in this chapter:
1. Landmark designations.
2. Street vacations.
3. Street use permits.
4. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(2), boundary line adjustments, building permits, and other construction permits, which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA or that do not require street improvements.
5. Administrative approvals which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the city’s SEPA/environmental policy ordinance, Ch. 20.04 EMC, or for which environmental review has been completed in connection with other project permits.
17.01.060 Joint public hearings.
A. Community Development Director decision to hold joint hearing. The Community Development Director may combine any public hearing on a project permit application with any hearing that may be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency, on the proposed action, as long as:
1. The other agency consents to the joint hearing;
2. The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing so;
3. Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to meet each of the agencies’ adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule;
4. The agency has received the necessary information about the proposed project from the applicant in enough time to hold its hearing at the same time as the local government hearing; and
5. The hearing is held within the Ephrata City Limits.
B. Applicant’s request for a joint hearing. The applicant may request that the public hearing on a permit application be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in this chapter. In the alternative, the applicant may agree to a particular schedule if additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings.
17.01.070 Process VI legislative actions.
A. Legislative actions. The following process VI actions are legislative, and are not subject to the procedures in this chapter, unless otherwise specified:
1. Zoning newly annexed lands;
2. Area-wide rezones and zoning map amendments to implement city policies;
3. Comprehensive plan amendments;
4. Development regulations and zoning text amendments; and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 11 Land Developmen t
17.01.080 Pre-application conference.
A. Applicability. The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide city staff with a sufficient level of detail about a proposal so that the city staff can acquaint the applicant with the requirements of the Ephrata Municipal Code - application conferences are required for Process I, II, III, and IV permits which require environmental review. Only one (1) pre-application conference shall be required for all project permit applications related to the same project. Pre-application conferences shall precede the submittal of any project permit application, including an environmental checklist. The Community Development Director may waive in writing the requirement for a pre-application conference for proposals that are determined not to be of a size and complexity to require the detailed analysis of a pre-application conference.
B. Pre-application conference initiation. To initiate a pre-application conference, an applicant shall submit a completed form provided by the city and all information pertaining to the proposal as prescribed by administrative procedures of the Community Development Department. Failure to provide all pertinent information may prevent the city from identifying all applicable issues or providing the most effective pre-application conference.
C. Scheduling. A pre-application conference may be conducted at any point prior to application for a project permit. A pre-application conference shall be scheduled by the city within five (5) working days of a completed pre-application conference request. The pre-application conference shall be held within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of a completed request, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of this time period in writing.
D. At the conference the applicant may request the following information be provided:
1. A form which lists the requirements of a complete project permit application;
2. A general summary of the procedures to be used to process the application;
3. The references to the relevant code provisions on development; and
4. The city’s design guidelines.
E. It is impossible for the conference to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues. The discussion at the conference or the form sent to the applicant under subsection (D)(1) of this section shall not bind or prohibit the city’s future application or enforcement of the applicable law.
17.01.090 Project permit applications.
A. Required materials. Applications for all project permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the city.
17.01.100 Submission and acceptance of application.
A. Determination of completeness. Within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receiving a project permit application for review for completeness, the city shall mail or personally provide a written determination of completeness to the applicant, which to the extent known by the city, identifies other agencies with jurisdiction over the project permit application, and states either:
1. That the application is complete; or
2. That the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 12 Land Developmen t
If the city does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed complete. The time period guidelines for review of project permit applications begin following the determination of a complete application.
B. Additional information for “complete applications.” A determination of completeness shall be made when an application is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The city’s determination of completeness shall not preclude the city from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice of completeness or at some later time, if new information is required or where there are substantial changes in the proposal.
C. Procedure for “incomplete applications.”
1. Prior to a determination of a complete application, if the applicant receives a written determination from the city that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the city. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the city shall make the determination of completeness as described in subsection (A) of this section, and notify the applicant in the same manner.
2. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review.
D. Date of acceptance of application. When the project permit application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance.
E. Project review. Following a determination that an application is complete, the city shall begin project review.
17.01.105 Application vesting.
A project permit application shall vest upon the submission of a fully completed project permit application, as defined in EMC 17.01.100. Vesting shall apply to land use regulations in effect on the land at the time a fully completed project permit application has been accepted as complete pursuant to EMC 17.01.100(D).
17.01.110 Procedure for complete, but “incorrect applications.”
A. Following a determination of a complete application and the commencement of project review, the city may make a determination in writing that some information is incorrect, and that corrected information be submitted. The applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit corrected information.
B. The city shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to review the submittal of corrected information. If the corrected information is still not sufficient, the city shall notify the applicant in writing that the submitted information is incorrect, and the time period set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall be repeated. This process may continue until complete or corrected information is obtained.
C. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit corrected information or does not submit the corrected information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 13 Land Developmen t
D. If the requested corrected information is sufficient, the city shall continue with project review, in accordance with the time calculation exclusions set forth in EMC 17.01.180.
17.01.120 Referral and review of project permit applications.
Within ten (10) calendar days of accepting a complete application, the Community Development Director shall do the following:
A. Transmit a copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the application, to each affected agency and city department for review and comment, including those responsible for determining compliance with state, federal and county requirements. The affected agencies and city departments shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to comment. The referral agency or city department is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The Community Development Director shall grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall only be for a maximum of three (3) additional calendar days.
17.01.130 Public notice – Generally.
The available records of the Grant County Assessor’s office shall be used for determining the property taxpayer of record. Addresses for mailed notice shall be obtained from the county’s real property tax records. All public notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. Failure to provide the public notice as described in this chapter shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision.
17.01.140 Notice of application.
A. Notice of application. A notice of application shall be issued for Process I and Process II permits requiring SEPA review, short plats, and all Process III and Process IV applications within fourteen (14) calendar days after the city has made a determination of completeness pursuant to EMC 17.01.100(A); provided, that if any open record hearing is required for the requested project permit(s), the notice of application shall be provided at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the open record hearing. One (1) notice of application will be done for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete permit application.
B. SEPA exempt projects. A notice of application shall not be required for project permits that are categorically exempt under SEPA, unless a public comment period or an open record pre-decision hearing is required.
C. Contents. The notice of application shall include:
1. The case file number(s), the date of application, the date of the determination of completeness for the application and the date of the notice of application;
2. A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the application and, if applicable, a list of any studies requested by the review authority pursuant to RCW 36.70B.070;
3. The identification of other permits not included in the application, to the extent known by the city;
4. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project, and, if not otherwise stated on the document providing notice of application, the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 14 Land Developmen t
5. A statement of the limits of the public comment period, which shall be not less than fourteen (14) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of notice of application, and statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights;
6. The tentative date, time, place and type of hearing. The tentative hearing date is to be set at the time of the date of notice of the application;
7. A statement of the preliminary determination of consistency, if one has been made at the time of notice, and of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency as provided in EMC 17.01.150;
8. The name of the applicant or applicant’s representative and the name, address and telephone number of a contact person for the applicant, if any;
9. A description of the site, including current zoning and nearest road intersections, reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location; and
10. Any other information determined appropriate by the city, such as a DS, if complete at the time of issuance of the notice of application or the city’s statement of intent to issue a DNS pursuant to the optional DNS process set forth in WAC 197-11-355.
D. Mailing of notice of application. The city shall mail a copy of the notice of application to the following:
1. Agencies with jurisdiction; and
2. Any person who requests such notice in writing delivered to the Community Development Department office; and
3. Applicant.
E. Public comment on the notice of application. All public comments received on the notice of application must be received by the Community Development Department by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible.
F. Posted notice of application. In addition to the mailed notice of application, the city will post notice of application at Ephrata City Hall. The applicant shall be responsible for posting the property for site-specific proposals with notice boards provided by the city. Public notice shall be accomplished through the use of a four (4) foot by four (4) foot generic notice board to be issued by the Community Development Department as follows: the applicant shall apply to the city for issuance of the notice board, and shall pay to the Community Development Department the amount of money on the fee schedule currently approved by the city council and available at the Community Development Department.
1. Posting. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall consist of one (1) or more notice boards as follows:
a. A single notice board shall be placed by the applicant in a conspicuous location on a street frontage bordering the subject property.
b. Each notice board shall be visible and accessible for inspection by members of the public.
c. Additional notice boards may be required when:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 15 Land Developmen t
(1) The site does not abut a public road; or
(2) Additional public notice boards are required under other provisions of the Ephrata Municipal Code; or
(3) The Community Development Director determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.
d. Notice boards should be:
(1) Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period;
(2) In place at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the end of any required comment period; and
(3) Removed by the applicant after expiration of the applicable notice period.
e. Notice boards that are removed, stolen, or destroyed prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of the departmental review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period. The city shall notify the applicant when it comes to their attention that notice boards have been removed prematurely, stolen, or destroyed.
f. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the Community Development Director at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. If the affidavits are not filed as required, any scheduled hearing or date by which the public may comment on the application may be postponed in order to allow compliance with this notice requirement.
g. Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with specifications determined by the Community Development Director.
G. Published notice of application. Published notice of application in an official newspaper of general circulation in the area where the proposal is located is required for Process I and II permits requiring SEPA review, short plats and Process III, IV, and V permits, except subdivision final plat applications. Published notice shall include at least the following information:
1. Project location;
2. Project description;
3. Type of permit(s) required;
4. Comment period dates; and
5. Location where the complete application may be reviewed.
17.01.145 Notice of public hearing.
A. Notice of public hearing for all types of applications. The notice given of a public hearing required in this chapter shall contain:
1. The name of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;
2. Description of the affected property, which may be in the form of either a vicinity location sketch or written description, other than a legal description;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 16 Land Developmen t
3. The date, time, and place of the hearing;
4. The nature of the proposed use or development;
5. A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony;
6. When and where information may be examined, and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be submitted;
7. The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;
8. That a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at the cost of reproduction; and
B. Mailed notice of public hearing. Mailed notice of the public hearing shall be provided by the city as follows:
1. Process I, II and V actions. No public notice is required because no public hearing is held. Notice for short plat meetings is mailed to property owners within three hundred (300) feet.
2. Process III and IV actions. The notice of public hearing shall be mailed to:
a. The applicant;
b. All owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property; and
c. Any person who submits written comments, delivered to the Community Development Department, regarding the project permit.
3. Process IV preliminary plat actions. In addition to the general notice of public hearing requirements for Process IV actions above, additional notice shall be provided as follows:
a. Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway or within two (2) miles of the boundary of a state or municipal airport shall be given to the Secretary of Transportation, who must respond within fifteen (15) calendar days of such notice.
b. Special notice of the hearing shall be given to adjacent land owners by any other reasonable method the city deems necessary. Adjacent land owners are the owners of real property, as shown by the records of the Grant County Assessor, located within three hundred (300) feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. If the owner of the real property which is proposed to be subdivided owns another parcel or parcels of real property which lie adjacent to the real property proposed to be subdivided, notice under RCW 58.17.090(1)(b) shall be given to owners of real property located within three hundred (300) feet of such adjacently owned parcels.
4. Process VI actions. For Process VI legislative actions, the city shall publish notice as described in subsection (C) of this section, and use all other methods of notice as required by RCW 35A.12.160.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 17 Land Developmen t
C. Procedure for posted or published notice of public hearing.
1. Posted notice of the public hearing is required for all Process III and IV actions. The posted notice of hearing shall be added to the sign already posted on the property pursuant to EMC 17.01.140(F).
2. Published notice of the public hearing is required for all Process III and IV procedures. The published notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and contain the following information:
a. Project location;
b. Project description;
c. Type of permit(s) required;
d. Comment period dates; and
e. Location where the complete application may be reviewed.
D. Time of notice of public hearing.
1. Notice shall be mailed, posted and first published not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing date. Any posted notice shall be removed by the applicant within seven (7) calendar days following the conclusion of public hearing(s).
17.01.150 Consistency with development regulations and SEPA.
A. Purpose. When the city receives a project permit application, consistency between the proposed project and the applicable regulations and comprehensive plan should be determined through the process in this chapter and the city’s adopted SEPA ordinance, Ch. 20.04 EMC.
B. Consistency. During project permit application review, the city shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the development regulations applicable to the proposed project. In the absence of applicable development regulations, the city shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the city’s adopted comprehensive plan. This determination of consistency shall include the following:
1. The type of land use permitted at the site, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied;
2. The level of development, such as units per acre, density of residential development in urban growth areas, or other measures of density;
3. Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, including public facilities and services identified in the comprehensive plan, if the plan or development regulations provide for funding of these facilities as required by Chapter 36.70A RCW; and
4. Characteristics of the development, such as development standards.
5. In deciding whether a project is consistent, the determinations made pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be controlling.
6. Nothing in this section limits the city from asking more specific or related questions in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 18 Land Developmen t
C. Initial SEPA analysis. The city shall also review the project permit application under the requirements of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW, the SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and Ch. 20.04 EMC.
1. This SEPA analysis shall:
a. Determine whether the applicable federal, state and local regulations require studies that adequately analyze all of the project permit application’s specific probable adverse environmental impacts;
b. Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that adequately address such environmental impacts;
c. Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the project permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures; and
d. Provide prompt and coordinated review by government agencies and the public on compliance with applicable environmental laws and plans, including mitigation for specific project impacts that have not been considered and addressed at the plan or development regulation level.
2. In its review of a project permit application, the city may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection and mitigation measures in the applicable development regulations, comprehensive plan and/or in other applicable local, state or federal laws provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the application.
3. A comprehensive plan, development regulation or other applicable local, state or federal law provides adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of an application when:
a. The impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; or
b. The city has designated as acceptable certain levels of service, land use designations, development standards or other land use planning required or allowed by Chapter 36.70A RCW.
4. The city’s determination of consistency with the items identified in subsection (B) of this section shall not prohibit the city from denying, conditioning, or mitigating impacts due to other aspects of the project.
5. In its decision whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the city shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the city shall base or condition its project approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.
6. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city in its review or mitigation of a project to adopt or otherwise rely on environmental analyses and requirements under other laws, as provided by Chapter 43.21C RCW.
7. The city shall also review the application under Ch. 20.04 EMC, the city’s environmental policy provisions.
D. Categorically exempt actions. Actions categorically exempt under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) do not require environmental review or the preparation of an environmental impact statement. An action that is categorically exempt under the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 19 Land Developmen t
rules adopted by the Department of Ecology (Chapter 197-11 WAC) may not be conditioned or denied under SEPA.
E. Planned actions. A planned action does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA.
1. A “planned action” means one (1) or more types of project action that:
a. Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the city;
b. Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with:
(1) A comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW; or
(2) A fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project;
c. Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (E)(1)(b) of this section;
d. Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030;
e. Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200;
f. Are consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.
2. The city shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or in the ordinance or resolution designating the planned action under RCW 36.70A.040.
3. During project review, the city shall not re-examine alternatives or hear appeals on the items identified in subsection (B) of this section except for issues of code interpretation. The planning director may make interpretations of the provisions of this title. Such administrative interpretations shall include determinations of uses permitted in the various districts, and approval or disapproval of development plans and zoning permits. Other interpretations may be made as specific circumstances arise which require such interpretations. The purpose of such administrative interpretations is to provide a degree of flexibility in the administration of this title while following the intent of the city council. Administrative interpretations are subject to applicable requirements of Process I applications.
4. Project review shall be used to identify specific project design and conditions relating to the character of development, such as the details of site plans, curb cuts, drainage swales, the payment of impact fees, or other measures to mitigate a proposal’s probable adverse environmental impacts.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 Land Developmen t
17.01.155 Code of conduct.
A. General. The following shall apply to open record hearings in EMC 17.01.160, open record appeals in EMC 17.01.190, and the closed record appeals in EMC 17.01.195.
B. Conflict of interest. The hearing body shall be subject to the code of ethics and prohibitions on conflict of interest as set forth in RCW 35A.42.020 and Chapter 42.23 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.
C. Ex parte communications.
1. No member of the hearing body may communicate, directly or indirectly, regarding any issue in a proceeding before him or her, other than to participate in communications necessary to procedural aspects of maintaining an orderly process, unless he or she provides notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; except as provided in this section:
a. The hearing body may receive advice from legal counsel; or
b. The hearing body may communicate with staff members (except where the proceeding relates to a code enforcement investigation or prosecution).
2. If, before serving as the hearing body in a quasi-judicial proceeding, any member of the hearing body receives an ex parte communication of a type that could not properly be received while serving, the member of the hearing body, promptly after starting to serve, shall disclose the communication as described in EMC 17.01.160(D)(3).
3. If the hearing body receives an ex parte communication in violation of this section, he or she shall place on the record:
a. All written communications received;
b. All written responses to the communications;
c. The substance of all oral communications received and all responses made; and
d. The identity of each person from whom the hearing body received any ex parte communication.
The hearing body shall advise all parties that these matters have been placed on the record. Upon request made within ten (10) calendar days after notice of the ex parte communication, any party desiring to rebut the communication shall be allowed to place a rebuttal statement on the record.
D. Disqualification.
1. A member of the hearing body who is disqualified may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. Any member who is disqualified may be counted only by making full disclosure to the audience, abstaining from voting on the disqualification, vacating the seat on the hearing body and physically leaving the hearing.
2. If all members of the hearing body are disqualified, all members present after stating their reasons for disqualification shall be re-qualified and shall proceed to resolve the issues.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 21 Land Developmen t
3. Except for Process VI actions, a member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or decision unless the member has reviewed the evidence received.
17.01.160 Open record hearings.
A. General. Open record hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
B. Responsibility of the Community Development Director for hearing. The Community Development Director shall:
1. Schedule an application for review and public hearing;
2. Give notice (applicant responsible for some of the notice requirements);
3. Prepare the staff report on the application, which shall be a single report stating all of the decisions made as of the date of the report, including recommendations on project permits in the consolidated permit process that do not require an open record pre-decision hearing. The report shall state any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or the city’s authority under SEPA. If the threshold determination other than a determination of significance has not been issued previously by the city, the report shall include or append this determination. In the case of a Process I or II project permit application, this report may be the permit; and
4. Prepare the notice of decision, if required by the hearing body, and/or mail a copy of the notice of decision to those required by this code to receive such decision.
C. Burden and nature of proof. Except for Process VI actions, the burden of proof is on the proponent. The project permit application must be supported by proof that it conforms to the applicable elements of the city’s development regulations, comprehensive plan and that any significant adverse environmental impacts have been adequately addressed.
D. Order of proceedings. The order of proceedings for a hearing will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following shall be supplemented by administrative procedures as appropriate.
1. Before receiving information on the issue, the following shall be determined:
a. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted on the record and if there is objection, the hearing body has the discretion to proceed or terminate; and
b. Any abstentions or disqualifications shall be determined.
2. The presiding officer may take official notice of known information related to the issue, such as:
a. A provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule, officially adopted development standard or state law; and
b. Other public records and facts judicially noticeable by law.
3. Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the hearing body in its determination. Parties requesting that a matter be officially noticed shall do so on the record; however, the hearing body, on its own accord, may take notice of matters listed in subsections
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 22 Land Developmen t
(D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section if stated for the record. Any matter given official notice may be rebutted.
4. The hearing body may view the area in dispute with or without notification to the parties, but shall place the time, manner, and circumstances of such view on the record.
5. Information shall be received from the staff and from proponents and opponents. The presiding officer may approve or deny a request from a person attending the hearing to ask a question. Unless the presiding officer specifies otherwise, if the request to ask a question is approved, the presiding officer will direct the question to the person submitting testimony.
6. When the presiding officer has closed the public hearing portion of the hearing, the hearing body shall openly discuss the issue and may further question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided.
7. When the hearing body is unable to formulate a recommendation on a project permit, the hearing body may decide to forward the project permit to the City Council to render a decision without a recommendation.
E. Recommendation/decision. The hearing body shall issue a recommendation or decision, as applicable, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the record being closed.
F. Reconsideration by hearing examiner. Reconsideration is not authorized for Process I and Process II applications. A party of record may ask for a reconsideration of a decision by the hearing examiner for a Process III action or a recommendation by the Planning Commission for a Process IV action. A reconsideration may be requested if either:
1. A specific error of fact or law can be identified; or
2. New evidence is available which was not available at the time of the hearing.
A request for reconsideration shall be filed by a party of record within five (5) working days of the date of the initial decision/recommendation. Any reconsideration request shall cite specific references to the findings and/or criteria contained in the ordinances governing the type of application being reviewed. A request for reconsideration temporarily suspends the appeal deadline. The hearing examiner/Planning Commission shall promptly review the reconsideration request and within five (5) working days of review, issue a written response, either approving or denying the request. If the reconsideration is denied, the appeal deadline of the hearing examiner’s/Planning Commission’s decision shall recommence for the remaining number of days. If a request for reconsideration is accepted, a decision is not final until after a decision on reconsideration is issued.
17.01.170 Notice of decision.
A. Following a decision on a project permit by the applicable decision-maker, the city shall provide a notice of decision that also includes a statement of any threshold determination made under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the procedures for appeal.
B. The notice of decision shall be issued within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, as calculated by EMC 17.01.180, after the city notifies the applicant that the application is complete.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 23 Land Developmen t
C. The notice of decision shall be provided to the applicant and to any person who, prior to the rendering of the decision, requested notice of the decision or submitted substantive comments on the application.
D. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the public as set forth in EMC 17.01.145(B)(2)(a) and (c). Affected property owners may request a change in valuation for property tax purposes. The city shall provide notice of the decision to the county assessor’s office in which the property is located.
E. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(1), building permits, grading permits, and civil construction permits are exempt from the requirements in subsection (C) and (D) of this section, except for notice to the applicant.
F. If the city is unable to issue its final decision on a project permit application within the time limits provided for in this chapter, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the parties of record. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of decision.
17.01.180 Time limitations.
A. Calculation of time periods for issuance of notice of final decision. In determining the number of calendar days that have elapsed after the city has notified the applicant that the application is complete for purposes of calculating the one hundred twenty (120) day time limit in EMC 17.01.070 for issuance of the notice of decision, the following periods shall be excluded:
1. Any period during which the applicant has been requested by the city to correct plans, perform required studies, provide additional required information, or otherwise requires the applicant to act. The period shall be calculated from the date the city notifies the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the local government determines whether the additional information satisfies the request for information or fourteen (14) calendar days after the date the information has been provided to the city;
2. Any period during which the city determines that the information submitted by the applicant under EMC 17.01.100 and 17.01.110 is insufficient or incorrect and has requested the applicant to provide sufficient or correct information;
3. Any period during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW, if the city by ordinance has established time periods for completion of environmental impact statements, or if the city and the applicant in writing agree to a time period for completion of an environmental impact statement;
4. Any period for administrative appeals of project permit applications, if an open record appeal hearing or a closed record appeal, or both, are allowed. The time period for consideration and decision on appeals shall not exceed:
a. Ninety (90) calendar days for an open record appeal hearing; or
b. Sixty (60) calendar days for a closed record appeal.
The parties may agree to extend these time periods; and
5. Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the local government.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 24 Land Developmen t
B. Time limit exceptions. The time limits established in this section do not apply if a project permit application:
1. Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation;
2. Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility as provided in RCW 36.70A.200; or
3. Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete pursuant to EMC 17.01.100.
C. Failure to meet time limit. If the city is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits provided in this chapter, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of a final decision. The city is not liable for damages due to the city’s failure to make a final decision within the time limits established in this chapter.
17.01.190 Open record appeal.
A. This section allows for open record appeals as provided in the framework in EMC 17.01.040. Open record appeals are heard by the hearing examiner.
B. Consolidated appeals.
1. All open record appeals on a project permit application decision, other than an appeal of determination of significance (DS), shall be considered together in a consolidated open record appeal.
2. Appeals of environmental determinations under SEPA, Ch. 20.04 EMC, including administrative appeals of a threshold determination, shall proceed as provided in that chapter.
C. Initiation of appeal. Only parties of record may initiate an appeal on a project permit application.
D. Time to file. An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days following issuance of the notice of decision. Appeals must be delivered to the Community Development Department office by mail, personal delivery or received by fax before 4:30 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period.
E. Computation of time. For the purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the notice of decision is rendered shall not be included. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, a day designated by RCW 1.16.050 or by the city’s ordinances as a legal holiday, then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day (RCW 35A.28.070).
F. Content of appeal. Appeals shall be in writing, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the City Council, and contain the following information:
1. Appellant’s name, address and phone number;
2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;
3. Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 25 Land Developmen t
4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;
5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and
6. A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.
G. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is adjudicated by the hearing examiner.
H. Notice of appeal. Public notice of the appeal shall be given as provided in EMC 17.01.145 (B)(2)(a) and (c).
I. Burden of proof. The burden of proof is on the appellant.
17.01.195 Closed record appeal.
A. This section shall allow for closed record appeals as provided in the framework of EMC 17.01.040. A closed record appeal hearing shall be on the record before the hearing body and no new evidence may be presented, unless the new evidence is limited to information that could not have been placed on the record previously.
B. Administrative appeals. Only parties of record may initiate an administrative appeal on a project permit application.
C. Time to file. An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days following issuance of the notice of decision. Appeals must be delivered to the Community Development Department office by mail, personal delivery or received by fax before 4:30 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period.
D. Computation of time. For the purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the notice of decision is rendered shall not be included. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, a day designated by RCW 1.16.050 or by the city’s ordinances as a legal holiday, then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day (RCW 35A.28.070).
E. Content of appeal. Appeals shall be in writing, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the city council, and contain the following information:
1. Appellant’s name, address and phone number;
2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;
3. Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;
4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;
5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and
6. A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.
F. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is adjudicated by the hearing body.
G. Order of proceedings. The closed appeal shall only be open for oral argument by the parties to the appeal.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 26 Land Developmen t
H. Burden of proof. The burden of proof is on the appellant.
17.01.200 Judicial appeals.
A. Appeal. The city’s final decision or appeal decision on a Process I, II, III, IV, or V application may be appealed by a party of record with standing to file a land use petition in Grant County Superior Court.
B. Petition period. A land use petition must be filed within twenty-one (21) calendar days of issuance of the notice of decision or appeal decision.
C. Filing and content of a land use petition. A land use petition shall be filed according to the procedural standards outlined in Chapter 36.70C RCW, Judicial Review of Land Use Decisions, also known as the “Land Use Petition Act.”
(Ord. 06-04, 06-05, 06-06, 2006)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 27 Land Developmen t
Chapter 17.02
Procedures for Amendments to Comprehensive Plan
Sections:
17.02.010 Annual docket amendments and exceptions
17.02.020 Concurrent review for comprehensive plan amendments
17.02.025 Docketing purpose
17.02.030 Time of filing
17.02.035 Process for Review
17.02.040 SEPA review
17.02.045 Annual docket evaluation criteria
17.02.050 Comprehensive plan amendment standard of review
17.02.060 Notice requirements
17.02.070 City council action
17.02.080 Standing
17.02.090 Fees
17.02.100 Appeals
17.02.010 Annual docket amendments and exceptions.
Amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map and comprehensive plan text may be proposed to respond to changing circumstances or needs of the city via the annual docket process. The city council shall consider proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan no more than once each calendar year, except under the following circumstances, which may be processed separately and in addition to the standard annual update:
A. If an emergency exists, which is defined as an issue of community-wide significance that promotes the public health, safety, and general welfare;
B. To resolve an appeal of a comprehensive plan filed with a growth management hearings board or with the court;
C. The initial adoption of a sub-area plan; and
D. The amendment of the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the city budget. The city council will hold the public hearing on this matter rather than the Planning Commission.
17.02.020 Concurrent review for comprehensive plan amendments.
In considering annual amendments to the comprehensive plan, city staff, the Planning Commission, and the city council shall consider all proposed text and land use map amendments concurrently so as to assess their cumulative impact.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 28 Land Developmen t
17.02.025 Docketing purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures and review criteria for amending the city of Ephrata comprehensive plan and to consider proposed amendment of development regulations through an open and public docketing process. Docketing refers to compiling and maintaining a list of proposed changes to the comprehensive plan or development regulations in a manner that will ensure such proposals will be considered by the city and will be available for review by the public.
17.02.030 Time of filing.
A. Any person, group, or agency may apply to propose text amendments to the comprehensive plan using a “docket” form prescribed by the Community Development office, which shall be submitted to the planning department office by February 15 of each calendar year.
B. Any person , group, or agency may apply to propose text amendments to the development regulations using a “docket” form prescribed by the Community Development office which shall be submitted to the planning office.
C. A property owner or authorized agent of the property owner may apply to propose an amendment to the land use map of the comprehensive plan using forms prescribed by the Community Development department, which shall be submitted to the Community Development department office by February 15 of each calendar year. Incomplete land use map amendment applications will not be accepted for filing.
D. Requests for amendments to the comprehensive plan map and text received each year after February 15 shall be considered in the following year’s annual docket amendment process.
17.02.035 Process for Review.
A. All proposals for amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map that have been filed with the Community Development office in accord with EMC 17.02.030(C) will be forwarded to the city council for action during the current annual comprehensive plan amendment cycle.
B. All proposals for text amendments to development regulations that have been filed with the Community Development office in accord with EMC 17.02.030(B) will be considered in a docket report and forwarded to the city council for action.
C. All proposals for amendments to the comprehensive plan text filed with the Community Development office in accord with EMC 17.02.030(A) shall be compiled by the Community Development office and distributed for review and comment to those city departments responsible for the applicable element of the comprehensive plan.
D. Using the criteria provided in EMC 17.02.045, city staff will review and submit to the Planning Commission, recommendations as to which proposals should have action taken on them.
E. The Community Development office will compile all comments and recommendations on proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan text in the docket report along with a list of the proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map. The docket report shall be presented to the Planning Commission in a public hearing. The Planning Commission will consider the docket report and forward a
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 29 Land Developmen t
recommendation to the city council, as to which proposals in the docket report should be considered for action in the current annual comprehensive plan amendment cycle.
F. Council may accept or modify the recommendation given on the annual comprehensive plan docket report. Proposed amendments to comprehensive plan text not included for action by the city council shall be included for consideration in the next year’s docket.
G. For docketed proposals accepted by the city council for inclusion in the annual comprehensive plan amendment cycle, the Community Development office shall prepare a report and recommendation which shall be presented to either the Planning Commission in workshop and public hearing, or to another body designated to hold a public hearing. Recommendations on the annual comprehensive plan amendments shall be forwarded to the city council no later than August 1.
H. The docket report will be posted on the city’s web site throughout the year and updated annually.
17.02.040 SEPA review.
After February 1 of each calendar year, the city’s responsible official shall review the cumulative anticipated environmental impact of the proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map, comprehensive plan text, pursuant to the Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). If the responsible official determines that an environmental impact statement (EIS), supplemental EIS, or other appropriate environmental review is warranted, applicants for amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map may be responsible for a full or proportionate share of the costs of preparing the necessary documents as determined by the responsible official.
17.02.045 Annual docket evaluation criteria.
A. Proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan text on the docket may be recommended for action if the following criteria have been met:
1. The proposed comprehensive plan text amendment addresses a matter appropriate for inclusion in the comprehensive plan;
2. The proposal addresses the interests and changed needs of the entire city as identified in its long-range planning and policy documents, including but not limited to the comprehensive plan;
3. The proposal does not raise policy or land use issues that are more appropriately addressed by an ongoing work program approved by city council;
4. The proposal can be reasonably reviewed within the time frame of the current annual work program and existing resources; and
5. The proposal has not been considered by the city council in the last three (3) years.
B. Staff may propose to expand the geographic scope of an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map to allow for consideration of adjacent property, similarly situated property, or area wide impacts. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether to expand the geographic scope of a proposed land use map amendment:
1. The effect of the proposed amendment on the surrounding area or neighborhood or city;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 30 Land Developmen t
2. The effect of the proposed amendment on the land use and circulation pattern of the surrounding area or neighborhood or city; and
3. The effect of the proposed amendment on the future development of the surrounding area or neighborhood or city.
17.02.050 Comprehensive plan amendment standard of review.
The Planning Commission may recommend and the city council may approve, approve with modifications, or deny amendments to the comprehensive plan text or land use map designations based upon the following criteria:
1. The amendment will not result in development that will adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
2. The amendment is based upon new information that was not available at the time of adoption of the comprehensive plan, or that circumstances have changed since the adoption of the plan that warrant an amendment to the plan; and
3. The amendment is consistent with other goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, and that the amendment will maintain concurrency between the land use, transportation, and capital facilities elements of the plan.
17.02.060 Notice requirements.
For the initial review of annual docket report described in EMC 17.02.035(F), notice of public hearing shall be given in at least one (1) publication in the local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. For proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map, notice of the public hearing shall be given both by publication in the local newspaper as prescribed above, and by notification of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the affected property. For revised geographic scope of land use map amendments, notice of public hearing shall be given both by publication in the local newspaper as prescribed above, and by notification of all property owners within the revised land use map amendment area.
17.02.070 City council action.
Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the recommendation provided per EMC 17.02.035(G), the city council shall affirm, deny, modify, or return the proposed amendments to the Planning Commission for further consideration. In the event the city council modifies the proposed amendment it shall make its own findings and set forth in writing the reasons for the action taken.
17.02.080 Standing.
Comprehensive plan amendments may be initiated by the city’s community development office or other administrative staff of the city, private citizens, the Planning Commission, or the city council.
17.02.090 Fees.
Application fees for docketed comprehensive plan land use map amendments shall be as defined in the Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 3.35, titled Fee Schedule and Charges for City Services.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 31 Land Developmen t
17.02.100 Appeals.
Appeals from a decision of the Ephrata city council shall be pursuant to applicable state law.
(Ord. 06-04, 06-05, 06-06, 2006, Ord. 13-07, 2013)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 32 Land Developmen t
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 33 Land Developmen t
CHAPTER 17.05
APPLICATION FEES AND CHARGES
Sections:
17.05.010 APPLICATION FEES AND CHARGES
17.05.010 APPLICATION FEES AND CHARGES
(A) The council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the fees, charges and rates for the various development applications, permits, and approvals authorized pursuant to the EMC and shall update said resolution as is appropriate and/or necessary for establishing such fees, charges and rates.
(B) In the review of a land use permit application, the City may determine that such review requires the retention of professional consultant services. In addition to any land use fees that an applicant is required to submit, the applicant shall also be responsible to reimburse the City for the cost of professional consultant services if the City determines such services are necessary to process and/or complete its review of the application submittal. These professional services may include, but shall not be limited to, planning, hearing examiner, engineering, traffic engineering, legal, financial and accounting, soils, mechanical and structural engineering, and electrical engineering, all contracted staff review expenses, publication costs and any consultant fees incurred to be able to review and process the application or permit request.
Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for the costs of any independent inspector employed by the city to inspect installations of utilities to be delivered to the city upon completion as a condition of the platting process. The applicant is responsible for all costs for environmental impact study, traffic studies, soil studies, and other reports required for project evaluation. The City may also require the applicant to deposit an amount with the City, which is estimated, at the discretion of the Administrator, to be sufficient to cover anticipated costs of retaining professional consultant services to ensure reimbursement to the City for such costs.
(C) Fees paid are for administrative costs incurred in processing the application and are therefore nonrefundable, whether the permit is issued or not.
(D) Any application requiring the publication, mailing, and/or posting of notices or ordinances shall be required to reimburse the City for all such costs incurred by the City.
(E) The fees shall be billed to the applicant on a monthly basis based upon the time taken by city staff, city consultants, and/or the city attorney to review the subject applications (the invoice shall note the time and related charges). Any required deposit shall be due at the time of application. The deposit shall be held by the city and billed against the final invoice submitted by the city’s consultants. An administrative fee of 10 percent shall also be added to cover the city’s administrative costs of processing the applicant’s invoices and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 34 Land Developmen t
billing expenses. If more than one application is required for a project, the applicant shall pay all deposits and fees as indicated for each required application.
Invoices shall be due and payable immediately upon receipt by the applicant. If the planning director ascertains that invoices are not paid within 21 days of mailing, the application shall be deemed incomplete and all processing shall stop until the invoice is paid in full. If the planning director ascertains that a deposit balance is less than the required minimum deposit balance, and said minimum balance is not restored within 21 days of mailing, the application shall be deemed incomplete and all processing shall stop until the minimum balance is restored. Where no deposit is required, the applicant will be billed for the overall costs not covered by any application fee.
All invoices not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing shall be assessed a 12 percent APR (one percent per month) interest charge. If the final invoice exceeds the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall be responsible for paying the additional amount due. Permits or other approvals shall not be issued until the final invoice is paid in full. The city shall refund any funds left from the deposit after the final invoice is paid. (Ord. 09-06, 2009)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 35 Land Developmen t
CHAPTER 17.13
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
17.13.010 ENFORCING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY
17.13.020 GENERAL PENALTY
17.13.030 APPLICATION
17.13.040 CIVIL REGULATORY ORDER
17.13.050 CIVIL FINES
17.13.060 REVIEW OF APPROVED PERMITS
17.13.070 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS
17.13.010 ENFORCING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY
The City Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for enforcing Titles 16 through 20, and may adopt administrative rules to meet that responsibility. The City Zoning Administrator may delegate enforcement responsibility to the Building Official, Fire Chief, Chief of Police, or Director of Public Works as appropriate.
17.13.020 GENERAL PENALTY
Compliance with the requirements of Titles 16 through 20 shall be mandatory. All violations of the requirements of Titles 16 through 20 shall be punished by a civil infraction subject to the maximum penalty provided by Chapter 1.04 of this Code. The enforcement actions authorized under this chapter shall be supplemental to those general penalties and remedies.
17.13.030 APPLICATION
A. Actions under this chapter may be taken in any order deemed necessary or desirable by the City Zoning Administrator to achieve the purpose of this chapter or of the Development Code.
B. Proof of a violation of a development application permit or approval shall constitute prima facie evidence that the violation is that of the applicant and/or owner of the property upon which the violation exists. An enforcement action under this chapter shall not relieve or prevent enforcement against any other responsible person.
17.13.040 CIVIL REGULATORY ORDER
A. Authority. A civil regulatory order may be issued and served upon a person if any activity by or at the direction of that person is, has been, or may be taken in violation of the Development Code.
B. Notice. A civil regulatory order shall be deemed served and shall be effective when posted at the location of the violation and/or delivered to any suitable person at the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 36 Land Developmen t
location and/or delivered by mail or otherwise to the owner or other person having responsibility for the location.
C. Content. A civil regulatory order shall set forth:
1. The name and address of the person to whom it is directed.
2. The location and specific description of the violation.
3. A notice that the order is effective immediately upon posting at the site and/or receipt by the person to whom it is directed.
4. An order that the violation immediately cease, or that the potential violation be avoided.
5. An order that the person stop work until correction and/or remediation of the violation as specified in the order.
6. A specific description of the actions required to correct, remedy, or avoid the violation, including a time limit to complete such actions.
7. A notice that failure to comply with the regulatory order may result in further enforcement actions.
D. Remedial Action. The City Zoning Administrator may require any action reasonably calculated to correct or avoid the violation, including but not limited to replacement, repair, supplementation, re-vegetation, or restoration.
E. Appeal. A civil regulatory order may be appealed as provided by law.
17.13.050 CIVIL FINES
A. Authority. A person who violates any provision of the Development Code, or who fails to obtain any necessary permit, or who fails to comply with a civil regulatory order, shall be subject to a civil fine.
B. Amount. The civil fine assessed shall not exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) plus all enhancements for each violation. Each separate day, event, or action or occurrence shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Notice. A civil fine shall be imposed by a written notice, and shall be effective when served or posted as set forth in 17.13.030(B). The notice shall describe the date, nature, location, and act(s) comprising the violation, the amount of the fine, and the authority under which the fine has been issued.
D. Collection. Civil fines shall be immediately due and payable upon issuance and receipt of the notice. The City Zoning Administrator may issue a regulatory order stopping work until such fine is paid. If remission or appeal of the fine is sought, the fine shall be due and payable upon issuance of a final decision. If a fine remains unpaid 30 days after it becomes due and payable, the City Zoning Administrator may take actions necessary to recover the fine. Civil fines shall be paid into the City=s general fund.
E. Application for Remission. Any person incurring a civil fine may, within ten days of the receipt of the notice, apply in writing to the City Zoning Administrator for remission of the fine. The City Zoning Administrator shall issue a decision on the application within ten days. A fine may be remitted only upon a demonstration of extraordinary circumstances.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 37 Land Developmen t
17.13.060 REVIEW OF APPROVED PERMITS
A. Review. Any approval or permit issued under the authority of the Development Code may be reviewed for compliance with the requirements of the Development Code, or to determine if the action is creating a nuisance or hazard, has been abandoned, or the approval or permit was obtained by fraud or deception.
B. Initiation of Review. The review of an approval or permit may be initiated by the City Zoning Administrator, City Council, or by petition to the City Zoning Administrator by three property owners or three residents of separate dwelling units in the City, stating their belief as to the noncompliance, nuisance, hazard of the permitted activity.
C. City Zoning Administrator=s Investigation. Upon receipt of the information indicating the need for, or upon receiving a request for review of permit or approval, the City Zoning Administrator shall investigate the matter and take one or more of the following actions:
1. Notify the property owner or permit holder of the investigation; and/or
2. Issue a civil regulatory order and/or civil fine and/or recommend revocation or modification of the permit or approval; and/or
3. Refer the matter to the City Attorney; and/or
4. Refer the matter to the City Council with a recommendation for action.
17.13.070 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS
A. Upon receiving a City Zoning Administrator=s recommendation for revocation or modification of a permit or approval, the City Council shall review the matter at a public hearing. Upon a finding that the activity does not comply with the conditions of approval or the provisions of the Development Code, or creates a nuisance or hazard, the City Council may delete, modify, or impose such conditions on the permit or approval it deems sufficient to remedy the deficiencies. If the Council finds no reasonable conditions which would remedy the deficiencies, the permit or approval shall be revoked and the activity allowed by the permit or approval shall cease.
B. If a permit or approval is revoked for fraud or deception, no similar application shall be accepted for a period of one year from the date of final action and appeal, if any. If a permit or approval is revoked for any other reason, another application may be submitted subject to all of the requirements of the Development Code.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 1 of 126
TITLE 18
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:
18.04 Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans, and Lot Line Adjustments
Article I. General Provisions
Article II. Type I Short Subdivisions
Article III. Type II Short Subdivisions
Article IV. Subdivisions
Article V. Binding Site Plans
Article VI. Lot Line Adjustments
18.29 Design Standards
18.33 Improvements
18.36 Reimbursements for Utility Installations
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 2 of 126
CHAPTER 18.04
SUBDIVISIONS, BINDING SITE PLANS, AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Article I. General Provisions
18.04.010 Title.
18.04.015 Purpose.
18.04.020 Scope.
18.04.025 Definitions.
18.04.030 Conformance to state law.
18.04.035 City functions.
18.04.040 Penalties.
18.04.045 Liability.
18.04.050 Planned unit developments.
18.04.055 Mobile home park design.
Article II. Type I Short Subdivisions
18.04.100 Purpose of type I short subdivisions.
18.04.105 Scope.
18.04.110 Preliminary consultation with staff.
18.04.115 Application procedures.
18.04.120 Preliminary short subdivision application.
18.04.125 Principles of acceptability.
18.04.130 Determination of completeness.
18.04.135 Vesting.
18.04.140 Notice of application.
18.04.145 Referral of preliminary short subdivision application.
18.04.150 Notification of agencies.
18.04.155 Public notice.
18.04.160 Public comment.
18.04.165 Agency recommendations.
18.04.170 Short subdivision committee.
18.04.175 Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.
18.04.180 Approval criteria.
18.04.185 Decision on short subdivisions.
18.04.190 Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.
18.04.195 Appeal to superior court.
18.04.200 Property annexed to city with short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
18.04.205 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
18.04.210 Filing the final short plat.
18.04.215 Short subdivision plat expiration.
18.04.220 Limitations on further subdivision.
18.04.225 Procedure for alteration of a type I short subdivision.
18.04.230 Procedure for vacation of a type I short subdivision.
18.04.235 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
18.04.240 Installation of utilities.
18.04.245 Public use and service areas.
18.04.250 Lots.
18.04.255 Other improvements.
18.04.260 Zero lot line type I short subdivisions.
18.04.263 Clustering in urban separators.
18.04.264 Clustering in residential zones outside urban separators.
18.04.265 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 3 of 126
Article III. Type II Short Subdivisions
18.04.400 Purpose of type II short subdivisions.
18.04.405 Scope.
18.04.410 Preliminary consultation with staff.
18.04.415 Application procedures.
18.04.420 Subdivision in phases.
18.04.425 Tentative short plat review.
18.04.430 Preliminary short subdivision application.
18.04.435 Principles of acceptability.
18.04.440 Determination of completeness.
18.04.445 Vesting.
18.04.450 Notice of application.
18.04.455 Referral of preliminary short subdivision application.
18.04.460 Notification of agencies.
18.04.465 Public notice.
18.04.470 Public comment.
18.04.475 Agency recommendations.
18.04.480 Short subdivision committee.
18.04.485 Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.
18.04.490 Approval criteria.
18.04.495 Decision on short subdivisions.
18.04.500 Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.
18.04.505 Appeal to superior court.
18.04.510 Property annexed to city with short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
18.04.515 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
18.04.520 Filing the final short plat.
18.04.525 Short subdivision plat expiration.
18.04.530 Limitations on further subdivision.
18.04.535 Procedure for alteration of a type II short subdivision.
18.04.540 Procedure for vacation of a type II short subdivision.
18.04.545 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
18.04.550 Installation of utilities.
18.04.555 Public use and service areas.
18.04.560 Blocks.
18.04.565 Lots.
18.04.570 Other improvements.
18.04.575 Zero lot line type II short subdivisions.
18.04.578 Clustering in urban separators.
18.04.579 Clustering in residential zones outside urban separators.
18.04.580 Parks and open space requirements.
18.04.585 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
Article IV. Subdivisions
18.04.600 Purpose of subdivisions.
18.04.605 Scope.
18.04.610 Preliminary consultation with staff.
18.04.615 Application procedures.
18.04.620 Subdivision in phases.
18.04.625 Tentative plat review.
18.04.630 Preliminary plat application.
18.04.635 Principles of acceptability.
18.04.640 Determination of completeness.
18.04.645 Vesting.
18.04.650 Notice of application.
18.04.655 Referral of subdivision preliminary plat.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 4 of 126
18.04.660 Notification of agencies.
18.04.665 Public notice.
18.04.670 Public comment.
18.04.675 Agency recommendations.
18.04.680 Public hearing.
18.04.685 Approval criteria.
18.04.690 Decision on preliminary plat.
18.04.700 Appeal to superior court.
18.04.705 Subdivision preliminary plat expiration.
18.04.710 Property annexed to city with preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
18.04.715 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
18.04.720 Filing the subdivision final plat.
18.04.725 Decision on subdivision final plat.
18.04.730 Subdivision final plat expiration.
18.04.735 Procedure for alteration of a subdivision.
18.04.740 Procedure for vacation of a subdivision.
18.04.745 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
18.04.750 Installation of utilities.
18.04.755 Public use and service areas.
18.04.760 Blocks.
18.04.765 Lots.
18.04.770 Other improvements.
18.04.775 Zero lot line subdivisions.
18.04.778 Clustering in urban separators.
18.04.779 Clustering in residential zones outside urban separators.
18.04.780 Parks and open space requirements.
18.04.785 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
Article V. Binding Site Plans
18.04.800 Purpose.
18.04.803 Definitions
18.04.805 Applicability
18.04.807 Preliminary consultation with staff
18.04.808 Application procedures
18.04.809 Tentative Plan review
1.1 18.04.810 Preliminary Binding Site Plan application
1.2 18.04.815 Binding Site Plan Conditions and Requirements.
1.3 18.04.820 Administrative Review.
1.4 18.04.830 Planning Commission Public Hearing.
1.5 18.04.835 Planning Commission Action.
1.6 18.04.840 Administrative Approval and Authorization.
1.7 18.04.844 Final Filing Recording Fees and Requirements.
1.8 18.04.846 Recording Requirements – Effect.
1.9 18.04.848 Building Permit - Certificate of Occupancy.
1.10 18.04.850 Improvements.
1.11 18.04.852 Sale or Lease of Lots.
18.04.855 Vested Rights.
18.04.857 Appeal.
18.04.858 Applicability for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.860 Application requirements for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.861 Approval criteria for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.862 Improvements for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.863 Modifications for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.864 Vacation for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.865 Vesting for commercial and industrial sites.
18.04.866 Applicability for condominium sites.
18.04.867 Application requirements for condominium sites.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 5 of 126
18.04.868 Approval criteria for condominium sites.
18.04.870 Enforcement.
18.04.875 Final binding site plan for condominium sites.
18.04.877 Filing binding site plan for condominiums.
18.04.880 Expiration period for condominium sites.
18.04.885 Modifications for condominium sites.
Article VI. Lot Line Adjustments
18.04.900 Purpose of lot line adjustments.
18.04.905 Scope.
18.04.910 Preliminary consultation with staff.
18.04.915 Application procedures.
18.04.920 Principles of acceptability.
18.04.925 Determination of completeness.
18.04.930 Vesting.
18.04.935 Referral of application.
18.04.940 Approval criteria.
18.04.945 Decision on lot line adjustments.
18.04.950 Appeal of decision on lot line adjustments.
18.04.955 Appeal to superior court.
18.04.960 Recording lot line adjustments.
Article I. General Provisions
18.04.010 Title.
This code shall be hereinafter known as the City of Ephrata Subdivision Code.
18.04.015 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations, requirements, standards, and procedures for subdividing land, for obtaining binding site plans, and for adjustments of lot lines in the city, ensuring:
1. That the highest feasible quality in subdivisions will be attained;
2. That the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city shall be promoted and protected;
3. That orderly growth, development, and the conservation, protection, and proper use of land shall be promoted;
4. That proper provisions for all public facilities, including connectivity, circulation, utilities, and services, shall be made;
5. That maximum advantage of site characteristics shall be taken into consideration; and
6. That the process shall be in conformance with provisions set forth in EMC Title 19, Zoning, and the comprehensive plan.
18.04.020 Scope.
This chapter shall apply to the division of land for sale or lease into two (2) or more parcels and to the modification of lot lines between adjoining parcels. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or higher standards upon the development of land than other laws, ordinances, or restrictive covenants, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 6 of 126
Unless otherwise indicated and as provided by RCW 58.17.040, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
1. Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose;
2. Divisions made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent;
3. Divisions of land into lots or tracts classified for industrial or commercial use when the city has approved a binding site plan for the use of the land;
4. A division for the purpose of lease when no residential structure other than mobile homes or travel trailers are permitted to be placed upon the land when the city has approved a binding site plan for the use of the land;
5. Condominium developments, pursuant to either Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, that are subject to an approved binding site plan;
6. A division for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose. "Personal wireless services" means any federally licensed personal wireless service. "Facilities" means un-staffed facilities that are used for the transmission or reception, or both, of wireless communication services including, but not necessarily limited to, antenna arrays, transmission cables, equipment shelters, and support structures; and
7. A division of land into lots or tracts of less than three acres that is recorded in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and is used or to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of publicly–owned, consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities. For purposes of this subsection, "electric utility facilities" means un-staffed facilities, except for the presence of security personnel, that are used for or in connection with or to facilitate the transmission, distribution, sale, or furnishing of electricity including, but not limited to, electric power substations. This subsection does not exempt a division of land from the zoning and permitting laws and regulations of cities, towns, counties, and municipal corporations. Furthermore, this subsection only applies to electric utility facilities that will be placed into service to meet the electrical needs of a utility's existing and new customers. New customers are defined as electric service locations not already in existence as of the date that electric utility facilities subject to the provisions of this subsection are planned and constructed.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.040.
18.04.025 Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Active recreation activities shall mean all outdoor recreational activities which involve field and court games.
Alley shall mean a public or private way not more than thirty (30) feet wide at the rear or side of property affording only secondary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property.
Binding site plan shall mean a scaled drawing which: (a) identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, open space, and any other matters specified in this chapter; (b) contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 7 of 126
established by the city through the approval process; and (c) contains provisions which require any development be in conformity with the binding site plan.
Block shall mean a group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well-defined and fixed boundaries.
Choker shall be defined as a physical constriction built at the curbside of the roadway effectively reducing the width of the travel lane to cause the reduction in speeds, provide parking protection and to shorten pedestrian crossing distances.
Circulation shall mean any of a number of quantitative measures that characterizes the frequency of transportation mode trips, the duration of a mode trip, and path choices made between two (2) or more activity spaces. Traffic counts usually indicate a measure of circulation.
Clustering or cluster subdivision shall mean a development or division of land in which residential building lots are reduced in size and concentrated in specified portion(s) of the original lot, tract, or parcel.
Common open space shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a subdivision or a planned unit development, and designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents of a subdivision. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the subdivision.
Community park shall mean a park that serves the entire City of Ephrata and can be located throughout the city. Community parks may have facilities or amenities that are not offered elsewhere in the city, and which can include swimming, fishing, athletic fields, group picnic shelters, play equipment, hard courts, skate-parks, and trails, and will vary at each park. Access to the park is by car, public transit, foot, or bicycle. Off-street parking may be provided.
Comprehensive plan shall mean the document, including maps, adopted by the City Council, which outlines the City’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted sub-area plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.
Connectivity shall mean subdivisions which are connected by through streets, easements, or other rights-of-way, to activity centers including other subdivisions, neighborhood centers, shopping centers, transit stops, recreational spaces, and other public facilities. Such connections shall have a character that is pedestrian-friendly and that provide a sense of location. A list of goals and criteria below indicate provisions to be considered by the Public Works Department and Community Development office in evaluating connectivity:
Goals and Corresponding Criteria:
A. Increase through-connections to adjacent subdivisions and activity centers.
1. Subdivision streets should connect through, except where impractical.
2. Cul-de-sac streets of subject subdivision should provide pedestrian/bicycle pathway(s) from bulb-ends to neighboring subdivision(s) streets or other adjacent activity centers.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 8 of 126
3. Subject subdivision should provide continuous five (5) foot wide sidewalks (on both sides of streets fronting developed lots) and connect to other streets.
4. Subject subdivision intersections are four (4) way intersections, where practical.
B. Increase connections to other travel modes.
1. Subdivision lots should be located no further than one-quarter (1/4) mile from the nearest bicycle path or trail.
2. Subdivision lots should be located no further than one-quarter (1/4) mile from the nearest transit stop.
C. Provide streetscaping improvements.
1. Vehicular traffic calming.
2. Provision of planting strips.
3. Neighborhood identity elements.
County auditor shall mean that person as defined in Chapter 36.22 RCW or the office of the person assigned such duties under the Grant County Code.
County treasurer shall mean that person as defined in Chapter 36.29 RCW or the office of the person assigned such duties under the Grant County Code.
Cul-de-sac shall mean a short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
Dedication shall mean a deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or a final short plat showing the dedication thereof; and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city.
Division of land shall mean the subdivision of any parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels.
Final plat shall mean the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the Grant County auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter.
Hearing examiner shall mean the person appointed by the mayor, or his or her designee, to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in Ch. 19.06 EMC which creates the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact, and conclusions on such applications.
Hillside subdivision shall mean a subdivision in which any lot in the subdivision has average slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent and in which any street in the subdivision has grades greater than seven (7) percent at any point or as defined in Chapter 19.03.190 EMC, Hillside Management Overlay Zone.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 9 of 126
Homeowners’ association shall mean an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
1. Each lot owner is automatically a member;
2. Each lot is automatically subject to a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization’s activities, such as maintaining common property; and
3. A charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property.
Lot shall mean a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in this title. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:
1. A single lot of record;
2. A portion of a lot of record;
3. A combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record; or
4. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds;
provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title.
Lot, corner shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.
Lot, frontage shall mean the front of a lot which shall be that portion nearest the street or, if the lot does not abut a street, the portion nearest an ingress/egress easement. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be considered the narrowest part of the lot that fronts on a street, except in industrial and commercial zones, in which case the user of a corner lot has the option of determining which part of the lot fronting on a street shall become the lot frontage.
Lot line adjustment shall mean the adjusting of common property lines or boundaries between adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels for the purpose of rectifying a disputed property line location, freeing such a boundary from any differences or discrepancies or accommodating a minor transfer of land. The resulting adjustment shall not create any additional lots, tracts, or parcels and all reconfigured lots, tracts, or parcels shall contain sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for zoning and building purposes.
Lot lines shall mean the property lines bounding the lot.
Lot measurements shall mean:
1. The depth of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
2. The width of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between the side lines connecting front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points where they intersect with the street line shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 10 of 126
except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where eighty (80) percent of requirements shall not apply.
Lot of record shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Grant County Assessor, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, through shall mean a lot that has both ends fronting on a street. Either end may be considered the front.
Meander line shall mean a line along a body of water intended to be used solely as a reference for surveying.
Neighborhood park shall mean a park that serves a neighborhood (not a subdivision) defined by arterial streets. These parks are generally located centrally in the neighborhood so that the park is easily accessible and neighborhood residents do not have to cross a major arterial to reach the park. Access is primarily by foot or bicycle, so the park is usually no further than one-half (1/2) mile from any point in the neighborhood. Parking spaces are typically not provided, unless on-street parking is not available, accessible or safe. Neighborhood parks have amenities for casual activities that are not programmed or organized, or for which a fee is charged. Amenities include play equipment, picnic tables, hard courts (basketball, tennis), walking trails, and open grassy areas.
Park open space shall mean those areas that are environmentally sensitive, wildlife habitat, or wetlands, that remain in a relatively natural state with minimal improvements for public access, interpretation, study, or enjoyment.
Party of Record for the purposes of this chapter shall mean the applicant, any person who testified at the open record public hearing on the application and/or any person who submitted written comments concerning the application at the open record public hearing (excluding persons who have only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters).
Park service area shall mean those areas defined by arterial streets or geographic features, and which are identified in the comprehensive park and recreation plan, that a neighborhood park or community park is intended to serve.
Performance bond or guarantee shall mean that security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the final plat is approved and signed, including performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
Piggyback or accumulative short subdivision shall mean multiple short subdivision of contiguous land under common ownership. Ownership for purposes of this section shall mean ownership as established at the application submittal date of the initial short subdivision approval.
Planning Commission shall mean that body as defined by Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 2.21.
Plat shall mean a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets and alleys, or other divisions and dedications.
Preliminary approval shall mean the official favorable action taken on the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, metes and bounds description or dedication, by the Planning Commission following a duly advertised public hearing or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 11 of 126
on a preliminary plat of a short subdivision following a duly advertised meeting of the short subdivision committee.
Preliminary plat shall mean a neat and precise scale drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a plat or subdivision which shall furnish a basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street intended for the accommodation of vehicular traffic, generally within curb-lines.
Short plat shall mean the map or representation of a short subdivision.
Short subdivision shall mean the division or re-division of land into nine (9) or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not build-able and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or storm-water detention are not included in the number of lots created.
Short subdivision, Type I shall mean the division of land into four (4) or less lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not build-able and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or storm-water detention are not included in the number of lots created.
Short subdivision, Type II shall mean the division of land into more than four (4) and less than ten (10) lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not build-able and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or storm-water detention are not included in the number of lots created.
Speed humps shall mean a raised hump (a pavement undulation) in the roadway with a parabolic top, extending across the road at right angles to the direction of traffic flow.
Street shall mean a public way thirty (30) feet or more in right-of-way width which affords a primary means of access to property.
Subdivision shall mean the division or re-division of land into ten (10) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale or lease or transfer of ownership; provided, that subdivisions of less than ten (10) parcels may be defined as short subdivisions. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not build-able and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or storm-water detention are not included in the number of lots created.
Subdivision, phased shall mean a subdivision, which is developed in increments over a period of time.
Tentative plat shall mean a map drawn in accordance with the same requirements as the preliminary plat map, but submitted prior to preliminary plat submittal.
Title report shall mean a certified report from a bonded title agency showing recorded title holder and all encumbrances and defects that exist on the land.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 12 of 126
Tract shall mean a parcel of land proposed for subdivision or subdividing.
Trail system shall mean those pathways that connect points of interest, parks, community facilities, streets, residences, etc., in the community, which are generally not confined within the limits of one (1) park. Trails are intended to be used by bicycles, rollerskaters, and pedestrians; they are not intended to be used by motorized vehicles.
Urban separators shall mean low-density lands that define community or municipal identities and boundaries, protect adjacent resource lands, rural areas, and environmentally sensitive areas, and create open space corridors within and between urban areas which provide environmental, visual, recreational, and wildlife benefits.
18.04.030 Conformance to state law.
This code is in conformance with RCW 58.17.010 et seq. regulating platting, subdivision, adjusting lot lines, and the dedication of land and further provides for administrative procedures for the adjustment of lot lines.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.030.
18.04.035 City functions.
A. Community Development Department. The Community Development Department is responsible for the administration and coordination of this chapter unless another department or division is authorized to administer and enforce a specific section.
B. Public Works Department. The Public Works Department is responsible for reviewing all engineering and technical requirements of this chapter.
C. Fire Department. The Fire Department is responsible for reviewing all fire access and fire safety requirements of this chapter.
D. Parks and Recreation Department. The Parks and Recreation Department is responsible for reviewing all parks and open space dedication requirements of this chapter.
E. Short subdivision committee. The short subdivision committee is authorized to hold a public meeting and make a final decision on all short subdivision plats.
F. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is responsible for holding public hearings and review and recommending subdivision preliminary plats to the City Council for approval, conditioned approval or denial.
G. City Council. The City Council shall make a final decision on the recommendation of the Planning Commission and/or shall conduct any closed record review of a recommendation or lack thereof from the Planning Commission on a subdivision preliminary plat. The city council shall have sole authority to approve subdivision final plats. An appeal of a final plat decision shall be in superior court.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 13 of 126
18.04.040 Penalties.
A. Civil. Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any violation of any term or condition of plat approval prescribed pursuant to this chapter by any person, firm, corporation, or association, or any agent thereof, shall constitute a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 EMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.
B. Criminal. Any person, firm, corporation, or association, or any agent thereof, who violates any provision of Chapter 58.17 RCW, or any provision of this chapter, relating to the sale, offer for sale, lease, or transfer of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and each sale, offer for sale, lease or transfer of each separate lot, tract, or parcel of land in violation of any provision of Chapter 58.17 RCW, or any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
18.04.045 Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning any land or building, constructing or modifying any subdivisions in the city for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of any preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificates authorized herein.
18.04.050 Planned unit developments.
In addition to the standard subdivision of land as outlined in this chapter, the city provides for the subdivision of land under the planned unit development regulations of the zoning code, EMC Title 19. The zoning code should be consulted concerning the special procedures for planned unit developments.
18.04.055 Mobile home park design.
The standards of this chapter for residential subdivisions shall apply to mobile home park subdivisions when lots in such subdivisions are to be sold, unless other standards are specifically approved by the city.
Article II. Type I Short Subdivisions
18.04.100 Purpose of Type I short subdivisions.
The procedures regulating Type I short subdivisions are established to promote orderly and efficient division of lots on a small scale, promote infill development and meet density requirements in established urban areas, while providing an efficient review process, avoiding placing undue burdens on the subdivider and complying with the purpose of this chapter and the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 et seq.
18.04.105 Scope.
A. Any land being divided into four (4) or less parcels, lots, tracts, sites or subdivisions, and which has not been divided in a short subdivision within a period of five (5) years, shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
B. No application for a short subdivision shall be approved if the land being divided is held in common ownership with a contiguous parcel that has been divided in a short subdivision within the preceding five (5) years. Serial subdivision of contiguous parcels in the same ownership is defined as ‘piggybacking’ short subdivisions and is prohibited unless the subject property has received master plan approval by the city through a rezone, planned unit development, or other hearing process, then ‘piggybacking’ short subdivisions shall be permitted. Such short subdivisions must be consistent with the approved master plan.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 14 of 126
18.04.110 Preliminary consultation with staff.
Any person who desires to subdivide land in the city should consult with the Community Development Department at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The Public Works Department should be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the engineering requirements of this chapter and the construction standards of the city.
18.04.115 Application procedures.
An application for a Type I short subdivision consists of five (5) separate steps as follows:
1. Preparation of the preliminary plat of the proposed short subdivision;
2. Submission of the preliminary short subdivision application to the short subdivision committee for a public meeting and decision;
3. Installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved preliminary plat requirements and satisfaction of all plat conditions;
4. Submission of the final plat to the Community Development Department for review and signature by the chair of the short subdivision committee; and
5. Recordation of the approved final plat in the office of the Grant County Auditor.
18.04.120 Preliminary short subdivision application.
A. Application for a short subdivision shall be made to the Community Development Department on the forms supplied and in the number of copies prescribed by that Department.
B. The short subdivision plat shall be a neat and approximate drawing on reproducible material at a decimal scale. The plat map shall measure between eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches and eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall include:
1. The short subdivision name, the name and address of the owner, and the name and address of the licensed land surveyor and if applicable, the subdivision engineer;
2. The date of preparation, the true north point, a graphic scale and legal description of the property to be subdivided and drawn to an appropriate decimal scale;
3. The location of existing and proposed platted property lines, and existing section lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, and any recorded public or private utility or roadway easements, both on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining lands that abut the proposed subdivision, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the subject property;
4. The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations and utilities;
5. The acreage of land to be subdivided; the number of lots; the area (square footage) of each lot; and the approximate square footage and approximate percent of total acreage in open space;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 15 of 126
6. The dimensions of each lot;
7. How the proposed subdivision will be served by utilities and the location of sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water lines;
8. All existing structures and distances from any existing and proposed lot lines within or abutting the short subdivision within a distance of fifty (50) feet;
9. Monumentation of all exterior corners and streets and be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state;
10. Provisions for sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school, users of public transit and other pedestrians;
11. All of the information requested on the application form by the Community Development Director.
12. The elevations of all permanent monuments based on datum plane approved by the Public Works Director.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.240, 58.17.250.
18.04.125 Principles of acceptability.
No short subdivision shall be approved unless the following principles of acceptability are met; the short subdivision shall:
1. Create legal building sites which comply with all provisions of EMC Title 19, Zoning, and health regulations;
2. Establish access to a public or private road for each segregated parcel;
3. Have suitable physical characteristics; a proposed short subdivision may be denied because of flood inundation or wetland conditions; slope, soil stability and/or capabilities; or the construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval;
4. Make adequate provision for storm-water detention, drainageways, water supplies, sanitary wastes, and other public utilities and services, as required by applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations;
5. Make adequate provision for the connectivity of streets, alleys, pedestrian accessways and other public ways;
6. Make adequate provisions for an irrigation water right of way for each parcel of land which lies in whole or in part in an irrigation district organized pursuant to Chapter 87.03 RCW. In addition, if the short subdivision lies within land within the district classified as irrigable, completed irrigation water distribution facilities for such land may be required by the irrigation district by resolution, bylaw, or rule of general applicability as a condition for approval of the short plat or final plat by the legislative authority of the city. Rights of way shall be evidenced by the respective plats submitted for final approval to the appropriate legislative authority. In addition, if the short subdivision to be platted is wholly or partially within an irrigation district of two hundred thousand acres or more and has been previously platted by the United States Bureau of Reclamation as a Farm Unit in the district, the legislative authority shall not approve for such land a short plat or final plat as defined in RCW 58.17.020 without the approval of the irrigation
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 16 of 126
district and the administrator or manager of the project of the Bureau of Reclamation, or its successor agency, within which that district lies. Compliance with the requirements of this section together with all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be a prerequisite, within the expressed purpose of this chapter, to any sale, lease, or development of land in this state.
18.04.130 Determination of completeness.
Within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receiving a Type I short subdivision preliminary plat application, the Community Development Department shall mail or personally provide to the applicant a written determination of completeness which states either that the application is complete or incomplete. If incomplete, the letter shall identify what information is required to make the application complete. The letter shall also identify, to the extent known by the city, other agencies with jurisdiction over the short subdivision application. If the city determines that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the city. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the city shall again make the completeness determination and shall notify the applicant in the same manner.
If the short subdivision application is determined to be complete, the community development department shall accept the application and note the date of acceptance. The time period for review of the proposed short subdivision begins following the determination of a complete application and acceptance of the application by the city. If the city does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed complete at the end of the twenty-eight (28) day completeness review period.
18.04.135 Vesting.
A proposed division of land shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that a preliminary plat application for a Type I short subdivision, as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the City of Ephrata, pursuant to EMC 18.04.130.
18.04.140 Notice of application.
A Notice of Application shall be issued for short subdivision applications within fourteen (14) calendar days after the City has made a Determination of Completeness, and at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting date. The Notice of Application shall be published and posted on the same day, in the following manner:
1. The city shall publish the Notice of Application in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
2. The city shall post the Notice of Application on the public notice board(s) placed on the property and shall also post the Notice of Application at Ephrata City Hall.
3. The City shall mail or send the Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.
4. One Notice of Application shall be done for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete project permit application.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 17 of 126
18.04.145 Referral of preliminary short subdivision application.
Upon determination of completeness of an application for a short subdivision, the Community Development Department shall transmit one (1) copy of the application materials to each member of the short subdivision committee, provide copies to the appropriate city departments and to any other department or agency deemed necessary. The application shall be transmitted at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting.
18.04.150 Notification of agencies.
A. The city shall mail a Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction over the short subdivision application. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the short subdivision committee meeting and a description of the property to be platted. A copy of the plat and the application materials shall be provided to agencies as deemed necessary or if requested by the agency.
B. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed short subdivision, adjacent to or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the city boundaries or which contemplates the use of private utilities shall be given to the appropriate county or utility authority.
C. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed short subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway shall be given to the State Department of Transportation. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the meeting, a legal description of the short subdivision and a location map. The Department of Transportation shall, within fourteen (14) days after receiving the notice, submit to the Community Development Department a statement of any information that the department deems to be relevant about the effect of the proposed short subdivision upon the legal access to the state highway, the traffic-carrying capacity of the state highway and the safety of the users of the state highway.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.155.
18.04.155 Public notice.
Notice of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be given in the following manner:
1. The date of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be listed on the Notice of Application, which shall be mailed to the applicant.
2. The City shall mail or send the Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.
3. The City shall publish the Notice of Application in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
4. The applicant shall place at least one public notice board on the property to be subdivided. The public notice board must be placed on the property as directed by the Community Development Department, and no later than fourteen (14) days after a Determination of Completeness. The applicant must remove the public notice board(s) from the property within seven (7) days after the end of the comment notice period or the conclusion of the public meeting(s). If the property to be subdivided is located adjacent to more than one public street or has more than one potential access route, one public notice board shall be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 18 of 126
placed on the property adjacent to each public street or potential access route. The Community Development Department staff shall post the Notice of Application at Ephrata City Hall.
18.04.160 Public comment.
Affected agencies and the public shall have a fourteen (14) calendar day period to comment on a Notice of Application. An agency is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall not be granted for a period longer than three (3) additional calendar days. The public may make written response to the proposed short subdivision application within the comment period.
The fourteen (14) day public comment period begins on the date the Notice of Application is posted and published. The Community Development Department must receive all public comments by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible. The short subdivision committee shall not take action on a short subdivision application until after the comment period has passed.
18.04.165 Agency recommendations.
At the time of the preliminary short subdivision plat application, written recommendations for approval or disapproval must be submitted from the jurisdiction/health agencies responsible for approval of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply, regarding the general adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply.
18.04.170 Short subdivision committee.
A. The short subdivision committee shall consist of the Community Development Director, who shall be chairman; the Parks and Recreation Director; the Building Official; the Public Works Director; the Fire Chief; and a Planning Commission member. Each committee member is authorized to designate an alternate to attend in their absence. A designated alternate shall have full voting power in the short subdivision approval process.
B. Three (3) of the six (6) members of the short subdivision committee must be present in order for the committee to take any action.
18.04.175 Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.
A public meeting attended by the applicant or representative and the short subdivision committee members shall be held within forty (40) days of the determination of completeness of the application. The meeting shall be open to the public.
18.04.180 Approval criteria.
A. A proposed short subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the city finds that:
1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:
a. The public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
b. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands and habitat;
c. Potable water supplies;
d. Sanitary wastes;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 19 of 126
e. Other public utilities and services, as deemed necessary;
f. Drainageways;
g. Stormwater detention;
h. Schools and school grounds;
i. Transit stops;
j. Connectivity of sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods for residents and students who walk to and from schools, parks, transit stops and other neighborhood services;
k. Irrigation right of way or easements when short subdivision lies in whole or in part in an irrigation district organized pursuant to 87.03 RCW.
l. Connectivity of streets, roads, alleyways and other private and public ways for vehicular transportation, where feasible; and
2. The City has considered all other relevant facts; and
3. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such short subdivision and dedication; and
4. The Subdivision shall front on an existing street. There shall be adequate access to all parcels. Streets shall be improved to City Standard. Street lighting shall be provided; and
5. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
6. The city has considered the physical characteristics of a proposed short subdivision site and may deny a proposed plat because of flood, inundation, or wetland conditions; slope, or soil stability and/or capabilities. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such improvements shall be noted on the final plat.
B. Dedication of land to any public body, provision of public improvements to serve the subdivision, and/or the imposition of impact fees may be required as a condition of subdivision approval. Dedications shall be clearly shown on the final plat. No dedication, provision of public improvements, or impact fees shall be allowed that constitutes an unconstitutional taking of private property. The city shall not require a release from damages to be procured from other property owners as a condition of approval for any subdivision.
18.04.185 Decision on short subdivisions.
A. The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be made at the short subdivision committee meeting. An additional meeting may be called if no decision is reached at the first meeting. The second meeting shall be set for the next scheduled short subdivision committee meeting or a date mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the short subdivision committee.
B. The city shall make written findings on the short subdivision approval criteria. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the committee’s decision and shall be provided with a copy of the committee’s findings addressing their reasons for approval or denial.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 20 of 126
C. The short subdivision committee may approve, approve with modifications and conditions, or deny the application for a short subdivision. Any short subdivision which has four (4) or fewer lots shall not be subject to full subdivision standards and shall not be required to comply with all of the design standards required of subdivisions.
D. If modifications are deemed necessary by the short subdivision committee, they may be added to the original short subdivision plat or a new short subdivision plat may be required.
E. An applicant may request that an application, on which the short subdivision committee has taken affirmative action, be reopened by the committee if it is found by the Community Development Director and the applicant that new information has come to light that might affect the action taken by the short subdivision committee.
F. In case of a denial by the short subdivision committee, any appeal made shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with EMC 17.01 and 19.06. New information may be presented during hearing examiner consideration of the appeal.
18.04.190 Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.
The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be final, unless an appeal by a party of record is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days after the short subdivision committee’s decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be processed pursuant to EMC 17.01 and 19.06. The decision of the hearing examiner shall represent final action of the city and is appealable only to the superior court.
18.04.195 Appeal to superior court.
The decision of the hearing examiner is final, unless it is appealed to the superior court. Such appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued.
18.04.200 Property annexed to city with short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
A. In instances where property annexed to the city has received short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County prior to annexation, the Community Development Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department and Building Department shall review the plat. City plan check review and inspections shall be subject to fees.
B. The density, lot size and dimensions, and the provisions made for open space, drainageways, streets, alleys, public ways, water, sanitary wastes, parks, playgrounds, sites for schools and school grounds, and those conditions imposed by Grant County need not comply with the requirements of EMC Title 19, Zoning, or the Ephrata construction standards. These plats are to be developed in accordance with county standards in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary plat application in the county.
C. The preliminary plat shall comply with the Grant County regulations pertaining to expiration of the preliminary plat that were in effect on the date the application vested. The date of approval will be that date on which Grant County approved the preliminary plat.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 21 of 126
D. The procedures for Type I short subdivision final plats shall be those county procedures and regulations in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary short plat application in the county.
18.04.205 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
A. The following tangible improvements may be required before a Type I short subdivision is recorded:
1. Grading and paving of streets and alleys;
2. Installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, monuments, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights, water mains, street name signs, street trees and planting strip landscaping, together with all appurtenances thereto.
All improvements are to be made pursuant to specifications and standards of this code, approved by the Public Works Department and in accordance with standards of the city.
B. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the supervision, inspection and acceptance of all subdivision improvements and shall charge the subdivider a fee that has been assessed in accordance with the EMC as enacted or as subsequently amended.
C. Prior to proceeding with short subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall make application for such permits from the city as are necessary. The applicant is also responsible for complying with all permit requirements of other federal, state and local agencies.
D. No Type I short subdivision shall be recorded until all improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the responsible departments or a bond approved by the city has been posted for deferred improvements. If a developer wishes to defer certain on-site improvements, written application shall be made to the Public Works and Community Development Departments stating the reasons why such delay is necessary. If the deferment is approved, the developer shall furnish a performance bond to the city in an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements. The decision of the City’s Public Works Director and Community Development Director as to the amount of such bond shall be conclusive. Such bond shall list the exact work that shall be performed by the applicant and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the Public Works Department. If no time is established, then the time period shall not be longer than one (1) year after recording of the short subdivision. The bond shall be held by the City Clerk. The developer may substitute a certified or cashier’s check or assignment of funds in lieu of a performance bond. Such check or assignment shall be made payable to the City of Ephrata and shall be in the same amount as the bond it is substituting.
E. The City reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay the City all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City requiring payment of such attorney’s fees. The requirement of the posting of any performance bond or other security shall be binding on the applicant, his heirs, successors and assigns.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 22 of 126
F. The Public Works Department shall notify in writing to the Community Development Department verification that the developer has completed the required installations and/or bonding in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the specifications and standards of the departments. The Community Development Department shall notify the developer advising him to proceed with recordation of the short subdivision when the required improvements have been installed and approved or adequate security has been posted as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
State law reference(s) – Improvements, RCW 58.17.130.
18.04.207 Final Plat Map Requirements.
A. Final Plat Map shall include the following:
1. Legend;
2. Identification of areas to be dedicated;
3. All blocks and lots within the proposed subdivision, together with the numbers assigned each lot and block, and the dimensions, square footage and acreage of all proposed lots and tracts;
4. The location, width, and description of existing and proposed:
a. Public and private roads and access thereto;
b. Special setbacks;
c. Private and public easements;
d. Utility easements;
e. Other rights-of-way; and
f. Walkways;
5. A designation of any lot that never can contain a dwelling or building unit or that is otherwise undevelopable;
6. A certificate, seal, date and signature of the registered land surveyor who made, or under whose supervision was made, the survey of the subdivision, in substantially the following language:
"I,_________________________________________________, registered as a land surveyor by the State of Washington, certify that this short plat is based on an actual survey of the land described herein, conducted by me or under my supervision, during the period of _____________, 20______, through _____________, 20______; that the distances, bearings and angles are shown thereon correctly, and that monuments other than those monuments approved for setting at a later date, have been set and lot corners staked on the ground as depicted on the plat."
7. A plat certificate conforming to the requirements of RCW 58.17.165;
8. Signature blocks for the following entities:
a. City Public Works Director;
b. City Community Development Director/Short Subdivision Committee Chairman;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 23 of 126
c. County Auditor;
d. County Assessor;
e. County Treasurer;
f. City Clerk
g. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation and Irrigation District when subdivision is located within the boundaries of the Columbia Basin Irrigation Project;
The signature blocks for each of the signatories shall be in a form and contain language specified by the signatory.
9. All requirements listed in Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC;
10. A listing of any other conditions delineated in the preliminary short subdivision approval; and
B. Additional Final Plat Map Requirements for Short Subdivisions:
The following additional final plat map requirements shall apply to Short Subdivisions:
1. A disclaimer which states that:
A. "Land within this Short Subdivision shall not be further divided for a period of five (5) years from the date of approval unless a new subdivision is approved;" and
B. "The approval of this Short Subdivision does not guarantee the issuance of any other permit.”
2. A declaration of covenant for all final Short Subdivisions with private rights-of-way, roads, or easements that requires construction and maintenance of private roads, with a provision to dedicate the rights-of-way and roads to Ephrata when required by local regulations.
18.04.210 Filing the final short plat.
A. The short subdivision final plat submitted for filing shall be two (2) reproducible maps drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing one hundred (100) feet on sheets eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development office. The original drawing shall be in black ink on mylar or photographic mylar, and shall:
1. Include the date, title, name and location of the subdivision, graphic scale, complete legend identifying line types and point features, and true north point;
2. Show the location of all existing fences and structures in relation to lot lines within or abutting the short plat;
3. Show the location of utilities, streets and easements within or abutting short plat;
4. Display the lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, lot lines, lot and blocks numbered in numerical order, reservations, easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use, with notes stating their purpose and any limitations;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 24 of 126
5. Contain data sufficient to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, easement line, lot line, boundary line and block line on site;
6. Include dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds;
7. Include Lambert coordinates to the nearest five (5) seconds, or as required by more stringent state regulations, if provided by the Public Works Department for permanent control monuments on the final plat as determined by the city’s engineer and/or land surveyor;
8. If applicable, display all interior permanent control monuments located as determined by the City Public Works office. All interior monuments shall be installed prior to the release of any bond;
9. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
10. Be mathematically correct;
11. Be accompanied by an approved printed computer plot closure on all lots, streets, alleys and boundaries;
12. Contain a metes and bounds legal description on the face of the final plat mylar which reflects all ties to subdivision lines, donation claim lines and/or recorded plat lines. The plat shall be accompanied by a current plat certificate with the identical metes and bounds legal description of the land to be subdivided on both the title report and final mylar;
13. Be accompanied by a complete survey of the section in which the plat or replat is located, or as much thereof as may be necessary to properly orient the plat within such section or sections. The plat and section survey shall be submitted with complete field and computation notes showing the original or reestablished corners with descriptions of the same and the actual traverse showing error of closure and method of balancing. A sketch showing all distances, angles and calculations required to determine corners and distances of the plat shall accompany this data. The allowable error of closure shall not exceed one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet or as required by more stringent state regulations;
14. List all conditions of approval for the short subdivision on the face of the plat;
15. Conform to the approved preliminary plat;
16. Be signed by the owner of the property on the face of the final plat mylar;
17. Include a notarized certificate of the owner, contract purchaser, grantor of a deed of trust, or other holder of beneficial title to the property being subdivided indicating that the short subdivision is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires, and if the short subdivision is subject to deeding of property, the notarized certificate shall be signed by all parties having any ownership interest in the lands subdivided. For purposes of this section, “ownership interest” shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 25 of 126
contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property.
B. In addition to other requirements as specified in this section, the final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
1. Certification showing that streets, rights-of-way and all sites for public use have been properly dedicated;
2. Certification by a licensed land surveyor that a survey has been made and that monuments and stakes will be set;
3. Certification by the responsible health agencies that the methods of sewage disposal and water service are acceptable;
4. Certification by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer that the subdivider has complied with either of the following alternatives:
a. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, or
b. Certain improvements have been deferred according to EMC 18.04.205 (D), deferred improvements;
5. The subdivider shall furnish the City a current plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the plat, subdivision, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the plat. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final plat by the short subdivision committee chairman;
6. Copies of any restrictive covenants as may be used in the short subdivision;
7. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Assessor;
8. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Auditor.
9. Certification by the Grant County Treasurer that taxes have been paid in accordance with RCW 58.08.030 and 58.08.040 and that a deposit has been made with the Grant County Treasurer in sufficient amount to pay any delinquent taxes and all taxes for the current year.
C. All short subdivision final plats shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state. All exterior corner and/or angle points shall be set with re-bar and cap. The type of street monuments used shall be in accordance with City of Ephrata Standards and shall be installed per those same Standards. The licensed land surveyor’s certification must appear on final mylar. Certificates of approval by the chairman of the short subdivision committee, the Grant County Assessor and the Grant County Auditor must be provided on the final mylar.
D. If any utility companies and/or utility districts have existing easements within the proposed plat, the plattor or its assigns shall have these easements removed or shall have their rights subordinated to the City of Ephrata.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 26 of 126
E. The final plat must be submitted to the Community Development Department for review by the City as to compliance with all terms of the preliminary approval of the proposed subdivision or dedication; terms of bonding or the completion of all improvements; and completeness and accuracy of survey data and platting requirements.
F. The short subdivision final plat shall be signed by the chairman of the short subdivision committee when the plat is determined to be in compliance with all applicable short subdivision platting requirements and before it is filed with Grant County.
G. An approved short subdivision final plat shall be filed for record in the office of the Grant County Auditor and shall not be deemed approved until filed.
H. A copy of the recorded short plat shall be filed with the Community Development Department and one set of the original mylar shall be filed with the Public Works Department.
I. A digital copy of the final plat map on electronic media in an Autodesk Autocad (.dwg) compatible format shall be submitted to the City of Ephrata Community Development Department and to the Grant County Auditor’s office.
18.04.215 Short subdivision plat expiration.
If the short subdivision final plat is not filed within one (1) year of the date of preliminary plat approval, the short subdivision plat shall be null and void. Upon written request of the subdivider, the Community Development Department may grant one (1) extension of not more than one (1) year. Such request must be received by the Community Development Department prior to the one (1) year expiration date.
18.04.220 Limitations on further subdivision.
Any land subdivided under the requirements for a short subdivision shall not be further divided for a period of five (5) years without following the procedures for subdivisions, except that when the short subdivision contains fewer than four parcels, nothing in this section shall prevent the owner who filed the short subdivision from filing an alteration within the five (5) year period to create up to a total of four lots within the original short subdivision boundaries.
18.04.225 Procedure for alteration of a Type I short subdivision.
A. If an applicant wishes to alter a Type I short subdivision or any portion thereof, except as provided in EMC 18.04.230, that person shall submit an application to the Community Development Department requesting the alteration. The application shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions within the subdivision or in that portion of the subdivision to be altered.
B. If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.
C. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision prior to final plat review and signature, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director. A major plat alteration shall require consent of the short subdivision committee, after public notice and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 27 of 126
a public meeting is held. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application for a major plat alteration to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the original short plat application. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to determine whether the proposed alteration constitutes a minor or major alteration.
D. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision after final plat review and signature, but prior to filing the final plat with Grant County, a plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the original short plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
E. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision after filing the final plat with Grant County, a minor plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee. If the Community Development Director determines that the proposed alteration is a major alteration, then the Community Development Director may require re-platting pursuant to this chapter. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the subdivision plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
F. The short subdivision committee shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may deny or approve the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between adjacent properties.
G. After approval of the alteration, the short subdivision committee shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the short subdivision, which after signature of the chair of the short subdivision committee, the final plat shall be filed with the county auditor to become the lawful plat of the property.
18.04.230 Procedure for vacation of a Type I short subdivision.
A. Whenever an applicant wishes to vacate a Type I short subdivision or any portion thereof, that person shall file an application for vacation with the Community Development Department. The application shall set forth the reasons for vacation and shall contain signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion of the subdivision subject to vacation.
B. If the short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the short subdivision, and the application for vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the short subdivision or portion thereof.
C. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street or road, the procedures for street vacation RCW 35.79 shall be utilized for the street vacation. When the application is for the vacation of the plat together with the streets or roads, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used but vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under state law.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 28 of 126
D. The Community Development Department shall give notice to all owners of property within the subdivision, and within three hundred (300) feet of short subdivision boundaries and to all applicable agencies. The short subdivision committee shall conduct a public meeting if the requested vacation does not involve a public dedication. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if the request involves a public dedication. The application for vacation of the short subdivision may be approved or denied after the city has determined the public use and interest to be served by the vacation of the short subdivision. If any portion of the land contained in the short subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the city, shall be deeded to the city unless the city council sets forth findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands.
E. Title to the vacated property shall vest with the rightful owner as shown in the county records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, for public use other than a road or street, and the city council has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title thereto shall vest with the person or persons owning the property on each side thereof, as determined by the City Council. When the road or street that is to be vacated was contained wholly within the short subdivision and is part of the boundary of the short subdivision, title to the vacated road or street shall vest with the owner or owners of property contained within the vacated subdivision.
18.04.235 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
A. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the protection of valuable, irreplaceable environmental amenities and to make urban development as compatible as possible with the ecological balance of the area. Goals are to preserve drainage patterns, protect ground water supply, prevent erosion and to preserve trees and natural vegetation. This is beneficial to the city in lessening the costs of the development to the city as a whole, and to the subdivider in creating an attractive and quality environment. Land which is found to be unsuitable for subdivision includes land with features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the future residents such as land adversely affected by flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes and rock formations. Land which the City Council considers inappropriate for subdivision shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods are provided as safeguards against these adverse conditions. If any portion of the land within the boundary of a preliminary plat or approved record of survey is subject to flood, or inundation, or is in a flood control zone, according to Chapter 86.16 RCW, that portion of the subdivision shall meet the requirements of EMC 19.04.140.
B. Where residential subdivisions are to be developed adjacent to business, commercial or industrial land use districts, buffer strips may be provided. No plan for the re-platting, subdivision, or dedication of any areas shall be approved by the City Council unless the streets shown therein are connected by a surfaced road or street according to city specifications to an existing street or highway. The location of all streets shall conform to any adopted plans for streets in the city. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. All proposed street names shall be approved by the City. Streets intersecting with existing or proposed public highways, major or secondary arterials shall be held to a minimum.
C. The alignment of all streets shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director. The following standards shall apply unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director, in consultation with the Community Development Department and the Fire Department:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 29 of 126
1. Where street intersections must be offset, such offsets shall not measure less than two hundred (200) feet from the centerline to centerline.
2. Residential cul-de-sacs shall conform to the standards as defined in the latest edition of the International Fire Code, Appendix D.
3. No street grades shall exceed fifteen (15) percent. A grading permit shall be required as per the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Ch. 16.04 EMC, prior to any grading.
4. A tangent of at least two hundred (200) feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves for community or major arterials, one hundred fifty (150) feet for neighborhood collector streets, and one hundred (100) feet for residential access streets.
5. Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets sixty (60) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet and on other streets it shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
6. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length of two hundred (200) feet unless specified otherwise by the Public Works Department.
7. All streets shall be platted at full width. All street improvements shall be of full-width improvement. Full-width improvement shall consist of the following:
a. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width and the pavement and sidewalks shall be constructed to standard cross-sections.
b. All street and alley surfaces shall be of asphalt concrete according to city specifications.
c. All streets shall have permanent concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks according to city specifications unless waived by the Public Works Director.
d. All streets shall have storm drains consisting of the proper size pipe and catch basins with associated dry-wells.
e. All primary/major arterials, secondary arterials and collector streets shall have sidewalks, with a minimum of five (5) feet width on at least one (1) side.
f. All streets shall have street lighting located and installed in accordance with the standards of the Public Works Department and shall be approved by the Grant County Public Utility District as follows:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 30 of 126
Street Type Maximum Lighting Height Residential Street 18 feet Cul-de-sac 18 feet
Street light heights and spacing shall consider the canopy and root system dimensions of adjacent full-grown trees.
g. Streets which may be extended in the event of future adjacent platting may be required to be dedicated to the boundary line. Extensions of greater depth than an average lot shall be improved with temporary turnarounds. Dedication of a full-width boundary street may be required in certain instances to facilitate future development.
h. If planting strips are installed they shall be approved by the Public Works Director and built to City Standard and shall:
i. Be not less than five (5) feet in width;
ii. Be located between curbs and sidewalks, except on cul-de-sac streets;
iii. Contain street trees appropriate to the city construction standards, as applied by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department;
iv. Be the maintenance responsibility of the abutting property owners, or homeowners’ association. Maintenance includes watering, removal of fallen leaves, fallen branches, and fruit debris. Maintenance does not include such things as fertilizing, trimming, root control, removal of dead or dying trees, or insect and disease control.
i. Street widths vary according to function and traffic generated. The following minimum widths for the types of streets, as defined in the comprehensive plan, must be adhered to if full pavement is required: Street Design Standards Right-of-Way Width (feet) Pavement Width (feet) Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collectors 60 37
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 31 of 126
Residential Streets 60 33 Alleys 20 20 Cul-de-Sac (Radius) 40 30
j. If a subdivision is located in the area of an officially designed trail, provisions shall be made for reservation of the right-of-way or for easements to the city for trail purposes.
8. Traffic calming improvements are required, and are specified according to street classification (see subsection (7)(i) of this section), site conditions, or other conditions as determined by the Public Works Director, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
a. Residential streets with entrances connected to arterial or collector streets shall provide curbs constructed at the return radius standard for residential class streets found in the city construction standards. Other traffic calming options may be determined more appropriate to site conditions by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
b. Other traffic calming designs and improvements may be determined appropriate as remedial options by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department. These options include, but are not limited to:
i. Traffic circles;
ii. Chokers; and
iii. Speed humps.
9. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. Such nonpublic streets may serve not more than nine (9) lots. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface. The minimum paving width for all limited residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited residential access streets serving four (4) or less dwellings.
18.04.240 Installation of utilities.
A. All utilities designed to serve the subdivision shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the Public Works Department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material.
B. Unless septic tanks are specifically approved by the city, sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the city and designed in accordance with city standards.
C. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 32 of 126
slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches.
D. The water distribution system including the locations of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards as defined by Public Works Department and Fire Department ordinances and requirements.
18.04.245 Public use and service areas.
Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the allocation on adequately sized areas for public service usage. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the Public Works Department.
18.04.250 Lots.
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must access a street or road, public or private. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Corner lots may be required to be platted with additional width to allow for the additional side yard requirements. Lots which are bordered by two (2) more or less parallel streets shall be permitted access to only one (1) of those streets. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have minimum radii of fifteen (15) feet.
18.04.255 Other improvements.
A. Monuments. Concrete permanent control monuments shall be established at each and every controlling corner of the subdivision. Interior monuments shall be located as determined by the City’s engineer or Public Works Department. All surveys shall be of second degree accuracy. The use of state plane coordinates is encouraged. All other lot corners shall be marked with suitable metal rebar and surveyors cap with Licensed Surveyors number imprinted on the cap.
B. Street signs. The subdivider at his cost shall install street name signs on all private streets in the subdivision.
C. Vertical Control Monument. One (1) brass cap permanent vertical control monument with elevation and Licensed Surveyor number stamped on the cap shall be established within the boundary of the subdivision. The vertical datum for the vertical control monument shall be linked to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1988 Adjustment (NGVD88). Elevation for the vertical control monument shall be determined to an accuracy standard equal to third order classification as defined by the Federal Geodetic Control Committee. All field techniques and procedures shall be compatible with the equipment utilized to insure that a true third order accuracy level is achieved. When utilizing a United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) monument (if located in its original position), both the USBR elevation data and the NGVD88 data shall be included on brass cap.
D. Hillside subdivisions. A hillside subdivision is a subdivision in which any lot in the subdivision has average slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent and in which any street in the subdivision has grades greater than seven (7) percent at any point or is located within the Hillside Management Overlay Zone EMC 19.03.190. Additional regulations shall be placed on hillside subdivisions in order to protect the unique environment and to deal with additional drainage and erosion problems present in such areas. The following standards shall apply to hillside subdivisions in addition to the regulations of EMC 18.04.235 through 18.04.255(A) and (B) which shall apply unless specifically excepted:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 33 of 126
1. Information concerning the soils, geology, drainage patterns, and vegetation shall be presented in order to determine if the subdivision can be safely developed.
2. Detailed plans prepared by a licensed engineer shall be submitted for any proposed cut and fill operations. These plans shall include the angle of slope, contours, compaction, provisions for stormwater control, and retaining walls.
3. Streets may have a grade exceeding fifteen (15) percent and street widths may be less than those required in EMC 18.04.235(C)(6) and (C)(7)(a) if it is found that traffic generated will be less than in a nonhillside subdivision.
4. Lots may be required to be larger than minimum lot sizes required by EMC Title 19, Zoning. Generally, lots in steeper areas of the subdivision should be larger than those in less steep areas of the subdivision.
5. Any clearing or grading shall be accompanied by erosion control measures as deemed necessary by the Public Works Department.
Cross reference(s) – View regulations on hillside management overlay zones, § 19.03.190.
18.04.260 Zero lot line type I short subdivisions.
A. Zero lot line subdivisions shall be subject to the development standards outlined in EMC Title 19. These standards include minimum lot size, width, depth, etc.
B. The regulations of EMC 18.04.235 through 18.04.255 shall apply unless specifically excepted. In addition, the following standards shall apply to zero lot line subdivision:
1. Streets, curbs and sidewalks.
a. Public streets. In certain areas, due to existing or planned circulation systems, it may be necessary for the City to require public rights-of-way to be provided within the development. When the provision of such rights-of-way is necessary, the right-of-way width, paving width, and other standards shall be the same as would otherwise be required. The perimeter buffering requirement shall be applied along these rights-of-way.
b. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface, and concrete or asphalt curbing shall be provided along both sides of all streets except where curb cuts are necessary for driveways. The minimum paving width for all collector streets within the zero lot line development shall be twenty-four (24) feet. The minimum paving width for all residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited access streets serving two (2) or less dwellings. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.5 guest parking spaces per dwelling unit beyond the normal parking provided at the dwelling.
2. Installation of utilities. All utilities designed to serve the development shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the Public Works Department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 34 of 126
to the application of any surface material. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the Public Works Department.
a. Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the city and designed in accordance with city standards.
b. Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches. All mobile home parks must comply with city drainage ordinances.
c. Water system. The water distribution system including the location of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards as defined by Public Works and Fire Department ordinances and requirements.
d. Electrical hook-ups. All electrical hookups shall comply with the National Electrical Code. Permits shall be obtained from the State Electrical Inspection Division.
18.04.265 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
A. The division of land for industrial and commercial purposes shall conform to the requirements and minimum standards of residential design except as provided in this section.
B. The street widths shall be as follows: Right-of-way width in feet Pavement width in feet Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collectors 60 37 Alleys 20 20
The city may require that street widths in commercial subdivisions be increased to provide for traffic movement and to reduce or eliminate traffic congestion.
C. All industrial arterial/primary street (one-hundred (100) foot right-of-way), industrial collectors/secondary street (eighty (80) foot right-of-way), and commercial streets/tertiary collectors (sixty (60) foot right-of-way) shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on both sides. All industrial and commercial access streets which are also
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 35 of 126
through streets shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on one (1) side.
D. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have a minimum radii of twenty-five (25) feet.
E. If railroad tracks are to be installed in a subdivision, such tracks and their route shall be shown on the face of the preliminary plat.
F. Lots are optional in industrial and commercial subdivisions. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. However, if lots for individual sale or lease are created, they shall conform to the following criteria:
1. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
2. Corner lots may be required to be platted wider than interior lots as determined by the Community Development Department.
Article III. Type II Short Subdivisions
18.04.400 Purpose of type II short subdivisions.
The procedures regulating type II short subdivisions are established to promote orderly and efficient division of lots on a smaller scale, promote infill development and meet density requirements in established urban areas while minimizing the application review time, avoiding placing undue burdens on the subdivider and complying with the purpose of this chapter and the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 et seq.
18.04.405 Scope.
A. Any land being divided into more than four (4) and less than ten (10) parcels, lots, tracts, sites or subdivisions, and which have not been divided in a short subdivision within a period of five (5) years shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
B. No application for a short subdivision shall be approved if the land being divided is held in common ownership with a contiguous parcel that has been divided in a short subdivision within the preceding five (5) years. Such serial subdivision of contiguous parcels in the same ownership is defined as ‘piggybacking’ short subdivisions and is prohibited unless the subject property has received master plan approval by the City through a rezone, planned unit development or other hearing process, then ‘piggybacking’ short subdivisions shall be permitted. Such short subdivisions must be consistent with the approved master plan.
18.04.410 Preliminary consultation with staff.
Any person who desires to subdivide land in the City should consult with the Community Development Department at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The Public Works Department should be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the engineering requirements of this chapter and the construction standards of the City.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 36 of 126
18.04.415 Application procedures.
An application for a Type II short subdivision consists of six (6) separate steps as follows:
1. Preparation of the tentative short subdivision and submission of the tentative short subdivision application to the Community Development Department;
2. Review of the tentative short subdivision by the City and convene a meeting with the developer and the City resulting in the issuance of a tentative subdivision letter;
3. Preparation of the preliminary plat of the proposed short subdivision and submission of the preliminary short subdivision application to the short subdivision committee for a public meeting and decision;
4. Installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved preliminary plat requirements and satisfaction of all plat conditions;
5. Submission of the final plat to the Community Development Department for review and signature by the chair of the short subdivision committee;
6. Recordation of the approved final plat in the office of the Grant County Auditor.
18.04.420 Subdivision in phases.
In a phased Type II short subdivision, preliminary plat approval must be granted for the entire subdivision and must delineate the separate divisions which are to be developed in increments. The preliminary plat approval shall be conditioned upon completion of the proposed phases in a particular sequence and may specify a completion date for each phase. Final plat approval shall be granted for each separate phase of the preliminary plat and any changes at the preliminary plat stage would require approval by the short subdivision committee.
18.04.425 Tentative short plat review.
A. Applications for a short subdivision tentative plat meeting and review shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The scale and information required for a tentative short subdivision application and number of copies to be filed shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Community Development Director.
B. The Community Development Department shall transmit copies of the short subdivision tentative plat to the Fire Department, Public Works Department, Parks and Recreation Department, Public Utility District serving the area, and to any other department or agency deemed necessary.
C. A meeting on the tentative short plat shall be held, which is attended by the Community Development Department, other city departments which receive copies of the tentative plat, and the subdivider. Any recommendations of the various departments for revision of the tentative plat should be discussed at such meeting. These recommendations and potential conditions of approval for the short plat shall be recorded in writing and mailed to the subdivider by the Community Development Department.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 37 of 126
D. The recommendations of the city departments shall be based on whether the tentative short plat is:
1. In conformance with the purpose and regulations of this chapter;
2. In conformance with fire safety regulations;
3. In conformance with City of Ephrata construction standards;
4. In conformance with building code regulations;
5. In conformance with the appropriate street standards and the circulation pattern established or proposed for the area that the subdivision will be developed in;
6. In conformance with sewer, water, storm water, and other utility plans for the area;
7. Not detrimental to its surroundings.
E. If the short subdivision tentative plat is recommended to proceed as presented or as modified in accordance with the written suggestions made by the City, the applicant shall proceed to the preliminary short subdivision stage. If not recommended to proceed, a preliminary short subdivision may still be submitted to the short subdivision committee. However, it is likely that the same objections and problems will arise at that stage.
F. If changes are made to a preliminary short plat which has already received tentative plat recommendations and potential conditions, the Community Development Department shall compare the subdivision tentative short plat and the proposed preliminary short plat and shall make a determination whether the preliminary plat requires additional tentative plat review. A new tentative plat review and meeting may be required if the preliminary plat is not substantially similar to the tentative plat reviewed by the City. The determination of the necessity for another tentative plat meeting shall be based on the following considerations:
1. The degree of commonality between the two (2) plans (i.e., the preliminary plat is a refinement of the tentative plat, or is a completely new plat for the same property); and
2. The presence or absence of revisions present in the preliminary plat resulting from concerns or recommendations raised at the tentative plat meeting.
18.04.430 Preliminary short subdivision application.
A. Application for a short subdivision shall be made to the Community Development Department on the forms supplied and in the number of copies prescribed by that Department.
B. The short subdivision plat shall be a neat and approximate drawing on reproducible material at a decimal scale. The plat map shall measure between eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and a reduced map that shall measure between eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches and shall include:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 38 of 126
1. The short subdivision name and number, the name and address of the owner, and the name and address of the licensed land surveyor and if applicable, the subdivision engineer;
2. The date of preparation, the true north point, a graphic scale and legal description of the property to be subdivided and drawn to an appropriate decimal scale;
3. The location of existing and proposed platted property lines, and existing section lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, and any recorded public or private utility or roadway easements, both on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining lands that abut the proposed subdivision, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the subject property;
4. The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations and utilities;
5. The acreage of land to be subdivided; the number of lots; the area of each lot (square footage); and the approximate square footage and approximate percent of total acreage in open space;
6. The dimensions of each lot;
7. How the proposed subdivision will be served by utilities and the location of sewer and water lines;
8. All existing structures and distances from any existing and proposed lot lines within or abutting the short subdivision within a distance of fifty (50) feet;
9. Monumentation of all exterior corners and streets and be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state;
10. Provisions for sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school, users of public transit and other pedestrians;
11. All of the information requested on the application form by the Community Development Director.
12. The elevations of all permanent monuments based on datum plane approved by the Public Works Director.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.240, 58.17.250.
18.04.435 Principles of acceptability.
No short subdivision shall be approved unless the following principles of acceptability are met. The short subdivision shall:
1. Create legal building sites which comply with all provisions of EMC Title 19, Zoning, and health regulations;
2. Establish access to a public road for each segregated parcel;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 39 of 126
3. Have suitable physical characteristics; a proposed short plat may be denied because of flood, inundation or wetland conditions; slope, soil stability and/or capabilities; or the construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval;
4. Make adequate provision for storm-water detention, drainageways, water supplies, sanitary wastes, and other public utilities and services, as required by applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations;
5. Make adequate provision for the connectivity of streets, alleys, pedestrian accessways and other public ways; and,
6. Make adequate provisions for an irrigation water right of way for each parcel of land which lies in whole or in part in an irrigation district organized pursuant to chapter 87.03 RCW. In addition, if the short subdivision lies on land within the district classified as irrigable, completed irrigation water distribution facilities for such land may be required by the irrigation district by resolution, bylaw, or rule of general applicability as a condition for approval of the short plat or final plat by the legislative authority of the city. Rights of way shall be evidenced by the respective plats submitted for final approval to the appropriate legislative authority. In addition, if the short subdivision to be platted is wholly or partially within an irrigation district of two hundred thousand acres or more and has been previously platted by the United States Bureau of Reclamation as a Farm Unit in the district, the legislative authority shall not approve for such land a short plat or final plat as defined in RCW 58.17.020 without the approval of the irrigation district and the administrator or manager of the project of the Bureau of Reclamation, or its successor agency, within which that district lies. Compliance with the requirements of this section together with all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be a prerequisite, within the expressed purpose of this chapter, to any sale, lease, or development of land in this state.
18.04.440 Determination of completeness.
Within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receiving a Type II short subdivision preliminary plat application, the Community Development Department shall mail or personally provide to the applicant a written Determination of Completeness which states either that the application is complete or incomplete. If incomplete, the letter shall identify what information is required to make the application complete. The letter shall also identify, to the extent known by the City, other agencies with jurisdiction over the short subdivision application. If the city determines that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the city. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the city shall again make the completeness determination and shall notify the applicant in the same manner.
If the short subdivision application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Department shall accept the application and note the date of acceptance. The time period for review of the proposed short subdivision begins following the determination of a complete application and acceptance of the application by the city. If the city does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete, the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 40 of 126
application shall be deemed complete at the end of the twenty-eight (28) day completeness review period.
18.04.445 Vesting.
A proposed division of land shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that a preliminary plat application for a Type II short subdivision, as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the City of Ephrata, pursuant to EMC 18.04.440.
18.04.450 Notice of application.
A Notice of Application shall be issued for short subdivision applications within fourteen (14) calendar days after the city has made a Determination of Completeness, and at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting date. The Notice of Application shall be published and posted on the same day, in the following manner:
1. The City shall publish the Notice of Application in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
2. The city shall post the Notice of Application on the public notice board(s) placed on the property and shall also post the Notice of Application at Ephrata City Hall.
3. The City shall mail or send the Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.
4. One Notice of Application shall be done for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete project permit application.
18.04.455 Referral of preliminary short subdivision application.
Upon determination of completeness of an application for a short subdivision, the Community Development Department shall transmit one (1) copy of the application materials to each member of the short subdivision committee, provide copies to the appropriate city departments and to any other department or agency deemed necessary. The application shall be transmitted at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting.
18.04.460 Notification of agencies.
A. The City shall mail a Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction over the short subdivision application. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the short subdivision committee meeting and a description of the property to be platted. A copy of the plat and application materials shall be provided to agencies as deemed necessary or if requested by the agency.
B. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed short subdivision, adjacent to or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the city boundaries or which contemplates the use of private utilities shall be given to the appropriate county or utility authority.
C. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed short subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway shall be given to the State Department of Transportation. Such notice shall
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 41 of 126
include the hour and location of the meeting, a legal description of the short subdivision and a location map. The Department of Transportation shall, within fourteen (14) days after receiving the notice, submit to the Community Development Department a statement of any information that the department deems to be relevant about the effect of the proposed short subdivision upon the legal access to the state highway, the traffic-carrying capacity of the state highway and the safety of the users of the state highway.
18.04.465 Public notice.
Notice of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be given in the following manner:
1. Notice of Application shall be published and posted on the same day, at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the meeting date.
2. The date of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be listed on the Notice of Application which shall be mailed to the applicant. The city shall mail or send the Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.
3. The city shall publish the Notice of Application in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
4. The applicant shall place at least one public notice board on the property to be subdivided. The public notice board must be placed on the property as directed by the Community Development Department and no later than fourteen (14) days after a Determination of Completeness. The applicant must remove the public notice board(s) from the property within seven (7) days after the end of the comment notice period or the conclusion of the public meeting(s). If the property to be subdivided is located adjacent to more than one public street or has more than one potential access route, one public notice board shall be placed on the property adjacent to each public street or potential access route. Community Development Department staff shall post the Notice of Application at Ephrata City Hall.
18.04.470 Public comment.
A. Affected agencies and the public shall have a fourteen (14) calendar day period to comment on a Notice of Application. An agency is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall not be granted for a period longer than three (3) additional calendar days. The public may make written response to the proposed short subdivision application within the comment period.
B. The fourteen (14) day public comment period begins on the date the Notice of Application is mailed, posted and published. The Community Development Department must receive all public comments by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible. The short subdivision committee shall not take action on a short subdivision application until after the comment period has passed.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 42 of 126
18.04.475 Agency recommendations.
At the time of the preliminary short subdivision plat application, written recommendations for approval or disapproval must be submitted from the jurisdiction/health agencies responsible for approval of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply, regarding the general adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply.
18.04.480 Short subdivision committee.
A. The short subdivision committee shall consist of the Community Development Director, who shall be chairman; the Public Works Director; the Building Official; the Parks and Recreation Director; the Fire Chief; and a Planning Commission member. Each committee member is authorized to designate an alternate to attend in their absence. A designated alternate shall have full voting power in the short plat approval process.
B. Three (3) of the six (6) members of the short subdivision committee must be present in order for the committee to take any action.
18.04.485 Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.
A public meeting attended by the applicant or representative and the short subdivision committee members shall be held within forty (40) days of the Determination of Completeness of the application. The meeting shall be open to the public.
18.04.490 Approval criteria.
A. A proposed short subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the city finds that:
1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:
a. The public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
b. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands and habitat;
c. Potable water supplies;
d. Sanitary wastes;
e. Other public utilities and services, as deemed necessary;
f. Drainageways;
g. Stormwater detention;
h. Community parks and recreation;
i. Neighborhood tot lots and play areas;
j. Schools and school grounds;
k. Transit stops;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 43 of 126
l. Connectivity of sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods for residents and students who walk to and from schools, parks, transit stops and other neighborhood services;
m. Irrigation right of way or easements when short subdivision lies in whole or in part in an irrigation district organized pursuant to 87.03 RCW.
n. Connectivity of streets, roads, alleyways and other private and public ways for vehicular transportation, where feasible; and
2. The city has considered all other relevant facts; and
3. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such short subdivision and dedication; and
4. The Subdivision shall front on an existing street. There shall be adequate access to all parcels. Streets shall be improved to City Standard. Street lighting shall be provided; and
5. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
6. The city has considered the physical characteristics of a proposed short subdivision site and may deny a proposed plat because of flood, inundation, or wetland conditions; slope, or soil stability and/or capabilities. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such improvements shall be noted on the final plat.
B. Dedication of land to any public body, provision of public improvements to serve the subdivision, and/or the imposition of impact fees may be required as a condition of subdivision approval. Dedications shall be clearly shown on the final plat. No dedication, provision of public improvements, or impact fees shall be allowed that constitutes an unconstitutional taking of private property. The city shall not require a release from damages to be procured from other property owners as a condition of approval for any subdivision.
18.04.495 Decision on short subdivisions.
A. The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be made at the short subdivision committee meeting. An additional meeting may be called if no decision is reached at the first meeting. The second meeting shall be set for the next scheduled short subdivision committee meeting or a date mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the short subdivision committee.
B. The city shall make written findings on the short subdivision approval criteria. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the committee’s decision and shall be provided with a copy of the committee’s findings addressing their reasons for approval or denial.
C. The short subdivision committee may approve, approve with modifications and conditions, or deny the application for a short subdivision. Any short subdivision which is in excess of four (4) lots shall
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 44 of 126
be subject to full subdivision standards and shall comply with all of the design standard sections of this code.
D. If modifications are deemed necessary by the short subdivision committee, they may be added to the original short subdivision plat or a new short subdivision plat may be required by the short subdivision committee.
E. An applicant may request that an application on which the short subdivision committee has taken affirmative action be reopened by the committee if it is found by the Community Development Director and the applicant that new information has come to light that might affect the action taken by the short subdivision committee.
F. In case of a denial by the short subdivision committee, any appeal made shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with EMC 17.01. New information may be presented during hearing examiner consideration of the appeal.
18.04.500 Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.
The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be final, unless an appeal by a party of record is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days after the short subdivision committee’s decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be processed pursuant to EMC 17.01. The decision of the hearing examiner shall represent final action of the city and is appealable only to the superior court.
18.04.505 Appeal to superior court.
The decision of the hearing examiner is final, unless appealed to the superior court. Such appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued.
18.04.510 Property annexed to city with short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
A. In instances where property annexed to the city has received short subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County prior to annexation, the Community Development Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department and Building Department shall review the plat. City plan check review and inspections shall be subject to fees, which are on file in the city clerk’s office.
B. The density, lot size and dimensions, and the provisions made for open space, drainageways, streets, alleys, public ways, water, sanitary wastes, parks, playgrounds, sites for schools and school grounds, and those conditions of approval imposed by Grant County need not comply with the requirements of EMC Title 19, Zoning, or the Ephrata construction standards. These plats are to be developed in accordance with county standards in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary plat in the county.
C. The preliminary plat shall comply with the Grant County regulations pertaining to expiration of the preliminary plat that were in effect on the date the application vested. The date of approval will be that date on which Grant County approved the preliminary plat.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 45 of 126
D. The procedures for Type II short subdivision final plats shall be those county procedures and regulations in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary short plat application in the county.
18.04.515 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
A. The following tangible improvements may be required before a short subdivision of five (5) or more lots is recorded:
1. Grading and paving of streets and alleys;
2. Installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, monuments, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights, water mains, street name signs, together with all appurtenances thereto.
All improvements are to be made pursuant to specifications and standards of this code, approved by the Public Works Department and in accordance with standards of the City.
B. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the supervision, inspection and acceptance of all subdivision improvements and shall charge the subdivider a fee that has been assessed in accordance with Ephrata Municipal Code as enacted or as subsequently amended.
C. Prior to proceeding with short subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall make application for such permits from the city as are necessary. The applicant is also responsible for complying with all permit requirements of other federal, state and local agencies.
D. No Type II short subdivision shall be recorded until all improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the responsible departments or a bond approved by the city has been posted for deferred improvements. If a developer wishes to defer certain on-site improvements, written application shall be made to the Public Works and Community Development Department stating the reasons why such delay is necessary. If the deferment is approved, the developer shall furnish a performance bond to the city in an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements. The decision of the Public Works Director and Community Development Director as to the amount of such bond shall be conclusive. Such bond shall list the exact work that shall be performed by the applicant and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the Public Works Department. If no time is established, then the time period shall not be longer than one (1) year after recording of the short subdivision. The bond shall be held by the City Clerk. The developer may substitute a certified or cashier’s check or assignment of funds in lieu of a performance bond. Such check or assignment shall be made payable to the City of Ephrata and shall be in the same amount as the bond it is substituting.
E. The City reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay the City all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City requiring payment of such attorney’s fees. The requirement of the posting of any performance bond or other security shall be binding on the applicant, his heirs, successors and assigns.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 46 of 126
F. The Public Works Department shall notify in writing to the Community Development Department verification that the developer has completed the required installations and/or bonding in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the specifications and standards of the departments. The Community Development Department shall notify the developer advising him to proceed with recordation of the short subdivision when the required improvements have been installed and approved or adequate security has been posted as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
State law reference(s) – Improvements, RCW 58.17.130.
18.04.520 Filing the final short plat.
A. An application for short subdivision final plat shall be filed with the Community Development Department on the forms provided and in the number of copies prescribed by the Community Development Department. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.43 RCW, and shall conform to the preliminary plat. Application fees are on file in the city clerk’s office and the Community Development Department.
B. The short subdivision final plat submitted for filing shall be two (2) reproducible maps drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department and on sheets eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches. The original drawing shall be in black ink on mylar or photographic mylar, and shall:
1. Include the date, title, name and location of the subdivision, graphic scale, complete legend identifying line types and point features and true north point.
2. Show the location of all existing fences and structures in relation to lot lines within or abutting the short plat.
3. Show the location of utilities, streets and easements within or abutting short plat.
4. Display the lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, lot lines, lot and blocks numbered in numerical order, reservations, easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use, with notes stating their purpose and any limitations.
5. Contain data sufficient to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, easement line, lot line, boundary line and block line on site.
6. Include dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
7. Include Lambert coordinates to the nearest five (5) seconds, or as required by more stringent state regulations, if provided by the Public Works Department for permanent control monuments on the final plat as determined by the city’s engineer or land surveyor.
8. If applicable, display all interior permanent control monuments located as determined by the city’s engineer. All interior monuments shall be installed prior to the release of any bond.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 47 of 126
9. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
10. Be mathematically correct.
11. Be accompanied by an approved printed computer plot closure on all lots, streets, alleys and boundaries.
12. Contain a metes and bounds legal description on the face of the final plat mylar which reflects all ties to subdivision lines, donation claim lines and/or recorded plat lines. The plat shall be accompanied by a current plat certificate with the identical metes and bounds legal description of the land to be subdivided on both the title report and final mylar.
13. Be accompanied by a complete survey of the section in which the plat or replat is located, or as much thereof as may be necessary to properly orient the plat within such section or sections. The plat and section survey shall be submitted with complete field and computation notes showing the original or reestablished corners with descriptions of the same and the actual traverse showing error of closure and method of balancing. A sketch showing all distances, angles and calculations required to determine corners and distances of the plat shall accompany this data. The allowable error of closure shall not exceed one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet or as required by more stringent state regulations.
14. List all conditions of approval for the short subdivision on the face of the plat.
15. Conform to the approved preliminary plat.
16. Be signed by the owner(s) of the property on the face of the final plat mylar.
17. Include a notarized certificate of the owner, contract purchaser, grantor of a deed of trust, or other holder of beneficial title to the property being subdivided indicating that the short subdivision is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires, and if the short subdivision is subject to deeding of property, the notarized certificate shall be signed by all parties having any ownership interest in the lands subdivided. For purposes of this section, “ownership interest” shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property.
C. In addition to other requirements as specified in this section, the final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
1. Certification showing that streets, rights-of-way and all sites for public use have been properly dedicated.
2. Certification by a licensed land surveyor that a survey has been made and that monuments and stakes will be set.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 48 of 126
3. Certification by the responsible health agencies that the methods of sewage disposal and water service are acceptable.
4. Certification by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer that the subdivider has complied with either of the following alternatives:
a. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations; or
b. Certain improvements have been deferred according to EMC 18.04.515(D), deferred improvements.
5. The subdivider shall furnish the City a current plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five (45) days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the plat, subdivision, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the plat. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final plat by the short subdivision committee chairman.
6. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Assessor.
7. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Auditor.
8. Copies of any restrictive covenants as may be used in the short subdivision.
9. Certification by the Grant County Treasurer that taxes have been paid in accordance with RCW 58.08.030 and 58.08.040 and that a deposit has been made with the Grant County Treasurer in sufficient amount to pay any delinquent taxes and all taxes for the current year.
10. Final Plat Map shall include the following:
a. Complete Legend defining all line types, point identification and other items included in the plat drawing;
b. Identification of areas to be dedicated;
c. All blocks and lots within the proposed subdivision, together with the numbers assigned each lot and block, and the dimensions, square footage and acreage of all proposed lots and tracts;
d. The location, width, and description of existing and proposed:
1) Public and private roads and access thereto;
2) Special setbacks;
3) Private and public easements;
4) Utility easements;
5) Other rights-of-way; and
6) Walkways;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 49 of 126
e. A designation of any lot that never can contain a dwelling or building unit or that is otherwise undevelopable;
f. A certificate, seal, date and signature of the registered land surveyor who made, or under whose supervision was made, the survey of the subdivision, in substantially the following language:
"I,_________________________________________________, registered as a land surveyor by the State of Washington, certify that this short plat is based on an actual survey of the land described herein, conducted by me or under my supervision, during the period of _____________, 20______, through _____________, 20______; that the distances, bearings and angles are shown thereon correctly, and that monuments other than those monuments approved for setting at a later date, have been set and lot corners staked on the ground as depicted on the plat."
g. A plat certificate conforming to the requirements of RCW 58.17.165;
h. Signature blocks for the following entities:
1) City Public Works Director;
2) City Community Development Director/Short Subdivision Committee Chairman;
3) City Parks and Recreation Director;
4) County Auditor;
5) County Assessor;
6) County Treasurer;
7) City Clerk; and
8) U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation and Irrigation District when subdivision is located within the boundaries of the Columbia Basin Irrigation Project;
The signature blocks for each of the signatories shall be in a form and contain language specified by the signatory.
i. All requirements listed in Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC;
j. A listing of any other conditions delineated in the preliminary short subdivision approval;
k. A disclaimer which states that:
The approval of this Short Subdivision does not guarantee the issuance of any other permit; and,
l. A declaration of covenant for all final Short Subdivisions with private rights-of-way, roads, or easements that requires construction and maintenance of private roads, with a provision to dedicate the rights-of-way and streets to Ephrata when required by local regulations.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 50 of 126
D. All short subdivision final plats shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state. All exterior corner and/or angle points shall be set with re-bar and cap. The type of street monuments used shall be in accordance with City of Ephrata standards and shall be installed per those same standards. The licensed land surveyor’s certification must appear on final mylar. Certificates of approval by the chairman of the short subdivision committee, the Grant County Assessor and the Grant County Auditor must be provided on the final mylar.
E. If any utility companies and/or utility districts have existing easements within the proposed plat, the plattor or its assigns shall have these easements removed or shall have their rights subordinated to those of the City of Ephrata.
F. The final short plat shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review by the city as to compliance with all terms of the preliminary approval of the proposed subdivision or dedication; terms of bonding or the completion of all improvements; and completeness and accuracy of survey data and platting requirements.
G. The short subdivision final plat shall be signed by the chairman of the short subdivision committee when the plat is determined to be in compliance with all applicable short subdivision platting requirements and before it is filed with Grant County.
H. An approved short subdivision final plat shall be filed for record in the office of the Grant County Auditor and shall not be deemed approved until filed.
I. A copy of the recorded short plat original mylar shall be filed with the Public Works Department.
J. A digital copy of the final plat map on electronic media in an Autodesk Autocad (.dwg) compatible format shall be submitted to the City of Ephrata Community Development Department and to the Grant County Auditor’s office.
18.04.525 Short subdivision plat expiration.
If the short subdivision final plat is not filed within one (1) year of the date of preliminary plat approval, the short subdivision plat shall be null and void. Upon written request of the subdivider, the Community Development Director may grant one (1) extension of not more than one (1) year. Such request must be received by the Community Development Department prior to the one (1) year expiration date.
18.04.530 Limitations on further subdivision.
Any land subdivided under the requirements for a Type II short subdivision shall not be further divided for a period of five (5) years without following the procedures for subdivisions.
18.04.535 Procedure for alteration of a Type II short subdivision.
A. If an applicant wishes to alter any Type II short subdivision or any portion thereof, except as provided in EMC 18.04.540, that person shall submit an application to the Community Development Department requesting the alteration. The application shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites or
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 51 of 126
divisions within the subdivision or in that portion of the subdivision to be altered.
B. If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.
C. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision prior to final plat approval and signature, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director. A major plat alteration shall require consent of the short subdivision committee, after public notice and a public meeting is held. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application for a major plat alteration to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the original short plat application. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to determine whether the proposed alteration constitutes a minor or major alteration.
D. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision after final plat approval and signature, but prior to filing the final plat with Grant County, a plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the original short plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
E. If the alteration is requested to a short subdivision after filing the final plat with Grant County, a minor plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee. If the Community Development Director determines that the proposed alteration is a major alteration, then the Community Development Director may require replatting pursuant to this chapter. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the subdivision plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
F. The short subdivision committee shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may deny or approve the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between adjacent properties.
G. After approval of the alteration, the short subdivision committee shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the short subdivision, which after signature of the chair of the short subdivision committee; the final plat shall be filed with the county auditor to become the lawful plat of the property.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 52 of 126
18.04.540 Procedure for vacation of a Type II short subdivision.
A. Whenever an applicant wishes to vacate a Type II short subdivision or any portion thereof, that person shall file an application for vacation with the Community Development Department. The application shall set forth the reasons for vacation and shall contain signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion of the subdivision subject to vacation.
B. If the short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the short subdivision, and the application for vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the short subdivision or portion thereof.
C. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street or road, the procedures for street vacation in RCW 35.79 shall be utilized for the street vacation. When the application is for the vacation of the plat together with the streets or roads, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used but vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under state law.
D. The Community Development Department shall give notice to all owners of property within the subdivision, and within three hundred (300) feet of short subdivision boundaries and to all applicable agencies. The short subdivision committee shall conduct a public meeting if the requested vacation does not involve a public dedication. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if the request involves a public dedication. The application for vacation of the short subdivision may be approved or denied after the city has determined the public use and interest to be served by the vacation of the short subdivision. If any portion of the land contained in the short subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the city, shall be deeded to the city unless the City Council sets forth findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands.
E. Title to the vacated property shall vest with the rightful owner as shown in the county records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, for public use other than a road or street, and the City Council has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title thereto shall vest with the person or persons owning the property on each side thereof, as determined by the City Council. When the road or street that is to be vacated was contained wholly within the short subdivision and is part of the boundary of the short subdivision, title to the vacated road or street shall vest with the owner or owners of property contained within the vacated subdivision.
18.04.545 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
A. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the protection of valuable, irreplaceable environmental amenities and to make urban development as compatible as possible with the ecological balance of the area. Goals are to preserve drainage patterns, protect ground water supply, prevent erosion and to preserve trees and natural vegetation. This is beneficial to the city in lessening the costs of the development to the city as a whole, and to the subdivider in creating an attractive and quality environment. Land which is found to be unsuitable for subdivision includes land with
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 53 of 126
features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the future residents such as land adversely affected by flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes and/or rock formations. Land which the city council considers inappropriate for subdivision shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods are provided as safeguards against these adverse conditions. If any portion of the land within the boundary of a preliminary plat or approved record of survey is subject to flood, or inundation, or is in a flood control zone, according to Chapter 86.16 RCW, that portion of the subdivision shall meet the requirements of EMC 19.04.140.
B. Where residential subdivisions are to be developed adjacent to business, commercial or industrial land use districts, buffer strips may be provided. No plan for the replatting, subdivision, or dedication of any areas shall be approved by the City Council unless the streets shown therein are connected by a surfaced road or street according to city specifications to an existing street or highway. The location of all streets shall conform to any adopted plans for streets in the city. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department. All proposed street names shall be approved by the City. Streets intersecting with existing or proposed public highways, major or secondary arterials shall be held to a minimum.
C. The alignment of all streets shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department. The following standards shall apply unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department in consultation with the Community Development Department and the Fire Department:
1. Where street intersections must be offset, such offsets shall not measure less than two hundred (200) feet from the centerline to centerline.
2. Residential cul-de-sacs shall conform to the standards as defined in the latest edition of the International Fire Code, Appendix D.
3. No street grades shall exceed fifteen (15) percent. A grading permit shall be required as per the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Ch. 16.04 EMC, prior to any grading.
4. A tangent of at least two hundred (200) feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves for community or major arterials, one hundred fifty (150) feet for neighborhood collector streets, and one hundred (100) feet for residential access streets.
5. Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets sixty (60) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet and on other streets it shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
6. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length of two hundred (200) feet unless specified otherwise by the Public Works Department.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 54 of 126
7. All streets shall be platted at full width. All street improvements shall be of full-width improvement. Full-width improvement shall consist of the following:
a. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width and the pavement and sidewalks shall be constructed to standard cross-sections.
b. All street and alley surfaces shall be of asphalt concrete according to city specifications.
c. All streets shall have permanent concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks according to city specifications.
d. All streets shall have storm drains consisting of the proper size pipe and catch basins with associated dry-wells.
e. All primary/major arterials, secondary arterials and collector streets shall have sidewalks, with a minimum of five (5) feet width on at least one (1) side.
f. All streets shall have street lighting located and be installed in accordance with the standards of the Public Works Department and the Grant County Public Utility District as follows:
Street Type Maximum Lighting Height Residential Street 18 feet Cul-de-sac 18 feet
Street light heights and spacing shall consider the canopy and root system dimensions of adjacent full-grown trees.
g. Streets which may be extended in the event of future adjacent platting may be required to be dedicated to the boundary line. Extensions of greater depth than an average lot shall be improved with temporary turnarounds. Dedication of a full-width boundary street may be required in certain instances to facilitate future development.
h. If planting strips are installed they shall be approved by the Public Works Director and built to City Standard and shall:
i. Be not less than five (5) feet in width;
ii. Be located between curbs and sidewalks, except on cul-de-sac streets;
iii. Contain street trees appropriate to the city construction standards, as applied by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department;
iv. Be the maintenance responsibility of the abutting property owners, or homeowners’ association. Maintenance includes watering, removal of fallen leaves, fallen branches, and fruit debris. Maintenance does not include such things as
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 55 of 126
fertilizing, trimming, root control, removal of dead or dying trees, or insect and disease control.
i. Street widths vary according to function and traffic generated. The following minimum widths for the types of streets, as defined in the comprehensive plan, must be adhered to if full pavement is required:
j. If a subdivision is located in the area of an officially designed trail, provisions shall be made for reservation of the right-of-way or for easements to the city for trail purposes.
8. Traffic calming design and improvements are required, and are specified according to street classification (see subsection (7)(i) of this section), site conditions, or other conditions as determined by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
a. Residential streets with entrances connected to arterial or collector streets shall provide curbs constructed at the return radius standard for residential class streets found in the city construction standards. Other traffic calming options may be determined more appropriate to site conditions by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
b. Other traffic calming designs and improvements may be determined appropriate as remedial options by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department. These options include, but are not limited to:
i. Traffic circles Street Design Standards Right-of-Way Width (feet) Pavement Width (feet) Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collector 60 37 Residential Street 60 33 Alley 20 20 Cul-de-Sac (Radius) 40 30
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 56 of 126
ii. Chokers; and
iii. Speed humps.
9. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. Such nonpublic streets may serve not more than nine (9) lots. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface. The minimum paving width for all limited residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited residential access streets serving four (4) or less dwellings.
18.04.550 Installation of utilities.
A. All utilities designed to serve the subdivision shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material.
B. Unless septic tanks are specifically approved by the city, sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the city and designed in accordance with city standards.
C. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches.
D. The water distribution system including the locations of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards as defined by Ephrata Municipal Code and any other local, state or federal ordinances, regulation, law or requirement.
18.04.555 Public use and service areas.
Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the allocation on adequately sized areas for public service usage. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the City’s Engineer or Public Works Department.
18.04.560 Blocks.
Blocks shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet nor more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length. Where circumstances warrant, the Public Works Director may require one (1) or more public crosswalks of not less than six (6) feet in width dedicated to the city to extend entirely across the width of the block at locations deemed necessary. Such crosswalks shall be paved for their entire width and length with a permanent surface and shall be adequately lighted. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the Public Works Director may approve a single tier.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 57 of 126
18.04.565 Lots.
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must access a street or road, public or private. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Corner lots may be required to be platted with additional width to allow for the additional side yard requirements. Lots which are bordered by two (2) more or less parallel streets shall be permitted access to only one (1) of those streets. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have minimum radii of fifteen (15) feet.
18.04.570 Other improvements.
A. Monuments. Concrete permanent control monuments shall be established at each and every controlling corner of the subdivision. Interior monuments shall be located as determined by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer. All surveys shall be of second degree accuracy. The use of state plane coordinates is encouraged. All other lot corners shall be marked with suitable metal rebar and surveyors cap with Licensed Surveyors number imprinted on the cap.
B. Street signs. The subdivider at his cost shall install street name signs on all private streets in the subdivision.
C. Vertical Control Monument. One (1) brass cap permanent vertical control monument with elevation and Licensed Surveyor number stamped on the cap shall be established within the boundary of the subdivision. The vertical datum for the vertical control monument shall be linked to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1988 Adjustment (NGVD88). Elevation for the vertical control monument shall be determined to an accuracy standard equal to third order classification as defined by the Federal Geodetic Control Committee. All field techniques and procedures shall be compatible with the equipment utilized to insure that a true third order accuracy level is achieved. When utilizing an United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) monument (if located in its original position), both the USBR elevation data and the NGVD88 data shall be included on brass cap.
D. Hillside subdivisions. A hillside subdivision is a subdivision in which any lot in the subdivision has average slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent and in which any street in the subdivision has grades greater than seven (7) percent at any point or is located within the Hillside Management Overlay Zone EMC 19.03.190. Additional regulations shall be placed on hillside subdivisions in order to protect the unique environment and to deal with additional drainage and erosion problems present in such areas. The following standards shall apply to hillside subdivisions in addition to the regulations of EMC 18.04.545 through 18.04.570(A) and (B) which shall apply unless specifically excepted:
1. Information concerning the soils, geology, drainage patterns, and vegetation shall be presented in order to determine if the subdivision can be safely developed.
2. Detailed plans prepared by a licensed engineer shall be submitted for any proposed cut and fill operations. These plans shall include the angle of slope, contours, compaction, provisions for stormwater control, and retaining walls.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 58 of 126
3. Streets may have a grade exceeding fifteen (15) percent and street widths may be less than those required in EMC 18.04.545(C)(6) and (C)(7)(i) if it is found that traffic generated will be less than in a non-hillside subdivision.
4. Lots may be required to be larger than minimum lot sizes required by EMC Title 19, Zoning. Generally, lots in steeper areas of the subdivision should be larger than those in less steep areas of the subdivision.
5. Any clearing or grading shall be accompanied by erosion control measures as deemed necessary by the Public Works Department.
Cross reference(s) – View regulations on hillside management overlay zones, § 19.03.190.
18.04.575 Zero lot line Type II short subdivisions.
A. Zero lot line subdivisions shall be subject to the development standards outlined in EMC Title 19. These standards include minimum lot size, width, depth, etc.
B. The following standards shall apply to zero lot line subdivision. In addition, the regulations of EMC 18.04.545 through 18.04.570 shall apply unless specifically excepted:
1. Streets, curbs and sidewalks.
a. Public streets. In certain areas, due to existing or planned circulation systems, it may be necessary for the City to require public rights-of-way to be provided within the development. When the provision of such rights-of-way is necessary, the right-of-way width, paving width, and other standards shall be the same as would otherwise be required. The perimeter buffering requirement shall be applied along these rights-of-way.
b. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface, and concrete or asphalt curbing shall be provided along both sides of all streets except where curb cuts are necessary for driveways. The minimum paving width for all collector streets within the zero lot line development shall be twenty-four (24) feet. The minimum paving width for all residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited access streets serving two (2) or less dwellings. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.5 guest parking spaces per dwelling unit beyond the normal parking provided at the dwelling.
2. Installation of utilities. All utilities designed to serve the development shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the Public Works Department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material. Easements may be required for the maintenance and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 59 of 126
operation of utilities as specified by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer.
a. Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the City and designed in accordance with City standards.
b. Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches. All mobile home parks must comply with city drainage ordinances.
c. Water Distribution System including the locations of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with City standards as defined by Ephrata Municipal Code and any other local, state or federal ordinances, regulation, law or requirement.
d. Electrical hook-ups. All electrical hookups shall comply with the International Electrical Code. Permits shall be obtained from the State Electrical Inspection Division.
18.04.580 Parks and open space requirements.
A. Approval of all subdivisions located in either single-family residential or multifamily residential zones as defined in EMC Title 19 Zoning, shall be contingent upon the subdivider’s dedication of land or providing fees in lieu of dedication to the city, as necessary to mitigate the adverse effects of development upon the existing park and recreation service levels. This requirement shall not apply to lots of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet or larger in size, planned unit developments or subdivisions of four (4) or less lots.
B. The following criteria shall serve as a basis for the Parks and Recreation Department determination whether land proposed for dedication is of sufficient size, character and quality:
1. The proposed area for dedication may be located either within or without the subdivision for which it is required, but must either be adjacent to an existing or proposed city park site or within the same park service area in which the subdivision is located or within one-half (1/2) mile of the subdivision for which it is required.
2. The proposed area for dedication shall have characteristics and location which make it suitable for future inclusion into the city parks system, as determined by the Parks and Recreation Director.
3. With the approval of the Community Development Department, the proposed area for dedication or portion thereof may contain valuable or sensitive environmental features, preservation of which is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan and/or parks and recreation plan.
4. The proposed area for dedication shall, in the determination of the Parks and Recreation Director, further one (1) or more comprehensive plan policies dealing with the open space element, steep slopes as open space, wetlands as open space, agricultural
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 60 of 126
lands as open space, wildlife habitat as open space and heritage sites as open space.
5. All lots within the subdivision for which dedication is required shall have legal and convenient access to the proposed area, at the time of final plat approval.
6. The area proposed by the subdivider for dedication must consist of an area that is equal or greater in size than the size computed as necessary by the Parks and Recreation Department using the formula described in subsection (C) of this section.
7. The area of proposed dedication shall have a street frontage equal to at least twenty (20) percent of its perimeter to allow for regular observation of play areas by residents of the subdivision. Alternative design measures that accomplish the same purpose of security may be approved by the City.
8. The topography, soils, hydrography and other physical characteristics of the area proposed for dedication shall be of such quality as to allow the development of community or neighborhood parks, or to create a flat, dry, obstacle-free space on at least fifty (50) percent of the total required area in a configuration which allows for active recreation; shall have no known safety hazards; and shall have no known physical problems such as the presence of hazardous waste, drainage, erosion, or flooding that the director determines would cause inordinate demands upon public resources for maintenance and operation of the property to be dedicated to the City.
9. If it is determined that the public interest would be served, the land may be conveyed to a homeowners’ nonprofit maintenance corporation. In this instance, the subdivider shall, at or prior to the time of filing a final plat for approval, supply the Community Development Department with copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the grantee organization, together with evidence of the conveyance or of a binding commitment to convey. The articles of incorporation shall provide that membership in the corporation shall be conditioned upon ownership of land in the subdivision that the corporation is empowered to assess the land for costs of construction and maintenance of the improvements and property owned by the corporation, and that the assessment shall be a lien upon the land. The City Attorney shall review and approve the articles of incorporation and bylaws as to compliance with this provision. The City Council may impose other conditions as it deems appropriate to assure that property and improvements owned by the corporation will be adequately constructed and maintained.
C. Subdividers who dedicate open space or park land pursuant to this section shall dedicate five (5) percent of the total property being subdivided. Unless a subdivider dedicates land in accordance with this section in order to mitigate the direct impacts identified as a consequence of the proposed development, the City’s final approval of the subdivision shall be contingent upon payment of a park development fee from the subdivider to the City. The fee in lieu of land dedication for parks and open space shall be determined by multiplying the following two (2) factors:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 61 of 126
1. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the average assessed value per unit area of land within the boundaries of the subdivision; and
2. The gross land area within the subdivision multiplied by five (5) percent as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The average assessed value shall be that for the year in which the subdivision is granted preliminary plat approval. Computations shall be based upon Grant County Assessor information.
The fee in lieu of dedication shall be held in a reserve account at the City, and may only be expended to fund capital improvements for park facilities within the city. The payment shall be expended in all cases within six (6) years of collection.
D. When approval of a subdivision is conditioned upon the dedication of land or the payment of any fees in lieu of dedication, a final plat or short plat shall not be recorded until:
1. The Parks and Recreation Director has determined in writing that any land to be dedicated is shown on the face of the short subdivision final plat, or a deed conveying the land to the City has been recorded with the Grant County Auditor.
2. Conveyance of land to a homeowners’ association shall be done within the time frames specified in subsection (B)(9) of this section.
3. The instrument conveying the land to the City has been transmitted to the City Council for acceptance of the dedication by ordinance.
4. Payment of any fees in lieu of dedication have been made to the City Clerk.
E. Any payment of fees made pursuant to this section that have not been expended within six (6) years of collection shall be refunded with interest at the rate applied to judgments to the property owners of record at the time of the refund. If the payment is not expended within six (6) years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest.
F. Appeals of dedication requirements or fees in lieu of dedication imposed pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
18.04.585 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
A. The division of land for industrial and commercial purposes shall conform to the requirements and minimum standards of residential design except as provided in this section.
B. The street widths shall be as follows:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 62 of 126
Right-of-way width in feet Pavement width in feet Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collectors 60 37 Alleys 20 20
The city may require that street widths in commercial subdivisions be increased to provide for traffic movement and to reduce or eliminate traffic congestion.
C. All industrial arterial/primary street (one-hundred (100) foot right-of-way), industrial collectors/secondary street (eighty (80) foot right-of-way), and commercial streets/tertiary collectors (sixty (60) foot right-of-way) shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on both sides. All industrial and commercial access streets which are also through streets shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on one (1) side.
D. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have a minimum radii of twenty-five (25) feet.
E. If railroad tracks are to be installed in a subdivision, such tracks and their route shall be shown on the face of the preliminary plat.
F. Lots are optional in industrial and commercial subdivisions. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. However, if lots for individual sale or lease are created, they shall conform to the following criteria:
1. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
2. Corner lots may be required to be platted wider than interior lots as determined by the Community Development Department.
Article IV. Subdivisions
18.04.600 Purpose of subdivisions.
The procedures regulating subdivisions are established to ensure quality development which promotes orderly and efficient growth, the conservation and proper use of land; protects the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the City; makes adequate provisions for public facilities in conformance with provisions set forth in EMC Title 19, Zoning, and the Ephrata Comprehensive Plan; and complies with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 58.17 RCW.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 63 of 126
18.04.605 Scope.
A. Any land being divided into ten (10) or more parcels, lots, tracts, sites; or
B. Any land which has been previously divided under the short subdivision procedures within the preceding five (5) years; or
C. Any land which is held in common ownership with a contiguous parcel divided under the short subdivision procedures within the preceding five (5) years shall conform to the procedures and requirements of EMC 18.04.615 et seq.
18.04.610 Preliminary consultation with staff.
Any person who desires to subdivide land in the City should consult with the Community Development Department at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The Public Works Department should be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the engineering requirements of this chapter and the construction standards of the City.
18.04.615 Application procedures.
An application for a subdivision consists of six (6) separate steps as follows:
1. Preparation of the tentative plat of the proposed subdivision and submission of the tentative plat application to the Community Development Department;
2. Review of the tentative subdivision plat by the City and convene a meeting with the City resulting in the issuance of a tentative subdivision letter;
3. Preparation and submission of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the City Council;
4. Installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved preliminary plat requirements and satisfaction of all plat conditions;
5. Submission of the final plat to the city council for approval;
6. Recordation of the approved final plat in the office of the Grant County Auditor.
18.04.620 Subdivision in phases.
In a phased subdivision, preliminary plat approval must be granted for the entire subdivision and must delineate the separate divisions which are to be developed in increments. The preliminary plat approval shall be conditioned upon completion of the proposed phases in a particular sequence and may specify a completion date for each phase. Final plat approval shall be granted for each separate phase of the preliminary plat by the City Council and any changes at the preliminary plat stage would require Planning Commission approval.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 64 of 126
18.04.625 Tentative plat review.
A. Applications for a subdivision tentative plat meeting and review shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The scale and information required for a tentative plat and number of copies to be filed shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Community Development Director.
B. The Community Development Department shall transmit copies of the subdivision tentative plat to the Fire Department, Community Development Department, Public Works Department, Parks and Recreation Department, Public Utility District serving the area, and to any other department or agency deemed necessary.
C. A meeting on the subdivision tentative plat shall be held, which is attended by the Community Development Department, other city departments which receive copies of the tentative plat and the subdivider. Any recommendations of the various departments for revision of the tentative plat should be discussed at such meeting. These recommendations and potential conditions of approval for the subdivision shall be recorded in writing and mailed to the subdivider by the Community Development Department.
D. The recommendations of the City departments shall be based on whether the tentative plat is:
1. In conformance with the purpose and regulations of this chapter;
2. In conformance with fire safety regulations;
3. In conformance with City of Ephrata construction standards;
4. In conformance with building code regulations;
5. In conformance with the appropriate street standards and the circulation pattern established or proposed for the area that the subdivision will be developed in;
6. In conformance with sewer, water and other utility plans for the area;
7. Not detrimental to its surroundings.
E. If the subdivision tentative plat is recommended to proceed as presented or as modified in accordance with the written suggestions made by the City, the applicant shall proceed to the preliminary plat stage. If not recommended to proceed, a preliminary plat may still be submitted to the Planning Commission. However, it is likely that the same objections and problems will arise at that stage.
F. If changes are made to a subdivision which has already received tentative plat recommendations and potential conditions, the Community Development Department shall compare the subdivision tentative plat and the proposed preliminary plat and shall make a determination whether the preliminary plat requires additional tentative plat review. A new tentative plat review and meeting may be required if the preliminary plat is not substantially similar to the tentative plat reviewed by the City. The determination of the necessity for another tentative plat meeting shall be based on the following considerations:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 65 of 126
1. The degree of commonality between the two (2) plans (i.e., the preliminary plat is a refinement of the tentative plat, or is a completely new plat for the same property); and
2. The presence or absence of revisions present in the preliminary plat resulting from concerns or recommendations raised at the tentative plat meeting.
18.04.630 Preliminary plat application.
A. Application for a subdivision preliminary plat shall be filed with the Community Development Department on the forms provided and in the number of copies prescribed by the Community Development Department. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in accordance with the requirements of RCW 18.43.010. Application fees, which are on file in the City Clerk’s office and the Community Development Department, shall be paid.
B. Unless an applicant for preliminary plat approval requests otherwise, a preliminary plat shall be processed simultaneously with applications for rezones, variances, planned unit developments, site plan approvals, and similar quasi-judicial or administrative actions to the extent that procedural requirements applicable to these actions permit simultaneous processing.
C. The subdivision preliminary plat shall include:
1. The subdivision name and number, the name and address of the owner, and the name and address of the licensed land surveyor and if applicable, the subdivision engineer;
2. The date of preparation, the true north point, a graphic scale and legal description of the property to be subdivided and drawn to an appropriate decimal scale;
3. The location of existing and proposed platted property lines, and existing section lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, and any recorded public or private utility or roadway easements, both on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining lands that abut the proposed subdivision, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the subject property;
4. Contours and/or elevations (at a minimum five (5) foot intervals) to the extent necessary to accurately predict drainage characteristics of the property. Contour lines shall be extended at least one hundred (100) feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed plat;
5. The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations and utilities;
6. How the proposed subdivision will be served by utilities and the location of water and sewer lines;
7. The acreage of land to be subdivided; the number of lots; the area of all lots; and the approximate square footage and approximate percent of total acreage in open space;
8. The approximate dimensions of each lot;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 66 of 126
9. A statement of soil type, drainage conditions, present landscaping including a description of any natural or manmade land cover, wildlife present and any other environmental factors which may be prescribed by the Community Development Department;
10. All existing structures and distances from any existing and proposed lot lines within or abutting the subdivision within a distance of 50 feet;
11. Monumentation of all exterior corners and streets and be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state;
12. Provisions for sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school, users of public transit and other pedestrians;
13. All of the information requested on the application form by the Community Development Director.
14. The elevations of all permanent concrete encased brass cap monuments based on datum plane approved by the Public Works Director.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.070.
18.04.635 Principles of acceptability.
No subdivision shall be approved unless the following principles of acceptability are met; the subdivision shall:
1. Create legal building sites which comply with all provisions of EMC Title 19, Zoning, and health regulations;
2. Establish access to a public road for each segregated parcel;
3. Have suitable physical characteristics; a proposed plat may be denied because of flood, inundation or wetland conditions; slope, soil stability and/or capabilities; or the construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval;
4. Make adequate provision for storm-water detention, drainageways, water supplies, sanitary wastes, and other public utilities and services, as required by applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations;
5. Make adequate provision for the connectivity of streets, alleys, pedestrian accessways and other public ways; and,
6. Make adequate provisions for an irrigation water right of way for each parcel of land which lies in whole or in part in an irrigation district organized pursuant to chapter 87.03 RCW. In addition, if the subdivision lies on land within the district classified as irrigable, completed irrigation water distribution facilities for such land may be required by the irrigation district by resolution, bylaw, or rule of general applicability as a condition for approval of the short plat or final plat by the legislative authority of the city. Rights of way shall be evidenced by the respective plats submitted for final approval to the appropriate legislative authority. In addition, if the short subdivision to be platted is wholly or partially within an irrigation district of two hundred thousand acres or more and has been previously platted by the United States Bureau of Reclamation
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 67 of 126
as a Farm Unit in the district, the legislative authority shall not approve for such land a short plat or final plat as defined in RCW 58.17.020 without the approval of the irrigation district and the administrator or manager of the project of the Bureau of Reclamation, or its successor agency, within which that district lies. Compliance with the requirements of this section together with all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be a prerequisite, within the expressed purpose of this chapter, to any sale, lease, or development of land in this state.
18.04.640 Determination of completeness.
Within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receiving a subdivision preliminary plat application, the Community Development Department shall mail or personally provide to the applicant a written Determination of Completeness which states either that the application is complete or incomplete. If incomplete, the letter shall identify what information is required to make the application complete. The letter shall also identify, to the extent known by the City, other agencies with jurisdiction over the subdivision application. If the City determines that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the City. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the City shall again make the completeness determination and shall notify the applicant in the same manner.
If the subdivision application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Department shall accept the application and note the date of acceptance. The time period for review of the proposed subdivision begins following the determination of a complete application and acceptance of the application by the City. If the City does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed complete at the end of the twenty-eight (28) day completeness review period.
18.04.645 Vesting.
A proposed division of land shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that a subdivision preliminary plat application, as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the City of Ephrata, pursuant to EMC 18.04.640.
18.04.650 Notice of application.
A Notice of Application shall be issued for subdivision applications within fourteen (14) calendar days after the City has made a Determination of Completeness, and at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing. The tentative date of the public hearing shall be listed on the Notice of Application and the Notice of Application shall be mailed, published and posted on the same day, in the following manner:
1. The City shall publish the Notice of Application in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
2. The applicant shall post the Notice of Application on the public notice board(s) placed on the property and shall also post the Notice of Application at Ephrata City Hall.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 68 of 126
3. The City shall mail or send the Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.
4. One Notice of Application shall be done for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete project permit application.
18.04.655 Referral of subdivision preliminary plat.
Upon Determination of Completeness of an application for a subdivision, the Community Development Department shall distribute copies of the plat and the application materials for review and comment to all city departments with jurisdiction over the subdivision application and to any other department or agency deemed necessary. The application materials shall be transmitted at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing.
18.04.660 Notification of agencies.
A. The City shall mail a Notice of Application to all agencies with jurisdiction over the subdivision application. Such notice shall include the tentative date, time and location of the public hearing and a description of the property to be platted. A copy of the plat and the application materials shall be provided to agencies as deemed necessary or if requested by the agency.
B. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision adjacent to or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the city boundaries or which contemplates the use of private utilities shall be given to the appropriate county or utility authority.
C. Notice of Application for a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway or within two (2) miles of the boundary of a municipal airport shall be given to the Secretary of Transportation. The Secretary shall respond to the City within fifteen (15) days of such notice as to the effect that the proposed subdivision will have on the state highway or the municipal airport. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the hearing, a legal description of the property to be platted and a location map.
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.155.
18.04.665 Public notice.
A. The applicant shall place at least one public notice board on the property to be subdivided. The public notice board must be placed on the property as directed by the Community Development Department and no later than fourteen (14) days after a Determination of Completeness. If the property to be subdivided is located adjacent to more than one public street or has more than one potential access route, one public notice board shall be placed on the property adjacent to each public street or potential access route.
B. The notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, published and posted on the same day, not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
C. The applicant shall post the notice of public hearing on the public notice board(s) on the property.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 69 of 126
D. The City shall publish the notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
E. The City shall mail a notice of public hearing to the applicant, any person who submits written comments on an application and all owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within three hundred (300) feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. If the owner of the real property proposed to be subdivided also owns another parcel or parcels of real property, which lie adjacent to the real property proposed to be subdivided, notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred (300) feet of such adjacently owned parcels.
18.04.670 Public comment.
A. Affected agencies and the public shall have a fourteen (14) calendar day period to comment on a Notice of Application. An agency is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall not be granted for a period longer than three (3) additional calendar days. The public may make written response to the proposed subdivision application within the comment period.
B. The fourteen (14) day public comment period begins on the date the Notice of Application is mailed, posted and published. The Community Development Department must receive all public comments by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible. The Planning Commission shall not take action on a subdivision application until after the comment period has passed.
18.04.675 Agency recommendations.
At the time of the preliminary subdivision plat application, written recommendations for approval or disapproval must be submitted from the jurisdiction/health agencies responsible for approval of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply regarding the general adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply.
18.04.680 Public hearing.
A. The Planning Commission shall hold an open record public hearing on any subdivision preliminary plat within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of the Community Development Department’s determination of a complete application and acceptance of the application.
B. A record of the public hearing shall be kept by the City and shall be open to public inspection.
State law reference(s) – Notice, RCW 58.17.090; Public Hearing review, RCW 58.17.100.
18.04.685 Approval criteria.
A. A proposed subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the City finds that:
1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 70 of 126
a. The public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
b. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands and habitat;
c. Open spaces;
d. Community parks and recreation;
e. Neighborhood tot lots and play areas;
f. Schools and school grounds;
g. Drainageways;
h. Storm-water detention;
i. Connectivity of sidewalks, pedestrian pathways and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods for residents and students who walk to and from schools, parks, transit stops and other neighborhood services;
j. Connectivity of streets or roads, alleys, pedestrian accessways, and other public ways within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods;
k. Transit stops;
l. Potable water supplies;
m. Sanitary wastes;
n. Other public utilities and services, as deemed necessary; and
2. The city has considered all other relevant facts; and
3. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication; and
4. The city has considered the physical characteristics of a proposed subdivision site and may deny a proposed plat because of flood, inundation, or wetland conditions, slope, or soil stability and/or capabilities. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such improvements shall be noted on the final plat.
5. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
B. Dedication of land to any public body, provision of public improvements to serve the subdivision, and/or the imposition of impact fees may be required as a condition of subdivision approval. Dedications shall be clearly shown on the final plat. No dedication, provision of public improvements, or impact fees shall be allowed that constitutes an unconstitutional taking of private property. The city shall not require a release from damages to be procured from other property owners as a condition of approval for any subdivision.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 71 of 126
18.04.690 Decision on preliminary plat.
A. The Planning Commission after reviewing the application materials, maps and reports, staff recommendation, oral and written testimony shall make a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions or deny the subdivision as presented. The Planning Commission shall direct the Community Development Department to prepare a written report setting forth the recommendation of the Planning Commission including: findings, conclusions, decision, staff report, and testimony on the record from agencies and interested parties in the form of a resolution. The decision of the Planning Commission constitutes a recommendation to the City Council. The Planning Commission is a recommending authority only for subdivision applications; the City Council renders the final decision.
B. Upon receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Clerk shall promptly set the matter on the City Council’s next agenda and hold a Closed Record public hearing and decision.
C. The notice of decision shall be provided to the parties of record and to any person who requested notice of the decision prior to the decision and shall include findings and conclusions, based on the record and approval criteria, to support the decision.
18.04.700 Appeal to superior court.
The decision of the City Council is final, unless appealed to the superior court. Such an appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued. Judicial review shall be pursuant to 36.70C RCW.
18.04.705 Subdivision preliminary plat expiration.
A. Subdivision preliminary plat approval shall lapse five (5) years from the date of approval unless a final plat based on the preliminary plat, or any phase thereof, is submitted within five (5) years from the date of subdivision preliminary plat approval. One (1) one (1) year extension shall be granted to an applicant who files a written request with the Community Development Department at least thirty (30) calendar days before the expiration of the five (5) year period, if the applicant can show that he has attempted in good faith to submit the final plat within the five (5) year period.
B. Additional time extensions beyond the one (1) year period may be granted by the Community Development Director if the applicant can show unusual circumstances or situations which make it impossible to file the final plat within the six (6) year period. The applicant must file a written request with the Community Development Department for this additional time extension. The request must be filed at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the subdivision preliminary plat expiration date. The request must include documentation as to the need for the additional time. Additional time extensions shall not be granted in greater than one (1) year increments.
C. In the case of a phased subdivision, final plat approval by the City Council of any phase of the subdivision preliminary plat will constitute an automatic one (1) year extension for the filing of the next phase of the subdivision.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 72 of 126
State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.110, 58.17.120, 58.17.140.
18.04.710 Property annexed to city with preliminary plat approval from Grant County.
A. In instances where property annexed to the City has received subdivision preliminary plat approval from Grant County prior to annexation, the Community Development Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department and Building Department shall review the plat. City plan check review and inspections shall be subject to fees.
B. The density, lot size and dimensions, and the provisions made for open space, drainageways, streets, alleys, public ways, water, sanitary wastes, parks, playgrounds, sites for schools and school grounds, and those conditions of approval imposed by Grant County need not comply with the requirements of EMC Title 19, Zoning or the Ephrata construction standards. These plats are to be developed in accordance with county standards in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary plat in the county.
C. The preliminary plat shall comply with the Grant County regulations pertaining to expiration of the preliminary plat that were in effect on the date the application vested. The date of approval will be that date on which Grant County approved the preliminary plat.
D. The procedures for subdivision final plats shall be those county procedures and regulations in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary plat application in the county.
18.04.715 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.
A. The following tangible improvements may be required before a subdivision final plat is submitted:
1. Grading and paving of streets and alleys;
2. Installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, monuments, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights, water mains, street name signs, together with all appurtenances thereto.
All improvements are to be made pursuant to specifications and standards of this code, approved by the Public Works Department and in accordance with standards of the City.
B. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the supervision, inspection and acceptance of all subdivision improvements and shall charge the subdivider a fee that has been assessed in accordance with the Ephrata Municipal Code as enacted or as subsequently amended.
C. Prior to proceeding with subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall make application for such permits from the City as are necessary. The applicant is also responsible for complying with all permit requirements of other federal, state and local agencies.
D. No final plat shall be submitted to the City Council until all improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the responsible departments or a bond approved by the City has been posted for deferred improvements. If a developer wishes to defer certain on-site improvements, written application shall be made to the Public Works Department and Community Development Department stating the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 73 of 126
reasons why such delay is necessary. If the deferment is approved, the developer shall furnish a performance bond to the City in an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements. The decision of the Public Works Director and Community Development Director as to the amount of such bond shall be conclusive. Such bond shall list the exact work that shall be performed by the applicant and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the City’s Public Works Director. If no time is established, then the time period shall not be longer than one (1) year after approval of the final plat by the city council. The bond shall be held by the City Clerk. The developer may substitute a certified or cashier’s check or assignment of funds in lieu of a performance bond. Such check or assignment shall be made payable to the City of Ephrata and shall be in the same amount as the bond it is substituting.
E. The City reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay the City all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City requiring payment of such attorney’s fees. The requirement of the posting of any performance bond or other security shall be binding on the applicant, his heirs, successors and assigns.
F. The Public Works Department shall notify the Community Development Department in writing verifying that the developer has completed the required installations and/or bonding in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the specifications and standards of the departments. The Community Development Department shall notify the developer advising him to proceed with preparation of a final plat when the required improvements have been installed and approved or adequate security has been posted as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
State law reference(s) – Improvements, RCW 58.17.130.
18.04.720 Filing the subdivision final plat.
A. An application for a subdivision final plat shall be filed with the Community Development Department on the forms provided and in the number of copies prescribed by the Community Development Department. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.43 RCW, and shall conform to the preliminary plat. Application fees are on file in the City Clerk’s office and the Community Development Department.
B. The final subdivision plat submitted for filing shall be two (2) reproducible maps drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department and on sheets eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches. The original drawing shall be in black ink on mylar or photographic mylar, and shall:
1. Include the date, title, name and location of the subdivision, graphic scale, complete legend identifying line types and point features and true north point;
2. Show the location of all existing fences and structures in relation to lot lines within or abutting the subdivision;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 74 of 126
3. Show the location of utilities, streets and easements within or abutting subdivision;
4. Display the lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, lot lines, lot and blocks numbered in numerical order, reservations, easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use, with notes stating their purpose and any limitations;
5. Contain data sufficient to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, easement line, lot line, boundary line and block line on site;
6. Include dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds;
7. Include Lambert coordinates to the nearest five (5) seconds, or as required by more stringent state regulations, if provided by the Public Works Department for permanent control monuments on the final plat as determined by the city’s engineer or land surveyor;
8. Display all interior permanent control monuments located as determined by the Public Works Department. All interior monuments shall be installed prior to the release of any bond;
9. The subdivision shall provide for irrigation water right of way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended; and
10. Be mathematically correct;
11. Be accompanied by an approved printed computer plot closure on all lots, streets, alleys and boundaries;
12. Contain a metes and bounds legal description on the face of the final plat mylar which reflects all ties to subdivision lines, donation claim lines and/or recorded plat lines. The plat shall be accompanied by a current plat certificate with the identical metes and bounds legal description of the land to be subdivided on both the title report and final mylar;
13. Be accompanied by a complete survey of the section in which the plat or replat is located, or as much thereof as may be necessary to properly orient the plat within such section or sections. The plat and section survey shall be submitted with complete field and computation notes showing the original or reestablished corners with descriptions of the same and the actual traverse showing error of closure and method of balancing. A sketch showing all distances, angles and calculations required to determine corners and distances of the plat shall accompany this data. The allowable error of closure shall not exceed one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet or as required by more stringent state regulations;
14. List all conditions of approval for the subdivision on the face of the plat;
15. Conform to the approved preliminary plat;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 75 of 126
16. Be signed by the owner(s) of the property on the face of the final plat mylar;
17. Include a notarized certificate of the owner, contract purchaser, grantor of a deed of trust, or other holder of beneficial title to the property being subdivided indicating that the subdivision is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires, and if the subdivision is subject to deeding of property, the notarized certificate shall be signed by all parties having any ownership interest in the lands subdivided. For purposes of this section, “ownership interest” shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property.
C. In addition to other requirements as specified in this section, the final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
1. Certification showing that streets, rights-of-way and all sites for public use have been properly dedicated;
2. Certification by a licensed land surveyor that a survey has been made and that monuments and stakes will be set;
3. Certification by the responsible health agencies that the methods of sewage disposal and water service are acceptable;
4. Certification by the City’s Public Works Director or Engineer that the subdivider has complied with either of the following alternatives:
a. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, or
b. Certain improvements have been deferred according to EMC 18.04.715(D), deferred improvements;
5. The subdivider shall furnish the City a current plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the plat, subdivision, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the plat. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to the granting of the final plat by the City Council;
6. Certification by the Grant County Treasurer that taxes have been paid in accordance with RCW 58.08.030 and 58.08.040 and that a deposit has been made with the Grant County Treasurer in sufficient amount to pay the taxes for the following year;
7. Certification of approval by the City of Ephrata Clerk/Finance Director that there are no delinquent special assessments and that all special assessments certified to the Finance Director for collection on any property herein contained dedicated for streets, alleys or other public uses are paid in full;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 76 of 126
8. Certification of approval to be signed by the City Public Works Director/ City Engineer and the Community Development Director;
9. Certification of approval to be signed by the mayor;
10. Certification of approval to be signed by the City Administrator
11. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Assessor;
12. Certification of approval to be signed by the Grant County Auditor;
13. Copies of any restrictive covenants as may be used in the subdivision.
D. All subdivision final plats shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state. All exterior corner and/or angle points shall be set with re-bar and cap. The type of street monuments used shall be in accordance with City of Ephrata standards and shall be installed per those same standards. The licensed land surveyor’s certification must appear on the final mylar. Certificates of approval by the mayor, Community Development Director, Public Works Director/City Engineer, City Administrator, Finance Director, the Grant County Assessor and the Grant County Auditor must be provided on the final mylar.
E. If any utility companies and/or utility districts have existing easements within the proposed plat, the plattor or its assigns shall have these easements removed or shall have their rights subordinated to the City of Ephrata.
F. The final plat shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review by the City as to compliance with all terms of the preliminary approval of the proposed subdivision or dedication; terms of bonding or the completion of all improvements; and completeness and accuracy of survey data and platting requirements. The Community Development Department shall distribute the final plat to all departments and agencies receiving the preliminary plat, and to any other departments, utility agencies and other governmental agencies as is deemed necessary.
G. After the final plat application has been determined to be complete and all of the plat conditions have been met, the plat will be officially accepted and the Community Development Department shall set a date for a public meeting for the City Council to consider the final plat.
H. Before the final plat is submitted to the city council, it shall be signed by the City Public Works Director/Engineer and Community Development Director. After the final plat is approved by the City Council, it shall be signed by the mayor, the City Administrator and the Clerk/Finance Director. The final plat shall be filed with the Grant County Auditor by the City.
I. A copy of the recorded plat shall be filed with the Community Development Department and one set of the original mylars shall be filed with the Public Works Department.
J. A digital of the final plat map on electronic media in an Autodesk Autocad (.dwg) compatible format shall be submitted to the City of
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 77 of 126
Ephrata Community Development Department and to the Grant County Auditor’s office.
18.04.725 Decision on subdivision final plat.
The City Council shall approve, disapprove or return the final plat to the applicant for modification and/or correction within thirty (30) days of the date of the City’s Determination of Completeness and acceptance of the final plat application, unless the applicant consents to an extension of such time period.
18.04.730 Subdivision final plat expiration.
If a final plat has not been submitted for recording within one (1) year after approval by the City Council, the plat shall expire and be null and void. To revitalize the expired plat, the plat shall be resubmitted as a preliminary plat. One (1) extension of no longer than six (6) months may be granted by the city council.
18.04.735 Procedure for alteration of a subdivision.
A. If an applicant wishes to alter a subdivision or any portion thereof, except as provided in EMC 18.04.740, that person shall submit an application to the Community Development Department requesting the alteration. The application shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions within the subdivision or in that portion of the subdivision to be altered.
B. If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.
C. If the alteration is requested to a subdivision prior to final plat approval, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director. A major plat alteration shall require consent of the City Council, after public notice and a public hearing is held. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application for a major plat alteration to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the subdivision application. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to determine whether the proposed alteration constitutes a minor or major alteration.
D. If the alteration is requested to a subdivision after final plat approval, but prior to filing the final plat with Grant County, a plat alteration may be approved with consent of the City Council. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the subdivision plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
E. If the alteration is requested to a subdivision after filing the final plat with Grant County, a minor plat alteration may be approved with consent of the City Council. If the Community Development Director determines that the proposed alteration is a major alteration, then the Community Development Director may require replatting pursuant to this chapter. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 78 of 126
Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision, and as was required by the subdivision plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting.
F. The City shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may deny or approve the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between adjacent properties.
G. After approval of the alteration, the City shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the subdivision. The final plat shall accurately reflect the approved alteration and shall be filed with the Grant County Auditor to become the lawful plat of the property, after receiving final plat approval.
18.04.740 Procedure for vacation of a subdivision.
A. Whenever an applicant wishes to vacate a subdivision or any portion thereof, that person shall file an application for vacation with the Community Development Department. The application shall set forth the reasons for vacation and shall contain signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion of the subdivision subject to vacation.
B. If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for vacation would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the subdivision or portion thereof.
C. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street or road, the procedures for street vacation in RCW 35.79 shall be utilized for the street vacation. When the application is for the vacation of the plat together with the streets or roads, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used but vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under state law.
D. The Community Development Department shall give notice to all owners of property within the subdivision, and within three hundred (300) feet of subdivision boundaries and to all applicable agencies. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing if the requested vacation does not involve a public dedication. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if the request involves a public dedication. The application for vacation of the subdivision may be approved or denied after the City has determined the public use and interest to be served by the vacation of the subdivision. If any portion of the land contained in the subdivision was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the City, shall be deeded to the City unless the City Council sets forth findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 79 of 126
E. Title to the vacated property shall vest with the rightful owner as shown in the county records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, for public use other than a road or street, and the City Council has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title thereto shall vest with the person or persons owning the property on each side thereof, as determined by the City Council. When the road or street that is to be vacated was contained wholly within the subdivision and is part of the boundary of the subdivision, title to the vacated road or street shall vest with the owner or owners of property contained within the vacated subdivision.
18.04.745 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.
A. It is the purpose of this subsection to provide for the protection of valuable, irreplaceable environmental amenities and to make urban development as compatible as possible with the ecological balance of the area. Goals are to preserve drainage patterns, protect ground water supply, prevent erosion and to preserve trees and natural vegetation. This is beneficial to the city in lessening the costs of the development to the city as a whole, and to the subdivider in creating an attractive and quality environment. Land which is found to be unsuitable for subdivision includes land with features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the future residents such as land adversely affected by flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations. Land which the City Council considers inappropriate for subdivision shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods are provided as safeguards against these adverse conditions. If any portion of the land within the boundary of a preliminary plat or approved record of survey is subject to flood, or inundation, or is in a flood control zone, according to Chapter 86.16 RCW, that portion of the subdivision shall meet the requirements of EMC 19.04.140.
B. Where residential subdivisions are to be developed adjacent to business, commercial or industrial land use districts, buffer strips may be provided. No plan for the replatting, subdivision, or dedication of any areas shall be approved by the City Council unless the streets shown therein are connected by a surfaced road or street according to City specifications to an existing street or highway. The location of all streets shall conform to any adopted plans for streets in the City. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department. All proposed street names shall be approved by the City. Streets intersecting with existing or proposed public highways, major or secondary arterials shall be held to a minimum.
C. The alignment of all streets shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department. The following standards shall apply unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department in consultation with the Community Development Department and the Fire Department:
1. Where street intersections must be offset, such offsets shall not measure less than two hundred (200) feet from the centerline to centerline.
2. Residential cul-de-sacs shall conform to the standards as defined in the latest edition of the International Fire Code, Appendix D.
3. No street grades shall exceed fifteen (15) percent. A grading permit shall be required as per the International Building Code, the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 80 of 126
International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Ch. 16.04 EMC, prior to any grading.
4. A tangent of at least two hundred (200) feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves for community or major arterials, one hundred fifty (150) feet for neighborhood collector streets, and one hundred (100) feet for residential access streets.
5. Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets sixty (60) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet and on other streets it shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
6. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length of two hundred (200) feet unless specified otherwise by the Public Works Department.
7. All streets shall be platted at full width. All street improvements shall be of full-width improvement. Full-width improvement shall consist of the following:
a. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width and the pavement and sidewalks shall be constructed to standard cross-sections.
b. All street and alley surfaces shall be of asphalt concrete according to city specifications.
c. All streets shall have permanent concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks according to City specifications.
d. All streets shall have storm drains consisting of the proper size pipe and catch basins with associated dry-wells.
e. All primary/major arterials, secondary arterials and collector streets shall have sidewalks, with a minimum of five (5) feet width on at least one (1) side.
f. All streets shall have street lighting located and installed in accordance with the standards of the Public Works Department and the Grant County Public Utility District as follows: Street Type Maximum Lighting Height Residential Street 18 feet Cul-de-sac 18 feet
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 81 of 126
Street light heights and spacing shall consider the canopy and root system dimensions of adjacent full-grown trees.
g. Streets which may be extended in the event of future adjacent platting may be required to be dedicated to the boundary line. Extensions of greater depth than an average lot shall be improved with temporary turnarounds. Dedication of a full-width boundary street may be required in certain instances to facilitate future development.
h. If planting strips are installed they shall be approved by the Public Works Director and built to City Standards and shall:
i. Be not less than five (5) feet in width;
ii. Be located between curbs and sidewalks, except on cul-de-sac streets;
iii. Contain street trees appropriate to the city construction standards, as applied by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department;
iv. Be the maintenance responsibility of the abutting property owners, or homeowners’ association. Maintenance includes watering, removal of fallen leaves, fallen branches, and fruit debris. Maintenance does not include such things as fertilizing, trimming, root control, removal of dead or dying trees, or insect and disease control.
i. Street widths vary according to function and traffic generated. The following minimum widths for the types of streets, as defined in the comprehensive plan, must be adhered to if full pavement is required: Street Design Standards Right-of-Way Width(feet) Pavement Width (feet) Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collector 60 37 Residential Street 60 33 Alley 20 20
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 82 of 126
Cul-de-Sac (Radius) 40 30
j. If a subdivision is located in the area of an officially designed trail, provisions shall be made for reservation of the right-of-way or for easements to the city for trail purposes.
8. Traffic calming improvements are required, and are specified according to street classification (see subsection (7)(i) of this section), site conditions, or other conditions as determined by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
a. Residential streets with entrances connected to arterial or collector streets shall provide curbs constructed at the return radius standard for residential class streets found in the city construction standards. Other traffic calming options may be determined more appropriate to site conditions by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department.
b. Other traffic calming designs and improvements may be determined appropriate as remedial options by the Public Works Department, in consultation with the Community Development Department and Fire Department. These options include, but are not limited to:
i. Traffic circles;
ii. Chokers; and
iii. Speed humps.
9. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. Such nonpublic streets may serve not more than nine (9) lots. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface. The minimum paving width for all limited residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited residential access streets serving four (4) or less dwellings.
18.04.750 Installation of utilities.
A. All utilities designed to serve the subdivision shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the Public Works Department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material.
B. Unless septic tanks are specifically approved by the city, sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the city and designed in accordance with city standards.
C. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 83 of 126
natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches.
D. The water distribution system including the locations of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards as defined by Ephrata Municipal Code and any other local, state or federal ordinances, regulation, law or requirement.
18.04.755 Public use and service areas.
Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the allocation on adequately sized areas for public service usage. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the Public Works Department.
18.04.760 Blocks.
Blocks shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet nor more than six hundred (600) feet in length. Where circumstances warrant, the Public Works Director may require one (1) or more public crosswalks of not less than six (6) feet in width dedicated to the city to extend entirely across the width of the block at locations deemed necessary. Such crosswalks shall be paved for their entire width and length with a permanent surface and shall be adequately lighted. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the Public Works Director may approve a single tier.
18.04.765 Lots.
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a public street or road. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Corner lots may be required to be platted with additional width to allow for the additional side yard requirements. Lots which are bordered by two (2) more or less parallel streets shall be permitted access to only one (1) of those streets. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have minimum radii of fifteen (15) feet.
18.04.770 Other improvements.
A. Monuments. Concrete permanent control monuments shall be established at each and every controlling corner of the subdivision. Interior monuments shall be located as determined by the Public Works Department and/or the City’s Engineer. All surveys shall be of second degree accuracy. The use of state plane coordinates is encouraged. All other lot corners shall be marked with suitable metal rebar and surveyors cap with Licensed Surveyors number imprinted on the cap.
B. Street signs. The subdivider at his cost shall install street name signs on all private streets in the subdivision.
C. Vertical Control Monument. One (1) brass cap permanent vertical control monument with elevation and Licensed Surveyor number stamped on the cap shall be established within the boundary of the subdivision. The vertical datum for the vertical control monument shall be linked to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1988 Adjustment (NGVD88). Elevation
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 84 of 126
for the vertical control monument shall be determined to an accuracy standard equal to third order classification as defined by the Federal Geodetic Control Committee. All field techniques and procedures shall be compatible with the equipment utilized to insure that a true third order accuracy level is achieved. When utilizing an United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) monument (if located in its original position), both the USBR elevation data and the NGVD88 data shall be included on brass cap.
D. Hillside subdivisions. A hillside subdivision is a subdivision in which any lot in the subdivision has average slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent and in which any street in the subdivision has grades greater than seven (7) percent at any point or is located within the Hillside Management Overlay Zone EMC 19.03.190. Additional regulations shall be placed on hillside subdivisions in order to protect the unique environment and to deal with additional drainage and erosion problems present in such areas. The following standards shall apply to hillside subdivisions in addition to the regulations of EMC 18.04.745 through 18.04.770(A) and (B) which shall apply unless specifically excepted:
1. Information concerning the soils, geology, drainage patterns, and vegetation shall be presented in order to determine if the subdivision can be safely developed.
2. Detailed plans prepared by a licensed engineer shall be submitted for any proposed cut and fill operations shall. These plans shall include the angle of slope, contours, compaction, provisions for stormwater control, and retaining walls.
3. Streets may have a grade exceeding fifteen (15) percent and street widths may be less than those required in EMC 18.04.745(C)(6) and (C)(7)(a) if it is found that traffic generated will be less than in a nonhillside subdivision.
4. Lots may be required to be larger than minimum lot sizes required by EMC Title 19, Zoning. Generally, lots in steeper areas of the subdivision should be larger than those in less steep areas of the subdivision.
5. Any clearing or grading shall be accompanied by erosion control measures as deemed necessary by the Public Works Department.
Cross reference(s) – View regulations on hillside management overlay zones, § 19.03.190.
18.04.775 Zero lot line subdivisions.
A. Zero lot line subdivisions shall be subject to the development standards outlined in EMC Title 19. These standards include minimum lot size, width, depth, etc.
B. The regulations of EMC 18.04.745 through 18.04.770 shall apply unless specifically excepted. In addition, the following standards shall apply to zero lot line subdivision:
1. Streets, curbs and sidewalks.
a. Public streets. In certain areas, due to existing or planned circulation systems, it may be necessary for the City to require
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 85 of 126
public rights-of-way to be provided within the development. When the provision of such rights-of-way is necessary, the right-of-way width, paving width, and other standards shall be the same as would otherwise be required. The perimeter buffering requirement shall be applied along these rights-of-way.
b. Nonpublic streets. Ownership of private streets not open to public circulation shall remain with a homeowners’ association and shall be their responsibility to maintain. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surface, and concrete or asphalt curbing shall be provided along both sides of all streets except where curb cuts are necessary for driveways. The minimum paving width for all collector streets within the zero lot line development shall be twenty-four (24) feet. The minimum paving width for all residential access streets shall be twenty (20) feet. A five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided on one (1) side of the street, as a minimum. However, a sidewalk is not required on limited access streets serving two (2) or less dwellings. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.5 guest parking spaces per dwelling unit beyond the normal parking provided at the dwelling.
2. Installation of utilities. All utilities designed to serve the development shall be placed underground. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the Public Works Department. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the Public Works Department.
a. Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the City and designed in accordance with City standards.
b. Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) inches. All mobile home parks must comply with city drainage ordinances.
c. Water system. The water distribution system including the location of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with City standards as defined by Ephrata Municipal Code and any other local, state or federal ordinances, regulation, law or requirement.
d. Electrical hook-ups. All electrical hookups shall comply with the International Electrical Code. Permits shall be obtained from the State Electrical Inspection Division.
18.04.780 Parks and open space requirements.
A. Approval of all subdivisions located in either single-family residential or multifamily residential zones as defined in EMC Title 19, Zoning, shall be contingent upon the subdivider’s dedication of land or providing fees in lieu of dedication to the City, as necessary to mitigate the adverse effects of development upon the existing park and recreation service
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 86 of 126
levels. This requirement shall not apply to lots of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet or larger in size, planned unit developments or subdivisions of four (4) or less lots.
B. The following criteria shall serve as a basis for the Parks and Recreation Department determination whether land proposed for dedication is of sufficient size, character and quality:
1. The proposed area for dedication may be located either within or without the subdivision for which it is required, but must either be adjacent to an existing or proposed City park site or within the same park service area in which the subdivision is located or within one-half (1/2) mile of the subdivision for which it is required.
2. The proposed area for dedication shall have characteristics and location which make it suitable for future inclusion into the city parks system, as determined by the Parks and Recreation Director.
3. With the approval of the Community Development Department, the proposed area for dedication or portion thereof may contain valuable or sensitive environmental features, preservation of which is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan and/or parks and recreation plan.
4. The proposed area for dedication shall, in the determination of the Parks and Recreation Director, further one (1) or more comprehensive plan policies dealing with the open space element, steep slopes as open space, wetlands as open space, agricultural lands as open space, wildlife habitat as open space and heritage sites as open space.
5. All lots within the subdivision for which dedication is required shall have legal and convenient access to the proposed area, at the time of final plat approval.
6. The area proposed by the subdivider for dedication must consist of an area that is equal or greater in size than the size computed as necessary by the Parks and Recreation Department using the formula described in subsection (C) of this section.
7. The area of proposed dedication shall have a street frontage equal to at least twenty (20) percent of its perimeter to allow for regular observation of play areas by residents of the subdivision. Alternative design measures that accomplish the same purpose of security may be approved by the City.
8. The topography, soils, hydrography and other physical characteristics of the area proposed for dedication shall be of such quality as to allow the development of community or neighborhood parks, or to create a flat, dry, obstacle-free space on at least fifty (50) percent of the total required area in a configuration which allows for active recreation; shall have no known safety hazards; and shall have no known physical problems such as the presence of hazardous waste, drainage, erosion, or flooding that the director determines would cause inordinate demands upon public resources for maintenance and operation of the property to be dedicated to the City.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 87 of 126
9. If it is determined that the public interest would be served, the land may be conveyed to a homeowners’ nonprofit maintenance corporation. In this instance, the subdivider shall, at or prior to the time of filing a final plat for approval, supply the Community Development Department with copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the grantee organization, together with evidence of the conveyance or of a binding commitment to convey. The articles of incorporation shall provide that membership in the corporation shall be conditioned upon ownership of land in the subdivision that the corporation is empowered to assess the land for costs of construction and maintenance of the improvements and property owned by the corporation, and that the assessment shall be a lien upon the land. The City Attorney shall review and approve the articles of incorporation and bylaws as to compliance with this provision. The City Council may impose other conditions as it deems appropriate to assure that property and improvements owned by the corporation will be adequately constructed and maintained.
C. Subdividers who dedicate open space or park land pursuant to this section shall dedicate five (5) percent of the total property being subdivided. Unless a subdivider dedicates land in accordance with this section in order to mitigate the direct impacts identified as a consequence of the proposed development, the City’s final approval of the subdivision shall be contingent upon payment of a park development fee from the subdivider to the City. The fee in lieu of land dedication for parks and open space shall be determined by multiplying the following two (2) factors:
1. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the average assessed value per unit area of land within the boundaries of the subdivision; and
2. The gross land area within the subdivision multiplied by five (5) percent as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The average assessed value shall be that for the year in which the subdivision is granted preliminary plat approval. Computations shall be based upon Grant County Assessor information.
The fee in lieu of dedication shall be held in a reserve account at the City, and may only be expended to fund capital improvements for park facilities within the city. The payment shall be expended in all cases within six (6) years of collection.
D. When approval of a subdivision is conditioned upon the dedication of land or the payment of any fees in lieu of dedication, a final plat or short plat shall not be recorded until:
1. The Parks and Recreation Director has determined in writing that any land to be dedicated is shown on the face of the final plat or a deed conveying the land to the City has been recorded with the Grant County Auditor.
2. Conveyance of land to a homeowners’ association shall be done within the time frames specified in subsection (B)(9) of this section.
3. The instrument conveying the land to the city has been transmitted to the City Council for acceptance of the dedication by ordinance.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 88 of 126
4. Payment of any fees in lieu of dedication have been made to the City Clerk/Finance Director.
E. Any payment of fees made pursuant to this section that have not been expended within six (6) years of collection shall be refunded with interest at the rate applied to judgments to the property owners of record at the time of the refund. If the payment is not expended within six (6) years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest.
F. Appeals of dedication requirements or fees in lieu of dedication imposed pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
18.04.785 Design standards for industrial and commercial plats.
A. The division of land for industrial and commercial purposes shall conform to the requirements and minimum standards of residential design except as provided in this section.
B. The street widths shall be as follows: Right-of-way Width in feet Pavement width in feet Primary Street 100 50 Secondary Street 80 50 Tertiary Collectors 60 37 Alleys 20 20
The City may require that street widths in commercial subdivisions be increased to provide for traffic movement and to reduce or eliminate traffic congestion.
C. All industrial arterial/primary street (one-hundred (100) foot right-of-way), industrial collectors/secondary street (eighty (80) foot right-of-way), and commercial streets/tertiary collectors (sixty (60) foot right-of-way) shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on both sides. All industrial and commercial access streets which are also through streets shall have sidewalks a minimum of five (5) feet in width, on one (1) side.
D. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way shall have a minimum radii of twenty-five (25) feet.
E. If railroad tracks are to be installed in a subdivision, such tracks and their route shall be shown on the face of the preliminary plat.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 89 of 126
F. Lots are optional in industrial and commercial subdivisions. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. However, if lots for individual sale or lease are created, they shall conform to the following criteria:
1. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
2. Corner lots may be required to be platted wider than interior lots as determined by the Community Development Department.
Article V. Binding Site Plans
18.04.800 Purpose.
Consistent with RCW 58.17.035, the purpose of this article is (a) to create an alternative process segregating property zoned industrial or commercial for the purpose of sale or lease without the necessity of completing the procedures for platting and upon which no residential structure will be placed; (b) to allow for the division of multifamily residential zoned land for condominium purposes without the necessity of completing the procedures for platting; and (c) to allow for the division of land into lots for the purpose of lease for mobile homes or recreational vehicles.
18.04.803 Definitions.
A. Binding Site Plan: a drawing to scale depicting lots for sale, lease or transfer of property and property rights from one person, firm or corporation to another as well as a developer agreement. A binding site plan identifies and shows the location of all improvements of streets, roads, utilities, open spaces, and other information as required by this Chapter.
B. Complete Application: An application will be declared complete under the EMC Title 17.01.
C. Lot: a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in a zone, including one main building together with any accessory buildings, open spaces, and parking spaces required by the Ephrata Municipal Code.
D. Mobile Home: a single-family dwelling which falls under the definition of a mobile home or manufactured home under the regulations of the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries or state law. Mobile home does not include a modular home.
18.04.805 Applicability.
The Binding Site Plan process and procedures specified herein may only be used for the following:
A. The division of land for the sale or lease of commercially or industrially zoned property (upon which no residential structures will be placed) when one (1) or more principal building is to be constructed on one (1) lot of record. The Binding Site Plan process is an alternative method of subdividing commercial or industrial property.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 90 of 126
B. The division of land for the purposes of leasing lots for mobile homes or recreational vehicles. The Binding Site Plan process is the sole and mandatory method of subdividing land for purpose of leasing lots for mobile homes or recreational vehicles.
18.04.807 Preliminary consultation with staff.
Any person who desires to subdivide land in the City should consult with the Community Development Department at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The Public Works Department should be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the engineering requirements of this chapter and the construction standards of the City.
18.04.808 Application procedures.
An application for a Binding Site Plan shall consist of six (6) separate steps as follows:
1. Preparation of the tentative Binding Site Plan of the proposed subdivision and submission of the tentative plan application to the Community Development Department;
2. Review of the tentative subdivision plan by the City and convene a meeting with the City resulting in the issuance of a tentative subdivision letter;
3. Preparation and submission of the Binding Site Plan of the proposed subdivision to the Hearing Examiner for public hearing and decision;
4. Installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved Preliminary Binding Site Plan requirements and satisfaction of all plan conditions;
5. Submission of the final Binding Site Plan to the City Administrator for signature;
6. Recordation of the approved final Binding Site Plan in the office of the Grant County Auditor.
18.04.809 Tentative Plan review.
A. Applications for a Binding Site Plan tentative plan meeting and review shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The scale and information required for a tentative plat and number of copies to be filed shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Community Development Director.
B. The Community Development Department shall transmit copies of the subdivision tentative plan to the Fire Department, Community Development Department, Public Works Department, Parks and Recreation Department, Public Utility District serving the area, and to any other department or agency deemed necessary.
C. A meeting on the subdivision tentative plan shall be held, which is attended by the Community Development Department, other city departments which receive copies of the tentative plan and the subdivider. Any recommendations of the various departments for revision of the tentative plan should be discussed at such meeting. These recommendations and potential conditions of approval for the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 91 of 126
subdivision shall be recorded in writing and mailed to the subdivider by the Community Development Department.
D. The recommendations of the City departments shall be based on whether the tentative plan is:
1. In conformance with the purpose and regulations of this chapter;
2. In conformance with fire safety regulations;
3. In conformance with City of Ephrata construction standards;
4. In conformance with building code regulations;
5. In conformance with the appropriate street standards and the circulation pattern established or proposed for the area that the subdivision will be developed in;
6. In conformance with sewer, water and other utility plans for the area;
7. Not detrimental to its surroundings.
E. If the subdivision tentative plan is recommended to proceed as presented or as modified in accordance with the written suggestions made by the City, the applicant shall proceed to the preliminary binding site plan stage. If not recommended to proceed, a preliminary plan may still be submitted to the Hearing Examiner. However, it is likely that the same objections and problems will arise at that stage.
F. If changes are made to a binding site plan which has already received tentative plan recommendations and potential conditions, the Community Development Department shall compare the subdivision tentative plan and the proposed preliminary plan and shall make a determination whether the preliminary plan requires additional tentative plan review. A new tentative plan review and meeting may be required if the preliminary binding site plan is not substantially similar to the tentative plan reviewed by the City. The determination of the necessity for another tentative plan meeting shall be based on the following considerations:
1. The degree of commonality between the two (2) plans (i.e., the preliminary plan is a refinement of the tentative plan, or is a completely new plan for the same property); and
2. The presence or absence of revisions present in the preliminary plan resulting from concerns or recommendations raised at the tentative plan meeting.
18.04.810 Preliminary Binding Site Plan application.
A. Application for a Preliminary Binding Site Plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department on the forms provided and in the number of copies prescribed by the Community Development Department. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in accordance with the requirements of RCW 18.43.010. Application fees, which are on file in the City Clerk’s office and the Community Development Department, shall be paid.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 92 of 126
B. Unless an applicant for preliminary plan approval requests otherwise, a preliminary plan shall be processed simultaneously with applications for rezones, variances, planned unit developments, site plan approvals, and similar quasi-judicial or administrative actions to the extent that procedural requirements applicable to these actions permit simultaneous processing.
C. The binding site plan preliminary plan shall include:
1. All documents, maps, and survey notes and shall clearly show the name of the Binding Site Plan, the name(s) of the applicant(s) and the name of the registered land surveyor responsible to the applicant(s).
2. The title shall include the type of Binding Site Plan (commercial, industrial, mobile home park or recreational vehicle park) and read as follows;
(TYPE OF) BINDING SITE PLAN
OF
(NAME OF THE PLAT/SHORT PLAT) (if property is platted)
A Record of Survey
3. The lines and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks, playgrounds, easements, and dedications, including municipal boundaries, township lines, and section lines adjacent to or within the Binding Site Plan.
4. The names, locations and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
5. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed water and sewer mains, public or private, and all existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way to be held privately or dedicated to the City.
6. Parking areas, loading areas, and landscaping areas.
7. The location of all access points which access a public street or right-of-way.
8. Block and lot locations including dimensions and number or letter designations.
9. The lengths and bearings of all straight lines, curve radii, arcs, and semi-tangents of all curves.
10. All dimensions along the lines of each lot with the true bearings and also any other data necessary for the location of any lot in the field.
11. Suitable primary control points, approved by the Plat Administrator or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles bearings, and similar data given on the plan shall be referred.
12. The location of all permanent monuments, property corners, and lot corners.
13. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent thereto.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 93 of 126
14. The date, true north point, scale, complete legend, datum plane, and date of survey.
15. The boundary of the Binding Site Plan, the courses and distances marked thereon, as determined by a field survey made by a registered and qualified land surveyor of the state, and with an allowable error not to exceed one foot (1') in five thousand feet (5,000') and one foot (1') in ten thousand feet (10,000') in the Central Business District. (Basin St. -18th Ave. SW to 7th Ave. NW, two (2) blocks each side.
16. The elevations of all permanent monuments based on datum plane approved by the Public Works Director.
17. Certification by a registered land surveyor of accuracy of the Binding Site Plan map and survey.
18. Location and dimensions of all irrigation water right-of-ways.
19. All linear dimensions shall be given in feet and decimals of a foot to the nearest hundredth.
20. The scale of the Binding Site Plan shall be not more than one hundred feet (100') to the inch. Except that the Public Works Director, subject to a request prior to Binding Site Plan submittal, may approve an alternative Binding Site Plan map scale not to exceed one hundred feet (100') to the inch.
21. If the Binding Site Plan is a redivision or amendment to or alteration of an existing Binding Site Plan, the parcels or lots, of the preceding Binding Site Plan shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper positions in relation to the new arrangement of the Binding Site Plan, the Binding Site Plan being so clearly shown in solid lines as to avoid ambiguity.
22. The applicant's land surveyor shall set all required monuments and shall stake all lot corners as shown on the Binding Site Plan before the Binding Site Plan is submitted for approval.
23. A vicinity map at a scale of not more than four hundred feet (400') to the inch. Except that the Public Works Director, subject to a request prior to plat submittal, may approve an alternative vicinity map scale exceeding four hundred feet (400') to the inch. The vicinity map shall show all adjacent parcels. It shall show how the streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision may connect with existing and proposed streets and alleys in neighboring subdivisions or un-platted property to produce an advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
24. The street address for the Binding Site Plan will be assigned by the Community Development Director.
25. Vertical Control Monument. One (1) brass cap permanent vertical control monument with elevation and Licensed Surveyor number stamped on the cap shall be established within the boundary of the subdivision. The vertical datum for the vertical control monument shall be linked to the National
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 94 of 126
Geodetic Vertical Datum 1988 Adjustment (NGVD88). Elevation for the vertical control monument shall be determined to an accuracy standard equal to third order classification as defined by the Federal Geodetic Control Committee. All field techniques and procedures shall be compatible with the equipment utilized to insure that a true third order accuracy level is achieved. When utilizing an United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) monument (if located in its original position), both the USBR elevation data and the NGVD88 data shall be included on brass cap.
D. Any deed restrictions or covenants existing or proposed shall be described and drawn on the Binding Site Plan map and/or in the other documents submitted with the Binding Site Plan application and map.
E. The applicant shall submit all parcel and boundary closures to the Community Development Department at the time the applicant submits the Binding Site Plan map and application.
F. The Binding Site Plan application shall be accompanied by the following:
1. A plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the binding site plan, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the binding site plan. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final binding site plan by the City Administrator.
2. A certificate from the Grant County Treasurer indicating that all taxes and assessments on the land and improvements included in the Binding Site Plan have been paid according to the provisions of RCW 58.08.030 and RCW 58.10.040 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
3. All easements and covenants proposed to run with the land.
4. A completed SEPA Environmental Checklist as required by law.
5. A non-refundable filing fee of $500.00 plus cost of Hearing Examiner made payable to the City.
G. The Binding Site Plan application shall also be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the Binding Site Plan and map. The Plat Administrator may determine that fewer copies are required.
18.04.815 Binding Site Plan Conditions and Requirements:
A. General Requirements-All Binding Site Plans:
1. Binding Site Plans shall be filed as a record of survey in the Grant County Auditor's Office.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 95 of 126
2. The Binding Site Plan shall connect to municipal utilities (sewer and water) in the existing dedicated streets that adjoin the Binding Site Plan, drainage ways, and other public ways, or municipal improvements shall be provided in conformance with the City of Ephrata Construction Standards in effect at the time of the Binding Site Plan approval.
3. The Binding Site Plan shall front on an existing dedicated street. There shall be adequate access to a public way from all lots within the Binding Site Plan. Existing dedicated streets shall be improved to the City of Ephrata's Construction Standards. Private streets shall have direct access onto a dedicated street.
4. The Binding Site Plan shall comply with all applicable zoning and health regulations, including but not limited to those regulations set forth in Title 19 EMC which prohibit or permit uses, outright or conditionally, or impose development standards, height requirements, off-street parking requirements, maximum land coverage by building requirements, minimum lot requirements, yard requirements, building site area requirements, minimum building set back requirements, separation requirements, occupied area requirements, accessory structures and buildings requirements, park land dedication/recreation areas requirements, interior park access ways requirements, parking requirements, stand requirements, pedestrian walkways requirements, street lighting requirements, landscaping, buffering and screening requirements, utilities and other services requirements, permit and license requirements, or park administration requirements.
5. The Binding Site Plan shall be consistent with the City of Ephrata's Comprehensive Plan.
6. The Binding Site Plan shall conform with the requirements and standards set forth in Chapters 18.29, 18.33 and 18.36 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. The requirements and standards set forth in said Chapters shall be applicable to each and every Binding Site Plan. A Binding Site Plan shall be considered a subdivision for purposes of those Chapters.
7. The Binding Site Plan shall provide for irrigation water rights-of-way pursuant to RCW 58.17.310 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
8. Environmental information shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the guidelines established under the State Environmental Policy Act of 1971, as amended. Said information is a part of and must accompany the Binding Site Plan application.
9. A Binding Site Plan shall be processed simultaneously with the application for platting, rezones, variances, planned unit developments, site plan approvals, and similar quasi-judicial or administrative actions to the extent that procedural requirements applicable to these actions permit simultaneous processing.
10. The Binding Site Plan shall contain provisions making all development conform to the Binding Site Plan.
11. Requests for alteration of an approved Binding Site Plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. Minor revisions to the Binding Site Plan may be approved by the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 96 of 126
Community Development Director. Minor revisions include a lot line adjustment. The amended Binding Site Plan shall be processed subject to all the procedures and requirements of this chapter except that a public hearing will not be required to amend an approved and recorded Binding Site Plan.
B. General Requirements - Commercial or Industrial Binding Site Plans:
1. A commercial or industrial Binding Site Plan authorizes a sale or transfer of a lot within the Binding Site Plan. The Binding Site Plan and all of its requirements shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or other person acquiring ownership of the lot within the Binding Site Plan. The sale or transfer of such lot in violation of the Binding Site Plan, or without obtaining a Binding Site Plan approval, shall be considered a violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW and shall be restrained by injunctive action and be illegal as provided in Chapter 58.17 RCW. The sale or other transfer of ownership of a lot of a commercial or industrial Binding Site Plan shall be filed as a record of survey in the Grant County Auditor's Office.
2. A commercial or industrial Binding Site Plan shall make adequate provision for public streets, roads, rights-of-way, other public ways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lighting circuits, alleys, transit stops, irrigation rights-of- way, the extension of municipal utilities, including water and sewer services, and any other municipal improvements deemed necessary in conformance with the City Construction Standards in effect at the time of the approval of the Binding Site Plan application.
3. All lots within a commercial or industrial Binding Site Plan shall have direct access to a public street. Street lighting shall be provided.
C. General Requirements - Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Binding Site Plans:
1. Mobile home and recreational vehicle Binding Site Plans shall authorize the leasing of lots therein but shall not authorize the sale or transfer of ownership of a lot within the Binding Site Plan.
2. Privately held improvements (i.e., all water services, fire lines, sewers, private access streets, etc.) within the mobile home or recreational vehicle park Binding Site Plan boundaries shall be maintained by the property owner(s)/applicant(s). The Binding Site Plan shall make adequate provision for internal private access streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lighting circuits, and alleys.
3. The Binding Site Plan shall make provisions for adequate easements within the Binding Site Plan for major municipal utility lines.
4. Public access shall not be less than thirty six feet (36') in width for a mobile home park nor less than twenty two feet (22') for an RV park. Secondary public access shall be required for mobile home parks with 25 units or more. The secondary public access shall enter the public street system at least one hundred fifty feet from the primary access.
D. Specific Conditions and Requirements - All Binding Site Plans:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 97 of 126
1. Pre-application conference. Prior to submission of a Binding Site Plan application and map, applicant or the applicant’s representative shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department.
a. The Community Development Department will coordinate the conference with representatives of other affected City of Ephrata departments.
b. The applicant shall present a conceptual idea of the Binding Site Plan.
c. The Community Development Department and representatives of affected City of Ephrata departments will respond informally and address potential items of concern to aid the applicant in preparing the Binding Site Plan.
The Binding Site Plan shall contain an accurate legal description of the land within the Binding Site Plan and the following declaration, acknowledgment, and endorsement statements shall appear in the following sequence in black permanent ink either by hand or mechanical device:
Legal Description:_____________________________________________________
Declaration:
The owner in fee simple of the land herein described is ______________________. The owner does hereby establish a Binding Site Plan for the purpose of lease or sale of portions thereof, pursuant to RCW Chapter 58.17 and Title 18 of the Ephrata Municipal Code and that the undersigned declares that development of the property herein described shall conform to all inscriptions contained hereon.
_________________________________ __________________________________
Signature Date Signature Date
Acknowledgment
State of Washington
County of Grant
I certify that I know or have satisfactory evidence that _______________________ signed this instrument and acknowledged it to be his/her free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes mentioned in the instrument.
Dated____________________________________
____________________________________
Signature of Notary Public
My appointment expires _____________________
Land Surveyor's Declaration:
I hereby certify that this Binding Site Plan is a true and correct representation of the lands actually surveyed.
I hereby declare that the Binding Site Plan_________________________________, the heretofore described tract of land, is based upon an actual survey and that all the distances and courses shown thereon are correct to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief; and that I have fully complied with the provisions of the statutes and platting regulations.
________________________________________
Professional Land Surveyor
Certificate No._____________________________
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 98 of 126
Approvals:
Examined and approved by the Ephrata City Administrator on _________________, 20_____.
_________________________________________
City Administrator
State of Washington
County of Grant
I certify that I know or have satisfactory evidence that _______________________ signed this instrument and acknowledged it to be his/her free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes mentioned in the instrument.
Dated_____________________________________
_________________________________________
Signature of Notary Public
My appointment expires _____________________
Assessor’s Certificate: Examined and approved by the Grant County Assessor.
______________________ _________________, 20____.
Grant County Assessor Date
Treasurer’s Certificate: This is to certify that all ____taxes and assessment which are now due and payable according to the records of Grant County have been fully paid.
______________________ ________________, 20______.
Grant County Treasurer Date
Auditor’s Certificate
Filed for the record at the request of the City of Ephrata this day _____ of ________________, 20___, in Volume of the Book of Surveys, on page ________, records of Grant County, Washington.
_______________________________ _______________________________
Grant County Auditor by Deputy Auditor
3. The Binding Site Plan shall be stamped and signed by a registered professional land surveyor licensed by the State of Washington. The Binding Site Plan map shall:
a. Be a neat and accurate drawing in black permanent ink.
b. Have a trimmed size which shall measure eighteen inches (18") by twenty-four inches (24").
c. Have a two inch (2") margin on the left margin and a half inch (½") border on the remaining three (3) margins.
d. Shall be drawn on two (2) or more sheets if the scale necessary to accommodate the map on one (1) sheet would unduly congest the drawing.
4. All public dedications attached to the property through a previous plat or other means shall also be shown on the Binding Site Plan.
5. The Binding Site Plan and the developer agreement described in Section 18.04.844.B of the Ephrata Municipal Code shall indicate that the documents are dependent upon one another and together constitute the Binding Site Plan.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 99 of 126
6. A digital of the final plat map on electronic media in an Autodesk Autocad (.dwg) compatible format shall be submitted to the City of Ephrata Community Development Department and to the Grant County Auditor’s office.
18.04.820 Administrative Review:
A. Upon receipt of a complete and satisfactory conclusive Binding Site Plan application and map and the required filing fee, the Plat Administrator shall distribute copies of the Binding Site Plan to each of the following offices, departments, or agencies within fourteen (14) days from issuance of the Notice of Complete Application:
1. Public Utility District
2. Telephone Company
3. Fire Department
4. Grant County Health District
5. Any irrigation district with jurisdiction
6. Grant County Assessor
7. Cable Television
8. Port of Ephrata
9. Ephrata Public Works Director
10. Police Department
11. Park and Recreation Department
12. City Administrator
13. Notice of the submission of a Binding Site Plan application located in the City of Ephrata adjoining the municipal boundaries thereof shall be given to the Grant County Planning Department.
14. Notice of the submission of a Binding Site Plan application located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway shall be given to the Regional Office of the State Department of Transportation.
Each office, department, or agency shall submit written recommendations with the Community Development Department within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date it receives the Binding Site Plan Application. If any such office, department, or agency fails to file a written recommendation within the time limitation, it may be presumed that such office, department, or agency has no recommendation.
Within fifteen (15) calendar days issuance of the Notice of Complete Application, the Community Development Department shall review the Binding Site Plan and submit to the Hearing Examiner a written report with respect to the following conditions:
1. That the proposed Binding Site Plan bears the required certificates and statements of approval.
2. That a title report furnished by the applicant confirms the title of the land and the proposed Binding Site Plan is vested in the name of the owner whose signature appears on the Binding Site Plan.
3. That the Binding Site Plan is technically correct as certified by the land surveyor responsible for the Binding Site Plan.
B. Within fifteen (15) days of its receipt of the Binding Site Plan application, the appropriate irrigation district serving or from which the real property is entitled to be served with irrigation water shall review the Binding Site
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 100 of 126
Plan and submit to the Community Development Department a written report recommending approval or disapproval of the Binding Site Plan as to the adequacy of the proposed means of the delivery of irrigation district entitlement water and as to the adequacy of the proposed means of removal of irrigation waste water.
C. If the Binding Site Plan application is found to be, objected to, or opposed by a reviewing agency a certified letter shall be mailed to the applicant within five (5) days of the closing of the fifteen (15) day agency review period.
D. The Community Development Director may determine that a meeting shall be held to resolve major issues identified as a result of the recommendations of other offices, departments, or agencies responsible for the recommendations and must include the applicant and Community Development Director.
18.04.830 Hearing Examiner Public Hearing:
Upon issuance of a Notice of Complete Application, the Community Development Director shall set a date for a public hearing before the Ephrata Hearing Examiner as prescribed in Ephrata Municipal Code, Section 17.01.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing on the binding site plan as required by EMC Chapter 17.01.
B. The Community Development Director shall give notice of the public hearing per the requirements of EMC Title 17.01.
18.04.835 Hearing Examiner Action:
A. The Community Development Director shall transmit the application, the Binding Site Plan drawing, respective comments and recommendations from other offices and agencies, comments and recommendations from city departments to the Hearing Examiner prior to the hearing.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall review the Binding Site Plan, recommendations, testimony, and exhibits submitted at the hearing to assure conformance of the proposed binding site plan with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning ordinance, City Construction Standards and any other applicable rules and regulations. The Hearing Examiner shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application.
18.04.840 Administrative Approval and Authorization
A. Within One hundred twenty (120) days of the issuance of Notice of Complete Application, the Hearing Examiner shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Binding Site Plan application.
B. The Community Development Director shall mail written notice of the decision of the Hearing Examiner to the applicant within five (5) working days of the date of the decision by regular first class mail.
C. Approval of the Binding Site Plan shall constitute authorization for the Binding Site Plan applicant to develop construction plans and specifications for all on-site street and utility improvements.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 101 of 126
18.04.844 Final Filing Recording Fees and Requirements
A. Upon approval of the Binding Site Plan by the Hearing Examiner and within fifteen (15) days thereafter, the applicant shall remit the following fees prior to the Binding Site Plan being officially signed and recorded with the Grant County Auditor:
1. A check payable to the Grant County Auditor sufficient to cover the recording fees for the Binding Site Plan and the developer agreement as well as any covenants and deed restrictions, if applicable.
2. When applicable, voluntary payment in lieu of a dedication of land or to mitigate a direct impact that has been identified as a consequence of a proposed Binding Site Plan as allowed by and pursuant to RCW 82.02.020, SEPA or any other applicable law.
B. Within 15 days following the decision for approval of a Binding Site Plan, the applicant shall submit three (3) Mylar copies of the Binding Site Plan drawing, each signed by the owner/applicant of the Binding Site Plan and notarized.
C. Upon approval of the Binding Site Plan by the Hearing Examiner and within thirty (30) days thereafter, the developer shall sign and submit to the City a developer agreement acceptable to the Hearing Examiner which:
1. Dedicates to the City all streets required to be dedicated to the City as a condition of Binding Site Plan approval;
2. Grants to the City all easements and improvements required to be granted as a condition of Binding Site Plan approval;
3. Describes and shows the precise location of all granted easements and dedicated streets;
4. Imposes an obligation on the applicant to install and construct all utility and street improvements required as a condition of Binding Site Plan approval and to post a one (1) year performance bond (or other security acceptable to the City Attorney) and a one (1) year maintenance bond as provided in Section 18.04.850 of the Ephrata Municipal Code; and
5. Sets forth any other conditions of Binding Site Plan approval. The signature of the applicant shall be notarized. The approved Binding Site Plan shall not be signed by the City Administrator or filed for recording with the Grant County Auditor’s Office until such signed and acceptable developer agreement is received by the City.
D. Within 30 days following the decision for approval of a Binding Site Plan, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Director:
1. Three (3) complete sets of construction plans and specifications prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington showing all street and utility improvements as required by the Hearing Examiner in approving the Binding Site Plan.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 102 of 126
2. The construction plans and specifications shall be accompanied by a plan check fee as per the rate schedule established by the Public Works Director. All construction plans and specifications shall be in conformance with City Construction Standards. Sheet size shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) unless other dimensions approved by the city and shall have a border of one inch (1") on the left margin and one half inch (½”) on the remaining three (3) margins. The scale shall be five feet (5') vertically and forty feet (40') horizontally.
E. The preliminary construction plans and specifications shall be forwarded to the Public Works Department within two (2) working days of receipt by the Community Development Department. Within twenty (20) days of the submittal of the plans by the Community Development Director, the Public Works Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans. The applicant shall submit one (1) set of permanent reproducible Mylar and three (3) sets of specifications which have been approved for the Public Works Director’s signature, records and use.
18.04.846 Recording Requirements - Effect:
A. Upon receipt of all required final fees and an acceptable and signed developer agreement, approved construction drawing and a one (1) year performance or subdivision bond or other security in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney in the amount of one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the construction costs as determined by the Public Works Director. The approved Binding Site Plan and the developer agreement shall be signed by the City Administrator. The City Administrator’s signature on the developer agreement shall be notarized. The Community Development Director shall transmit the three (3) Mylar copies of the Binding Site Plan to the Grant County Assessor and Grant County Treasurer for signatures of the Certification. The Plat Administrator will then transmit the three (3) signed Mylar copies of the Binding Site Plan, the original developer agreement, and any covenants/deed restrictions to the Grant County Auditor for final filing and recording. One (1) reproducible conformed copy of the Binding Site Plan shall be retained by the Community Development Director. One (1) conformed copy of the Binding Site Plan shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Any record of survey filed as a Binding Site Plan which does not bear the notarized approval signature of the City Administrator is not a valid Binding Site Plan and shall not confer any rights or privileges upon the property or its owners.
C. Once the Binding Site Plan and developer agreement are filed for recording with the Grant County Auditor’s Office, the Binding Site Plan and developer agreement shall be binding upon and be enforceable against the applicant, the applicant’s heirs and personal representatives, and the applicant’s successors and assigns, including any person or entity which obtains an ownership interest in all or any portion of the land within the Binding Site Plan.
D. If the Binding Site Plan and developer agreement are not signed and delivered to the City within thirty (30) days, of the date upon which the Binding Site Plan is approved, the Binding Site Plan approval may be withdrawn and voided by the City Administrator and, if the Binding Site Plan is withdrawn and voided, neither the Binding Site Plan nor the developer agreement shall be filed for recording with the Grant County Auditor’s office.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 103 of 126
18.04.848 Building Permit - Certificate of Occupancy:
A. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the City with respect to any lots or land within an approved Binding Site Plan until all required street and utility improvements have been completed and approved and a one (1) year maintenance bond posted.
18.04.850 Improvements:
A. Upon Binding Site Plan and developer agreement approval by the City, the applicant shall complete and install all street and utility improvements within one (1) year of the date upon which the Public Works Director approves the construction plans and specifications. A one (1) year performance or subdivision bond or other security in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be required in the amount of one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the construction costs as determined by the Public Works Director. After the street and utility improvements are constructed and approved, a one (1) year maintenance bond shall be required in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the construction costs as determined by the Public Works Director.
B. In the event that all street and utility improvements are not completed within one (1) year of the date upon which the Public Works Director approves the construction plans and specifications, the bond or security may be forfeited and the City may undertake the installation and completion of all required street and utility improvements. In the alternative, the City Administrator may grant one (1) extension of the performance or subdivision bond or security for a period not to exceed one (1) year provided that the request for an extension is filed with the Community Development Director at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond or security. If the request for a time extension is granted, a new performance or subdivision bond or security shall be submitted in an amount sufficient to cover one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of completing street and utility improvements. The bond will be updated with new estimates of costs on all uncompleted improvements and all increased costs shall be passed onto the bond. If these increased costs are not accepted by the surety, then the City will foreclose on the bond and the Binding Site Plan will be held in abeyance. Departments issuing recommendations for new performance or subdivision bonds or other approved security shall not modify the terms and requirements of the bond or security other than to pass on all increased costs estimates as determined by the Public Works Director to the bond or security to cover the costs of completing utility and street improvements without the written consent of the applicant. After the street and utility improvements are constructed and approved, a one (1) year maintenance bond shall be required in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the construction costs as determined by the Public Works Director.
C. The Public Works Department or a licensed professional engineer or engineering firm hired by the City shall be responsible for the inspection of all street and utility improvements to insure conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
D. In the event that the applicant fails to submit to the Community Development Director three (3) complete sets of construction plans and specifications prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington showing all street and utility improvements as required by the City Administrator in approving the binding site plan and the plan
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 104 of 126
check fee, as per the rate schedule established by the public works director within one (1) year of the date upon which the Binding Site Plan was approved, the Binding Site plan and developer agreement may be rescinded and voided by the City Administrator and, in such event, an instrument showing that the binding site plan and developer agreement have been rescinded and voided shall be filed for recording with the Grant County Auditor’s Office.
18.04.852 Sale or Lease of Lots:
No commercial or industrial lots within a Binding Site Plan may be sold or leased until the approved Binding Site Plan and the signed developer agreement are recorded by the Grant County Auditor’s Office.
18.04.855 Vested Rights:
A Binding Site Plan shall be governed by the terms of approval of the Binding Site Plan. Lots in a Binding Site Plan filed for record shall be a valid land use notwithstanding any change in zoning laws for a period of five (5) years from the date of filing.
18.04.857 Appeal.
The decision of the Hearing Examiner on the binding site plan shall be final, unless an appeal by a party of record is made to the City Council within fourteen (14) days after the Hearing Examiner’s decision. The appeal shall be in writing to the City Council and filed with the Community Development Department. Any appeal shall be consistent with EMC 17.01.
18.04.858 Applicability for commercial and industrial sites.
A. The subject site shall consist of one (1) or more legally created lots; and
B. The property must be zoned commercial and/or industrial.
18.04.860 Application requirements for commercial and industrial sites.
All of the following information shall be included in any application for binding site plan approval for commercial and industrial lots:
A. At a minimum, the binding site plan application shall include the following information:
1. A map or plan showing the location and size of all new proposed lots;
2. Proposed and existing structures including floor areas and setbacks;
3. Location of existing and proposed public rights-of-way, private and public streets and easements;
4. Location of all existing and proposed open spaces including any required landscaped areas, parking areas and all major manmade or natural features (i.e., streams, creeks, drainage courses, railroad tracks, utility lines, etc.);
5. Layout of an internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including proposed or existing ingress and egress points;
6. Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants to serve the site;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 105 of 126
7. Description, location, and size of existing and proposed utilities, storm drainage facilities, and streets to serve each lot;
8. Expected location of new buildings and driveways;
9. Letter of water and/or sewer availability, if not served by the City of Ephrata;
10. Parking calculations to demonstrate that the requirements of Ch. 19.04.010 EMC have been met;
11. The following municipal code data: zoning district; total lot area; total building area; percent of site coverage; total parking and maneuvering area;
12. Plans, analysis and calculations verifying building code compliance of all existing structures, to include, but not be limited to, identification of all types of construction and occupancy classifications, allowable area calculations, wall and wall opening protection, and provisions for exiting and accessibility for the disabled;
13. Proposed cross-access and maintenance agreements for parking, circulation, utility, and landscaping improvements, if shared;
14. The site plan shall also include the name of proposed development; the legal description of the property for which the binding site plan is sought, the date on which the plans were prepared; the graphic scale and north point of the plans; and
15. The title, “Binding Site Plan” shall be at the top of the plan in large print.
B. A current plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the binding site plan, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the binding site plan. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final binding site plan by the City Administrator.
C. A plan showing the layout and size of all existing and proposed utilities to serve each lot.
D. A phasing plan and time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases.
E. A complete environmental checklist, if required by Ch. 20.04 EMC.
F. Copies of all easements, covenants, and other encumbrances restricting the use of the site.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 106 of 126
18.04.861 Approval criteria for commercial and industrial sites.
A. Criteria. An application for a binding site plan on commercial or industrial lands may be approved if the following criteria are satisfied:
1. Adequate provisions have been made for storm-water detention, water supply, sanitary sewer, drainageways; private and/or public streets; pedestrian access; public and private utilities; and other public ways;
2. Each lot shall provide access to a public street and make provisions for connectivity of alleys, pedestrian accessways, and other public ways;
3. The binding site plan complies with, or makes adequate provisions to comply with, applicable provisions of the building code, fire code, public works standards, and zoning standards;
4. Potential environmental impacts, together with any practical means of mitigating adverse impacts, have been considered such that the proposal will not have an adverse effect upon the environment;
5. Approving the binding site plan will serve the public use and interest and adequate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. Shared improvements. As a condition of approval, the City may authorize sharing of open space, parking, access, setbacks, landscaping, and other improvements among contiguous properties. Conditions of use, maintenance, and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access, and other improvements shall be identified on the binding site plan and enforced by covenants, easements, or other similar mechanisms. Such agreements or restrictions shall be recorded with the Grant County auditor’s office and run with the land. Such agreements shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney prior to filing the final binding site plan. The binding site plan shall contain the conditions to which the binding site plan is subject, including any applicable irrevocable dedications of property. The binding site plan shall contain a provision requiring that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved site plan and any applicable development regulations subject to the vesting requirements of this chapter.
C. Phasing of development. Unless otherwise provided for in a development agreement, development permit applications shall be submitted for all structures and improvements shown on the binding site plan within three (3) years of approval. The Community Development Director may administratively extend this period by one (1) additional year if requested by the applicant. Permit applications submitted within that period shall be subject to the vesting requirements of this chapter. If the applicant chooses to develop the property in a phased development, the applicant must execute a development agreement with the City pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170. This agreement shall govern, at a minimum, the use and development of the property subject to the binding site plan, including: (1) vesting applicable to subsequent permits; (2) the manner in which each phase of the development will proceed to ensure that the roads and utilities necessary to serve each phase of the development are constructed prior to the development of each phase; and (3) expiration of the agreement and all provisions therein.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 107 of 126
18.04.862 Improvements for commercial and industrial sites.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for construction within a binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites, all improvements required to adequately serve that portion of the plan for which the permit will be issued shall be installed. Improvements may include, but are not limited to, road construction; water, sewer, and storm utilities; parking; building improvements to meet code; and landscaping. Public improvements may be bonded for, with approval of the public works director.
18.04.863 Modifications for commercial and industrial sites.
A. If an applicant wishes to alter a binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites or any portion thereof, that person shall submit an application to the Community Development Department requesting the alteration. The application shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions within the binding site plan or in that portion of the binding site plan to be altered. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to determine whether a proposed alteration is minor or major.
B. If the binding site plan is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the binding site plan, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the binding site plan or portion thereof.
C. If the alteration is requested to a binding site plan prior to recording of the binding site plan with Grant County, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director. A major alteration shall require consent of the Hearing Examiner, after public notice and a public meeting is held. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application for a major alteration to all owners of property within the binding site plan, and as was required by the original application.
D. If the alteration is requested to a binding site plan after recording of the binding site plan with Grant County and it is determined to be a minor alteration, it may be approved with the consent of the Hearing Examiner, after public notice and a public meeting is held. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the application for a minor alteration to all owners of property within the binding site plan, and as was required for the original application. If the alteration is requested to a binding site plan after recording of the binding site plan with Grant County and it is determined to be a major alteration, then the Community Development Director shall require the binding site plan be vacated per EMC 18.04.230 and 18.04.882 and a new application for a binding site plan may be submitted.
E. The Hearing Examiner shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 108 of 126
F. After approval of the alteration, the Hearing Examiner shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the binding site plan, which after signature by the City Administrator, shall be filed with the Grant County auditor’s office to become the lawful binding site plan of the property.
18.04.864 Vacation for commercial and industrial sites.
A binding site plan may be vacated as a whole only. Vacating a binding site plan releases all conditions and obligations on the parcel associated with such plan. A binding site plan may be vacated by submitting a letter to the Community Development Director indicating an intention to vacate the binding site plan. The letter shall include signatures of all ownership interests within the binding site plan and shall become binding upon its acceptance by the Community Development Director.
18.04.865 Vesting for commercial and industrial sites.
A binding site plan application shall be considered under the zoning and other land use control ordinances in effect on the land at the time of submission of the fully complete binding site plan application. Any vacant or redeveloped lot within an approved binding site plan shall comply with the standards in place at such time as a subsequent project permit application is filed on that property unless otherwise provided for in a development agreement.
18.04.866 Applicability for condominium sites.
Multi-family residential condominium developments are eligible for binding site plan approval, when the purpose of such approval is to divide the property so that a portion of the parcel or tract can be subjected to either Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW. A binding site plan can only be approved either when the development has already been constructed or when the approval has been obtained and a building permit for an entire development or a portion of a development is issued.
18.04.867 Application requirements for condominium sites.
A. An application for a binding site plan for condominium sites may not be submitted until a building permit has been approved.
B. The binding site plan application shall conform to the following requirements and shall:
1. Be on reproducible material and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (unless otherwise approved by the Community Development Department) on sheets eighteen (18) inches by twenty-two (22) inches.
2. Contain the name of the proposed development; the legal description of the property for which binding site plan approval is sought; the date on which the plans were prepared; the graphic scale and north point of the plans.
3. Show the following:
a. The layout of the site including the location of all existing and proposed structures and their distance from property lines; the location of all existing and proposed utilities, streets, and easements within or abutting subject property; the location of all
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 109 of 126
existing and proposed private pedestrian walks; existing and proposed open space area.
b. Any areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public purposes, and areas to be reserved for private open space and landscaping and areas reserved for the common use of the occupants of the proposed development.
c. All major manmade or natural features, i.e., streams, creeks, drainage ditches, railroad tracks, etc.
d. Building dimensions, height and number of stories, distance between buildings, location and size of parking areas and number of stalls.
e. Following zoning code data:
i. Zoning district;
ii. Total lot area (square feet);
iii. Total building area (square feet);
iv. Percent of site coverage;
v. Number of units proposed;
vi. Total number of parking stalls (include handicapped);
vii. Total parking and maneuvering area (square feet);
viii. Required landscaping (square feet);
ix. Percent of lot in open space;
x. Type of construction;
xi. Sprinklered-nonsprinklered;
xii. Occupancy classification.
4. Contain the name of the proposed development and the title, “Binding Site Plan” shall be at the top of the plan, in large print, together with the statement required pursuant to RCW 58.17.040 (7)(e), prominently displayed on the face of the site plan map.
5. Contain the statement: “The use and development of the property must be in accordance with the plan as represented herein or as hereafter amended, according to the provisions of the binding site plan regulations of the City and any division of the land subject to this plan shall not take place until the development or the portion thereof to be divided is subject to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW.”
6. Contain the statement: “The roads and utilities shown on this plan need not be constructed and/or installed at the time that the property subject to this plan is divided. Any permit required to develop any portion of the property shall not be issued until the roads and utilities necessary to serve that portion of this property have been constructed and installed or until arrangements acceptable to the city have been made to ensure that the construction and installation of such roads and utilities will be accomplished.”
7. Set forth or reference any conditions, limitations, and requirements for the use and development of the land as required pursuant to the approvals set forth in EMC 18.04.866.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a current plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than forty-five
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 110 of 126
(45) calendar days prior to final plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the binding site plan, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the metes and bounds legal description on the face of the binding site plan. The City reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final binding site plan by the City Administrator.
18.04.868 Approval criteria for condominium sites.
Approval of a binding site plan shall take place only after the following are met:
1. Adequate provisions have been made for drainageways, alleys, streets, other public ways, water supplies, open space, and sanitary wastes, for the entire property covered by the binding site plan;
2. Comply with all building code requirements;
3. Comply with all zoning code requirements and development standards; and
4. Have suitable physical characteristics.
A proposed binding site plan may be denied because of flood, inundation, or swamp conditions or construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval.
18.04.870 Enforcement.
Any violation of the conditions of approval, limitations on development or the requirements of development imposed as part of a binding site plan approval shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties established for violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW and for violations of the subdivision code.
18.04.875 Final binding site plan for condominium sites.
The final binding site plan map which is submitted for filing shall conform to all requirements of the preliminary binding site plan, plus the following:
1. It must be a reproducible map drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, on stabilized drafting film or on linen tracing cloth. Scale and north point must be on map;
2. Size eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches;
3. Legal description of total parcel shall be shown on the final linen. All legal descriptions shall be metes and bounds descriptions reflecting within the descriptions ties to all subdivision lines, donation claim lines and/or recording plat lines;
4. Property subject of the binding site plan shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state. All exterior corners and streets shall be monumented. Surveyor’s certificate must appear on final mylar;
5. All conditions, limitations, and requirements for the use and development of the land as required pursuant to the approvals set forth in EMC 18.04.866 or the approval of the binding site plan committee shall be appropriately set forth or referenced. Building permit number, if applicable, shall be shown on the linen;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 111 of 126
6. Certificate of approval by the City Administrator shall be provided on the mylar; and
7. Face of final site plan mylar must be signed by all owners of the property.
18.04.877 Filing binding site plan for condominiums.
The binding site plan must be signed by the City Administrator. An approved binding site plan shall be filed for record in the office of the Grant County Auditor and shall not be deemed approved until so filed. Copies of the approved binding site plans shall be filed with the Community Development Department and Public Works Department.
18.04.880 Expiration period for condominium sites.
If the binding site plan is not filed within six (6) months of the date of approval, the binding site plan shall become null and void. Upon written request of the applicant, the Community Development Department may grant one (1) extension of not more than six (6) months. Such request must be received by the Community Development Department prior to the six (6) month expiration date.
18.04.885 Modifications for condominium sites.
A. An approved binding site plan may be amended by filing a request for such an amendment with the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department shall determine what information shall be submitted with a request for an amendment, based on the type of modification being requested. Any amendment to an approved binding site plan must be reviewed by the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 112 of 126
Article VI. Lot Line Adjustments
18.04.900 Purpose of lot line adjustments.
The purpose of a lot line adjustment is to allow for the adjustment of common property lines or boundaries between adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels in order to rectify a disputed property line location, free the boundary from any differences or discrepancies or accommodate a minor transfer of land. The resulting adjustment shall not create any additional lots, tracts, or parcels and all reconfigured lots, tracts, or parcels shall contain sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for zoning and building purposes.
18.04.905 Scope.
A lot line adjustment shall allow property owners to alter, eliminate or relocate lot lines to correct setback encroachments, improve access, correlate property lines with survey or map lines or to create better lot design while conforming to all applicable code requirements pertaining to lot design, building location, and development standards. A lot line adjustment shall not allow the creation of an additional lot, parcel or tract.
18.04.910 Preliminary consultation with staff.
Any person who desires to change the location of a lot line on land in the City should consult with the Community Development Department at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The Public Works Department should also be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the impact of relocating the lot line in relation to structures and easements and any applicable engineering requirements of this chapter.
18.04.915 Application procedures.
Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted on the forms supplied and in the number of copies prescribed by the Community Development Department, and shall include the following:
1. Lot line adjustment application;
2. Applicable fee as defined in the City’s fee schedule in EMC 3.35;
3. A legible map, drawn to an appropriate decimal scale on a minimum eight-and-one-half (8-1/2) inch by eleven (11) inch sheet of paper showing all of the information required by the application form;
4. The signature of all parties having any ownership interest in the lands affected by the lot line adjustment, indicating that the lot line adjustment is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires. For purposes of this section, “ownership interest” shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property;
5. A current title report produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to lot line adjustment application, or other documentation as approved by the Community Development Director, which documents ownership, title and encumbrances;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 113 of 126
6. A copy of the existing legal description for both parcels;
7. A metes and bounds description of the proposed new lots if other than a platted lot.
(Ord. 16-10, 2016)
18.04.920 Principles of acceptability.
Lot line adjustments shall be consistent with the following principles of acceptability:
1. Adjust lot lines to eliminate a common lot line between parcels in the same ownership, to relocate a lot line to rectify a property line dispute, correct property line or setback encroachments, or correlate with more accurate survey data; and to allow a minor transfer of land between adjacent parcels;
2. Create better lot design, or improve access;
3. Conform to applicable zoning, subdivision and other code requirements pertaining to lot design, building location, and development standards;
4. Avoid creation of an additional lot, parcel or tract; and
5. Lots created or combined for tax purposes do not constitute a legal lot of record.
18.04.925 Determination of completeness.
Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of a lot line adjustment application, the Community Development Department shall review all of the materials submitted and determine whether the application is complete or incomplete. If incomplete, the Community Development Department shall send the applicant a letter identifying what information is required to make the application complete. If the City determines that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the City. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit additional information or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review. Within five (5) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the City shall again make the completeness determination and shall notify the applicant in the same manner. If the lot line adjustment application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Department shall accept the application and note the date of acceptance. The time period for review of the lot line adjustment begins following the determination of a complete application and acceptance of the application by the City.
18.04.930 Vesting.
A proposed relocation of a lot boundary line shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that an application for a lot line adjustment as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the City of Ephrata, pursuant to EMC 18.04.925.
18.04.940 Approval criteria.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 114 of 126
A proposed lot line adjustment shall not be approved unless the City finds that:
1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:
a. Setbacks from existing buildings to proposed new property lines;
b. Existing and proposed utilities and utility easements;
c. Existing and proposed access to the parcels, adjacent streets, and access easements;
d. Lot dimension and area conforming to city code requirements;
e. Location of onsite parking, landscaping and other significant site features affected by the proposed new property lines;
f. The public health, safety, and general welfare of the community;
g. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands and habitat;
2. The City has considered all other relevant facts;
3. The public use and interest will be served by the adjustment of such property lines; and
4. The lot line adjustment is consistent with the principles of acceptability per EMC 18.04.920.
18.04.945 Decision on lot line adjustments.
A. The Community Development Department will review and approve the proposed lot line adjustment after receiving a complete application and providing an opportunity for comment from other city departments and affected agencies when applicable. The Community Development Director may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application for a lot line adjustment. If approved, all copies of the lot line adjustment map shall be stamped “approved” and signed and dated by the Community Development Director. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision. Additional copies of the approval notification and map shall be distributed to the Grant County Assessor’s office and kept on file in the Community Development Department.
B. If modifications are deemed necessary by the Community Development Director, they may be added to the original lot line adjustment map or a revised map may be required. The applicant will be notified of the requirements for any such modification action. If a modification of the original lot line adjustment map, legal description or other information is necessary, the projected approval date may be extended.
C. If denied, the lot line adjustment shall be marked “denied” and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision, stating the reasons.
18.04.950 Appeal of decision on lot line adjustments.
The decision of the Community Development Director shall be final, unless an appeal is made by a party of record to the City Council within fourteen (14) calendar days after the written decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be processed pursuant to Ch. 17.01 EMC. The decision of the City
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 115 of 126
Council shall represent final action of the City and is appealable only to superior court.
18.04.955 Appeal to superior court.
The decision of the City Council is final, unless appealed to the superior court. Such an appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued.
18.04.960 Recording lot line adjustments.
A lot line adjustment does not become effective until it and the appropriate deeds defining the full and complete legal description of the new boundaries of the adjusted lots are recorded with the Grant County Auditor’s office. The Applicant shall submit the approved map and new legal descriptions to Grant County for recording. The Applicant shall return a copy of the recorded documents to the City. The recording of a lot line adjustment does not constitute a transfer of title. If the title to an area of land is changing ownership, separate deeds to this effect must be recorded with the Grant County Auditor’s office.
(Ord. 06-13, 2006)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 116 of 126
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTIONS:
18.29.010 Conformance Required
18.29.020 Alignment of Major Streets-Conformity
18.29.030 Streets-Relation to Adjoining Street Systems
18.29.040 Minor Streets-Discouragement of Through Traffic
18.29.050 Dead-end Streets
18.29.060 Limited Access Streets-Dedication to Comply with State Definition
18.29.070 Access Strips
18.29.100 Street Jogs--Offsets to be avoided when
18.29.130 Street and Alley Surfacing
18.29.140 Streets Along Subdivision Boundaries
18.29.150 Street Names
18.29.160 Curbs
18.29.170 Alleys-Required when
18.29.180 Alleys-Standards
18.29.190 Easements-Public Utilities
18.29.200 Easements-Unusual Facilities
18.29.240 Lots-Access
18.29.250 Lots-Size
18.29.280 Tree Planting
18.29.300 Disposal of Surface Drainage
18.29.310 Utilities-Sanitary Sewers
18.29.320 Utilities-Water Supply
18.29.330 Utilities-Street Lights
18.29.340 Utilities-Electrical, Telephone and Cable Television
18.29.350 Installation of Street Signs
18.29.360 Capacity for Future Development
18.29.370 Physical Developments and Improvements-Standard Specifications
18.29.380 Monuments
18.29.390 Pedestrian Ways
18.29.010 Conformance Required Each and every new development application shall conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter.
18.29.020 Alignment of Major Streets-Conformity. The alignment of major streets shall conform as nearly as possible with that shown in the Transportation Element of the Ephrata Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Maps.
18.29.030 Streets-Relation to Adjoining Street Systems. The layout of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets existing in adjoining subdivisions or for future projection of streets into areas which presently are not subdivided. Where a parcel or tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the commission may require an arrangement of lots and streets such as to permit a later subdivision in conformity with the street requirements specified in this chapter and the Community Street and Utility Construction Standards of the City of Ephrata.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 117 of 126
18.29.040 Minor Streets-Discouragement of Through Traffic. Minor streets which serve primarily to provide access to abutting property only shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
18.29.050 Dead-end streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed or in the form of a cul-de-sac shall be no longer than six hundred 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum roadway radius of not less than forty-five 45 feet or with a "Y" or “T" permitting comparable ease of turning. Where deemed necessary, a fire lane of a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width and a pedestrian way of a minimum of ten feet (10') in width may be required. Temporary dead end streets shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac with appropriate easement for continuation.
18.29.060 Limited Access Streets-Dedication to Comply with State Definition. Streets which are designated in the comprehensive plan as "limited access" shall be dedicated in such a manner as to qualify them as "limited access facilities", such as are defined in Chapter 47.52 of the Revised Code of Washington, but nothing shall prohibit the construction, operation, and maintenance of the public utilities in the right-of-way of a limited access facility.
18.29.070 Access Strips. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the council. The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot, by means of a public street, with satisfactory access to an existing public highway.
18.29.100 Street Jogs-Offsets to be Avoided When. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five 125 feet shall be avoided.
18.29.130 Street and Alley Surfacing. All street and alley surfacing will meet the current City of Ephrata Community Street and Utility Standards.
18.29.140 Streets Along Subdivision Boundaries. A street lying along the boundary of a subdivision will be dedicated and completed to its full width.
18.29.150 Street Names. Streets that are obviously in alignment with other streets already existing and named shall bear names of the existing streets. Other streets shall not bear names that duplicate or phonetically approximate the name of existing streets. Insofar as possible, a new street shall preserve and continue any alphabetical or numerical sequence and type of name already established in nearby subdivisions.
18.29.160 Curbs. All streets shall be improved at edge of the paved roadway with concrete curbs meeting the Community Street and Utility Standards as currently adopted. Such curbs shall be similar in design and construction to concrete curbs adopted as standard for the city unless special conditions warrant the waiver of this requirement by the city council.
18.29.170 Alleys-Required When. Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots intended for business or industrial uses, except that this
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 118 of 126
requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with, and adequate for, the uses proposed. Alleys may or may not be provided in residential areas.
18.29.180 Alleys-Standards Dead-end alleys shall be avoided wherever possible but, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end. Alley intersections and sharp changes in direction shall be avoided, but, where they are necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. Alley right-of-way width shall be not less than twenty-five 25 feet in commercial or industrial zones, and twenty 20 feet in residential zones. Except as otherwise provided in this title, alleys shall follow the general standards as provided in the Community Street and Utility Standards.
18.29.190 Easements-Public Utilities Utility easements will be permitted in lieu of alleys for property not adjacent to arterials in residential areas. Fire hydrants and water mains located in easements (such as an alley) which cross a street between easements, shall provide valving at each right-of-way crossing. The termination or end of the sewer main shall be located in the right-of-way crossing, and a manhole shall be provided at the terminus point. An access easement ten feet (10') wide shall be located from right-of-way to utility easement at each manhole location within the block. The width of utility easements shall be determined by the Public Works Director.
18.29.200 Easements-Unusual Facilities. Easements for unusual facilities, such as high-voltage electric lines, irrigation canals and ponding areas, shall be of such width as is adequate for the intended purpose, including any necessary maintenance roads.
18.29.240 Lots-Access Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access by means of a public street connecting to an existing public highway or by some other legally sufficient right of access which is permanent and inseparable from the lot served.
18.29.250 Lots-Size Lot widths and lot areas shall conform with the zoning restrictions that are applicable to the area. Except that corner lots for which side yards are required shall have extra width to permit appropriate setback from and orientation to both streets. Lot depths shall be suitable for the land use proposed.
18.29.280 Tree Planting Street tree planting plans in duplicate must be submitted to the Planning Commission and receive its approval before planting is begun. Care of any trees that are planted by the subdivider will be the responsibility of the adjacent landowner.
18.29.300 Disposal of Surface Drainage. Surface drainage from streets and other areas shall be disposed of through an adequate system of gutters and storm sewers (dry wells may be accepted upon prior approval from the City’s Public Works Director).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 119 of 126
18.29.310 Utilities-Sanitary Sewers All subdivisions shall be required to connect to the city sanitary sewer system. If adequate grade is not available to the city sanitary sewer system, a sewage lift station or transfer station of a design acceptable to the city Public Works Director will be required. The subdivision shall be provided with a complete sanitary sewer serving each lot designed for human habitation. Design of sewage disposal system shall be in accordance with Washington Pollution Control Commission requirements, State Department of Ecology or State Department of Health, or any other agency that the Public Works Director deems necessary.
18.29.320 Utilities-Water Supply The source of water for domestic use and fire protection shall be the city system. The subdivider shall provide and install water mains, together with fire hydrants and all necessary fittings, to bring water within convenient connection distance to all lots in the subdivision. The size and kind of pipe and fittings, the manner of installation, and the installation itself, whether by the water department or by the subdivider under the supervision of the water department of the city shall follow the City of Ephrata construction standards and water system plan. If, in the opinion of the water department, it is desired to install water mains and fittings of a size larger than adequate for domestic use and fire protection of the subdivision in question, the additional expense incurred may be borne by the city water department.
Design of the water system shall be in accordance with the Grant County Health Department, the City Water System Plan, the State Department of Health and the State Department of Ecology requirements and standards.
18.29.330 Utilities-Street Lights All new subdivisions shall be required to allow for and install street lighting circuitry in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by the Grant County Public Utility District and approved by the Public Works Director.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, in conjunction with the Grant County PUD, to provide circuitry for all required street lighting to be located in the proposed subdivision.
B. The Grant County PUD shall prepare a street lighting plan for the new subdivision. All plans and specifications must be approved by the Public Works Director prior to installation of said lighting circuitry.
C. Alternative (decorative) street lighting must be approved by the City Council. All costs for the purchase, placement and maintenance shall be borne by the subdivider.
18.29.340 Utilities--Electrical, Telephone, and Cable Television. All subdivisions shall conform to standards set forth by the local authority governing electrical, telephone and cable television utilities.
18.29.350 Installation of Street Signs Street signs corresponding in design to those adopted as standard for the City shall be installed at each intersection for convenient identification of streets.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 120 of 126
Any other regulatory signs that the Public Works Director deems necessary, such as fire lane marking, dead ends, no parking, and similar signs, will also be installed by the developer or owner at his expense.
18.29.360 Capacity for Future Development The capacities and dimension of water, sewer, drainage and street facilities shall be adequate to provide for the future needs of other undeveloped properties in the general vicinity, and the city may share in the cost of these improvements to the extent of the difference in cost between the capacities needed to serve the subdivision and the capacities required to serve the vicinity. (see City Policy #6020).
18.29.370 Physical Developments and Improvements–Standard Specifications Physical developments and improvements required by this title shall be designed and installed in accordance with applicable construction standards of the city. Construction shall be performed under the supervision of the Public Works Director or his/her designee. As built drawings will be given to the city upon completion of all improvements.
18.29.380 Monuments
Monuments shall be installed as follows:
A. Monuments shall be installed to the currently adopted Community Street and Utility Standards and shall be set at the centerlines of all streets at intersections, all boundary angle points of curves on street centerlines, all points of curvature and points of tangent in street centerlines, at the radial points of any cul-de-sac, at all external corners and block corners of the subdivision and at such intermediate points as required by the City Engineer/Public Works Director.
B. The corners of all lots within the subdivision shall be marked by iron pins with surveyor caps, not less than three-fourths of an inch in diameter, and twenty-four inches in length, firmly driven for their full length into the ground.
C. Monuments shall be constructed to follow the Community Street and Utility Standards. If a monument is placed in an open field or unpaved street, the land surveyor shall place an iron pin in the center of the concrete or tile pipe.
(Ord. 16-11, 2016)
18.29.390 Pedestrian Ways Paved crosswalks or pedestrian ways may be required, when essential to provide circulation or access to schools between right-of-ways, playgrounds, shopping centers, etc., the right-of-way of which shall be at least ten (10’) feet in width.
(Ord. 11-23, 2011)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 121 of 126
CHAPTER 18.33
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTIONS:
18.33.010 Procedure for Installing Improvements
18.33.015 Definitions
18.33.030 Water Mains
18.33.040 Sewer Mains
18.33.050 Drainage
18.33.060 Streets
18.33,070 Alleys
18.33.080 Sidewalks
18.33.100 Conformity
18.33.110 Arterials
18.33.120 New Utilities
18.33.130 Bicycle Paths
18.33.135 Complete Streets
18.33.140 Special Improvements
18.33.010 Procedure for Installing Improvements: The Subdivider shall use the City’s Community Street and Utility Standards and American Public Works Association (A.P.W.A.) Standards. Also, comprehensive plans for the orderly development of the city's utilities and streets will be available to guide in preparation of preliminary plats and specifications. The city’s engineer or public works director may require a soil test to insure adequate base designs for streets, retaining walls, utilities, and structures within the subdivision.
18.33.015 Definitions:
Complete street – means a road that is designed to be safe for drivers; bicyclists; transit vehicles and users; and pedestrians of all ages and abilities. The complete streets concept focuses not just on individual roads but on changing the decision-making process so that all users are routinely considered during the planning, designing, building and operating of all roadways.
18.33.030 Water Mains:
A. The subdivider shall install water mains as shown on drawings after approval by the City Public Works Director. The City shall supervise connections by the Utility Contractor. The subdivider or his contractor shall reimburse the city for fees as required in the city’s Construction and Utility Standards in testing mains and supervising connections as required.
B. Fire hydrants shall be located per the Water System Plan and the International Fire Code.
C. When a subdivider is required to install a water main through or adjacent to property other than his proposed subdivision, he shall be required to install fire hydrants per the Water System Plan and the International Fire Code.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 122 of 126
18.33.040 Sewer Mains:
A. Sewer mains shall be installed by the subdivider or his contractor as shown on drawings as approved by the City Public Works Director. Sewer mains, manholes, and lift stations and force mains when required shall be installed in all subdivisions prior to any water service being connected to any improvements.
B. Should the subdivider be required to install sewer mains larger than eight inches (8") in diameter or lift stations and force mains larger than his subdivision requires to implement the development of the Comprehensive Plan, the city may mitigate the installation of the required sewer facilities and reimburse the subdivider for the additional costs for the larger facilities. If bids are required, a percentage of cost will be determined prior to bid award1.
C. Should the subdivider or his contractor be required to install sewer mains to a depth deeper than required for his development to service undeveloped land adjacent to his development, the city may reimburse the subdivider for the additional cost for the deeper installation1.
1 Materials only.
18.33.050 Drainage:
A. All drainage in and through the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
B. The subdivider may divert or enclose the natural drainage system after approval by the City Engineer/Public Works Director. The subdivider shall bear all costs associated with diverting or enclosing natural drainage.
C. All drainage in right-of-ways must be in underground pipes and culverts, except where permitted in gutters.
D. Drainage design and construction shall meet current Community Street and Utility Standards.
E. Should the subdivider be required to install street drainage facilities which are over and above the subdivision requirements to implement the development of the Comprehensive Plan, the city may negotiate the installation of the required drainage facilities and reimburse the subdivider for the additional cost for the larger facilities. If bids are required, a percentage of cost will be determined prior to bid award2.
2 Materials only.
18.33.060 Streets:
A. Excavation of all streets shall be to full width of the right-of-way. Retaining walls may be required in areas
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 123 of 126
exceeding three feet (3') in cut or fill.
B. Street area shall be graveled with crushed aggregate as shown on approved plans.
C. Curbs shall be installed in accordance with Community Street and Utility Standards.
D. Streets shall be paved with an approved asphalt mix or a Portland cement concrete as approved by the City Engineer/Public Works Director.
18.33.70 Alleys:
A. Alleys shall be paved in conformance with the Community Street and Utility Standards.
18.33.80 Sidewalks:
A. Sidewalks shall be required in all zones and where shown on the Community Pedestrian Link Plan. They shall be constructed as required in the Community Street and Utility Standards. Sidewalks shall be located adjacent to the curb. Sidewalks shall be constructed so as to avoid physical obstructions unless the City Council has previously approved the placement of physical obstructions such as but not limited to light poles, fire hydrants, planter boxes, trees, or tree wells in or on the area reserved for sidewalks. Sidewalk shall be constructed so as to avoid placement over water, gas, sewer, or other utility lines.
B. Sidewalk widths in the Central Business District Zone (C-1) shall be full dimension, meaning that all area between the back of the curb and the abutting property lines shall be constructed in conformance with the Community Street and Utility Standards describing sidewalk construction. See City Construction Standards for decorative concrete areas.
C. All sidewalk requirements shall be completed prior to an occupancy permit being granted for any new building.
18.33.100 Conformity:
A. Sidewalks and/or trails, where shown on the Community Pedestrian Link Plan shall be required on all dedicated street rights-of-way in all new subdivisions. All improvements shall be constructed in conformance with the Community Street and Utility Standards and shall be made from intersection to intersection, intersection to subdivision boundary, or from subdivision boundary to subdivision boundary unless the Council has previously approved a variation in conformity.
B. On streets where a proposed subdivision adjoins an existing subdivision or existing street dedication in mid-block and the existing subdivision or existing street dedication is unpaved, the subdivider shall be responsible for installing paving, curbs, and sidewalks and trails on that portion of the street right-of-way on the existing subdivision or existing street dedication.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 124 of 126
18.33.110 Arterials: Should the subdivider be required to construct or reconstruct a community arterial within a proposed subdivision and if that community arterial is designed to serve areas of the city other than just the proposed subdivision, the city may participate in the cost of construction. The City Council shall approve the percentage of participation prior to bonding or bid award for community arterial construction.
A. The city's maximum participation will only be for the required extra width and construction materials which are over and above the thirty-three feet (33') of pavement width required of a residential street.
B. In a residential subdivision containing lots which front on a residential street and have an arterial street parallel to the residential street and adjacent to the back lot line, those lots shall be defined as through lots. The city's maximum participation shall be fifty percent (50%) of the sidewalk construction costs along the arterial on all through lots.
C. In no event should this ordinance be construed to establish an affirmative obligation upon the city to participate, or to participate in any fixed percentage in any project. The city's participation shall be limited by the funds available, and priority of projects throughout the city.
18.31.120 New Utilities: Where telephone, electric and cablevision utilities are not existing in a proposed subdivision and additional utility construction is required, all new utility construction shall be underground improvements.
18.33.130 Bicycle Paths: The subdivider shall be required to provide bicycle paths for suitable and safe bicycle traffic where the city's Comprehensive Plan requires bicycle paths or lanes within the boundaries of the subdivision.
18.33.135 Complete Streets: Generally
A. The City of Ephrata will plan for, design and construct all new transportation projects to provide appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users and persons of all abilities in comprehensive and connected network with the following exceptions:
1. Where their establishment would be contrary to public health and safety; or
2. Where there is no identified long-term need; or
3. Where there are significant adverse environmental impacts to streams, wetlands, steep slopes, or other critical areas; or
4. Where there are significant adverse impacts on neighboring land uses, including impacts from right-of-way acquisition; or
5. Where the Public Works Director grants a documented exception which may only be authorized in specific situations where conditions warrant. Such site specific exceptions shall not constitute general changes to the standards set in the Ephrata Community Street and Utility Standards.
B. Except in unusual or extraordinary circumstances, complete streets principles may not apply to the following:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 125 of 126
1. Repairs made pursuant to pavement opening and restoration allowed by approval of the Public Works Director.
2. Ordinary maintenance activities designed to keep assets in serviceable condition (e.g., mowing, cleaning, sweeping, spot repair and surface treatments such as chip seal, or interim measures on detour or haul routes).
C. Complete streets may be achieved through single projects or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or maintenance activities over time. All sources of transportation funding should be drawn upon to implement complete streets. Maximum financial flexibility is important to implement complete streets principles.
D. Street design must provide for the maximum loading conditions anticipated. The width and grade of the pavement must conform to specific standards set forth herein for safety and uniformity.
18.33.140 Special Improvements:
A. The subdivider's land surveyor or engineer shall submit all specifications or contract documents to be used in construction of all improvements within easement and right-of-way of the proposed plat. A maintenance bond as required by the city and approved by the city Attorney shall be included with contract document.
B. The City Engineer/Public Works Director shall approve all street design, alignment, vertical curves, horizontal curves, water design, sewer disposal methods, storm drains, and traffic control required.
(Ord. 11-23, 2011)(Ord. 16-12, 2016)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE SUBDIVISIONS
Page 126 of 126
CHAPTER 18.36 REIMBURSEMENT FOR UTILITY INSTALLATIONS
Sections:
18.36.010 Installation of Utilities Required
18.36.020 General Reimbursement Procedure
18.36.030 Subdivider's Requirements
18.36.040 Subdivided and Undeveloped Areas
18.36.050 Reimbursement Time Limit
18.36.010 Installation of Utilities Required: The final subdivision plat requirements of the city provide that water mains, sewer mains and storm drains must be installed at the expense of the subdivider. In connection with the installation of water mains, sewer mains, and storm drains, the subdivider is required to extend existing utilities to the property being subdivided. Extensions of water mains, sewer mains, and storm drains may be required to be extended through, or adjacent to, real estate owned by third parties.
18.36.020 General Reimbursement Procedure: The following sections establish the reimbursement procedure for connections to water mains, sewer mains, and storm drains which have been paid for by other subdivider.
18.36.030 Subdivider's Requirements: Where the subdivider is required to install utilities through or adjacent to property undeveloped or not subdivided and owned by others, a written statement requesting future reimbursement for improvements and a certified copy of costs shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk will then define the total area subject to reimbursement fees and will establish a front foot or square foot cost to be paid to the subdivider prior to any future building, subdividing or other improvements on property abutting the subdivider installed utilities.
18.36.040 Subdivided and Undeveloped Areas:
A. Sewer side lateral connections and water connections and water service connections shall be denied a subdivider, builder, or owner to existing water mains, sewer mains, or storm drain extensions when those extensions are through or adjacent to subdivided or undeveloped areas until the subdivider, builder, or owner files with the City Clerk a written acknowledgment from the original installer or his successor in interest, stating that satisfactory arrangements have been made for reimbursement of that portion of the water main, sewer main, or storm drain extension which extends through, or is adjacent to, the property to be served and for which request is made for hook up and connection.
B. A plat shall not be considered for final approval until satisfactory reimbursement has been acknowledged by the original installer for existing water mains, sewer mains, and storm drain extensions required as a part of an existing subdivision or development.
18.36.050 Reimbursement Time Limit: The city will limit all water service connections and sewer side lateral connections to subdivider installed lines for a period of fifteen (15) years from date of acceptance. Should the City Clerk be unable to locate the subdivider by registered or certified mail prior to fifteen (15) year limitation then all connections to subdivider lines shall be released.
(Ord. 11-23, 2011)(Ord. 16-13, 2016)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 1
Title 19
ZONING
Chapters:
19.01 Short Title and Purpose
19.02 Definitions
19.03 Districts Established – Zoning Map
19.04 District Regulations
19.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
19.06 Sign Regulations
19.07 Landscaping Regulations
19.08 General and Supplementary Provisions
19.09 Administration
19.10 Enforcement
19.11 Flood Damage Prevention
19.12 Hearing Examiner
19.13 Fences and Walls
19.14 Planned Unit Development
19.15 Recreational Vehicle Parks
19.16 Manufactured Housing Communities
19.17 Marijuana Regulations
19.22 Sidewalk Construction and Improvement Standards
19.30 Cryptocurrency Mining
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 2
Chapter 19.01 SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE
Sections:
19.01.010 Short title.
19.01.020 Purpose of zoning code.
19.01.010 Short title.
This title shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Code, City of Ephrata.”
19.01.020 Purpose of zoning code.
A. In adopting this title, the city recognizes that there is a continuing need to regulate the use of land to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 3
Chapter 19.02 DEFINITIONS
Sections:
19.02.001 Rules of construction.
19.02.002 Applicability.
19.02.003 Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
19.02.004 Accessory living quarters.
19.02.005 Accessory use or structure.
19.02.006 Adult entertainment.
19.02.007 Adult entertainment business.
19.02.008 Adult uses.
19.02.009 Adult entertainment material.
19.02.010 Agricultural use.
19.02.015 Alley.
19.02.016 Alteration.
19.02.017 Appeal.
19.02.018 Area of Shallow Flooding.
19.02.019 Area of Special Flood Hazard.
19.02.020 Apartment.
19.02.023 Attached Dwelling
19.02.027 Automobile body repair.
19.02.028 Automobile detailing.
19.02.030 Automobile repair.
19.02.035 Automobile service station or gasoline filling station.
19.02.040 Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking.
19.02.045 Basement.
19.02.046 Base Flood.
19.02.047 Battery Charging Station.
19.02.048 Battery Exchange Station.
19.02.050 Bed and Breakfast Homestay.
19.02.055 Boarding or lodging home.
19.02.056 Breakaway Wall.
19.02.060 Building.
19.02.065 Building height.
19.02.067 Bulk retail uses.
19.02.070 Canopy.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 4
19.02.071 Cargo containers.
19.02.072 Charging levels.
19.02.073 Clustering or cluster subdivision.
19.02.075 Comprehensive plan.
19.02.080 Combining district.
19.02.085 Common open space.
19.02.086 Community Development Director.
19.02.088 Congregate care facilities.
19.02.089 Convalescent home.
19.02.090 Conditional use.
19.02.091 Condominium.
19.02.092 Critical Facility.
19.02.095 Crop and tree farming.
19.02.096 Density, maximum permitted.
19.02.097 Dangerous wastes.
19.02.098 Day-care center.
19.02.099 Day-care Family home.
19.02.100 Day-care operation.
19.02.101 Designated manufactured home.
19.02.102 Designated zone facility.
19.02.103 Detached Dwelling
19.02.104 Development Plan
19.02.105 Development.
19.02.106 Development Standard.
19.02.107 Discontinuance.
19.02.108 Discontinuance – conforming.
19.02.110 District.
19.02.111 Dock-high loading areas.
19.02.112 Drainage ditch.
19.02.113 Drip line.
19.02.114 Drive-in, drive-through facilities.
19.02.115 Duplex.
19.02.116 Dwelling, single-family.
19.02.125 Dwelling, multiple-family.
19.02.126 Dwelling unit.
19.02.127 Easement.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 5
19.02.128 Efficiency Apartment.
19.02.129 Electric Vehicle.
19.02.130 Electric vehicle charging station.
19.02.131 Electric vehicle infrastructure.
19.02.132 Equitable distribution.
19.02.133 Erosion hazard areas.
19.02.134 Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision.
19.02.135 Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park Subdivision.
19.02.136 Established Grade.
19.02.137 Extremely hazardous waste.
19.02.138 Family.
19.02.140 Fence, sight-obscuring.
19.02.141 Fence, one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring.
19.02.142 Flood.
19.02.143 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
19.02.144 Flood Insurance Study.
19.02.145 Floodway.
19.02.147 Floor area ratio.
19.02.148 Floor, Lowest
19.02.150 Frontage, building or occupancy.
19.02.155 Garage or carport, private.
19.02.160 General conditional uses.
19.02.165 Grade.
19.02.167 Gross floor area.
19.02.168 Ground cover.
19.02.169 Group home.
19.02.170 Guest cottage/Guesthouse.
19.02.171 Guestroom
19.02.174 Habitable Space (room).
19.02.175 Hazardous substance.
19.02.176 Hazardous substance facility buffer zone.
19.02.177 Hazardous substance land use.
19.02.178 Hazardous substance land use facility.
19.02.179 Hazardous substance, processing or handling of.
19.02.180 Hazardous waste.
19.02.181 Hazardous waste facility.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 6
19.02.182 Hazardous waste storage facility.
19.02.183 Hazardous waste treatment facility.
19.02.184 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, offsite.
19.02.185 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, onsite.
19.02.186 Hearing examiner (land use).
19.02.187 Height of Building.
19.02.190 Home occupation.
19.02.195 Homeowners’ association.
19.02.200 Hotel.
19.02.202 Impervious surface.
19.02.204 Institution.
19.02.205 Interior court.
19.02.210 Junkyard.
19.02.215 Kennel.
19.02.220 Landscaping.
19.02.222 Landslide areas.
19.02.223 Less restrictive alternative.
19.02.225 Lot.
19.02.228 Long term commercial significance.
19.02.230 Lot, corner.
19.02.231 Lot area.
19.02.235 Lot frontage.
19.02.240 Lot lines.
19.02.245 Lot measurements.
19.02.250 Lot of record.
19.02.255 Lot, through.
19.02.257 Major nonconforming building or structure.
19.02.258 Minor nonconforming building or structure.
19.02.259 Mixed use building or structure.
19.02.260 Mixed use development.
19.02.261 Manufactured Home.
19.02.262 Manufactured Housing Community or Subdivision.
19.02.263 Mobile Home.
19.02.264 Mobile home park.
19.02.267 Moderate risk waste.
19.02.268 Modular home.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 7
19.02.269 Motel, including hotel and motor hotel.
19.02.270 Motor vehicle.
19.02.271 Multifamily design review.
19.02.272 Multifamily transition area.
19.02.275 Natural or native areas.
19.02.277 Net acreage.
19.02.278 New Construction Structures.
19.02.279 New Manufactured Housing Community or Subdivision.
19.02.281 New manufactured home.
19.02.282 Nonconforming lot of record.
19.02.283 Nonconforming sign.
19.02.285 Nonconforming use.
19.02.286 Nonconformity.
19.02.287 Non-transient.
19.02.288 Northern lot line.
19.02.289 North-south lot dimension.
19.02.295 Occupancy.
19.02.300 Official map.
19.02.305 Open green area.
19.02.315 Outside storage.
19.02.317 Overlay district.
19.02.318 Owner Occupied.
19.02.320 Parking space or parking stall.
19.02.325 Parking, temporary.
19.02.327 Pedestrian-oriented use.
19.02.330 Performance standards.
19.02.332 Planned unit development.
19.02.333 Preempted facility.
19.02.334 Preschool.
19.02.335 Public area.
19.02.336 Recreational vehicles.
19.02.337 Recreational Vehicle Lot.
19.02.338 Recreational Vehicle Park.
19.02.339 Revegetation.
19.02.340 Recyclables.
19.02.341 Recycling collection and processing center.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 8
19.02.342 Recycling collection station.
19.02.343 Risk potential activity or risk potential facility.
19.02.345 Roadside stand.
19.02.346 Secure community transition facility.
19.02.347 Seismic hazard areas.
19.02.348 Service uses or activities.
19.02.349 Setback, average.
19.02.350 Shopping center.
19.02.351 Short Term Vacation Rental.
19.02.354 Sign.
19.02.355 Sign area.
19.02.360 Sign height.
19.02.365 Sign, abandoned.
19.02.370 Sign, advertising.
19.02.375 Sign, business.
19.02.380 Sign, canopy.
19.02.385 Sign, construction.
19.02.390 Sign, directional or informational.
19.02.395 Sign, flashing.
19.02.400 Sign, freestanding.
19.02.405 Sign, gate or entrance.
19.02.410 Sign, identification.
19.02.415 Sign, illuminated.
19.02.420 Sign, indirectly illuminated.
19.02.425 Sign, institutional.
19.02.430 Sign, off-premises.
19.02.435 Sign, on-premises.
19.02.440 Sign, painted.
19.02.445 Sign, political.
19.02.450 Sign, portable.
19.02.455 Sign, projecting.
19.02.460 Sign, roof.
19.02.465 Sign, rotating.
19.02.470 Sign, subdivision.
19.02.475 Sign, temporary.
19.02.480 Sign, wall.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 9
19.02.485 Sign, window.
19.02.487 Single-family zoning district.
19.02.490 Site coverage.
19.02.495 Slope line.
19.02.496 Solid waste incinerator.
19.02.497 Special life safety measures.
19.02.500 Special use.
19.02.501 Special trees.
19.02.502 Specified anatomical areas.
19.02.503 Specified sexual activities.
19.02.504 Stacking space.
19.02.505 Start of Construction.
19.02.506 Stadium.
19.02.510 Structure.
19.02.515 Story.
19.02.520 Street.
19.02.522 Substantial Damage.
19.02.523 Substantial Improvement.
19.02.524 Townhouse.
19.02.525 Townhouse with ownership interest.
19.02.526 Trade, retail.
19.02.527 Transient.
19.02.528 Transitional housing.
19.02.529 Tree.
19.02.530 Undeveloped land.
19.02.531 Unique and fragile area.
19.02.532 Urban separators.
19.02.533 Use.
19.02.534 Use, change of.
19.02.535 Use, temporary.
19.02.536 Used.
19.02.537 Variance.
19.02.541 Vegetative aid.
19.02.545 Veterinary clinic.
19.02.550 Veterinary hospital.
19.02.552 Water Dependent.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 10
19.02.565 Yards.
19.02.570 Yard, front.
19.02.575 Yard, rear.
19.02.580 Yard, side.
19.02.585 Zoning.
19.02.588 Zoning districts redefined.
19.02.590 Zoning lot.
19.02.595 Zoning permit.
19.02.0955 High Intensity computer operations.
19.02.001 Rules of construction.
For purposes of this title, certain terms or words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. The word shall is mandatory; the word may is permissive.
D. The word used or occupied includes the words “intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.”
E. The word lot includes the words “plot” and “parcel.”
19.02.002 Applicability.
The definitions contained in this chapter are those that are generally used throughout this title; except for those definitions specified in EMC 19.08.035, which are specific to that respective section and chapter.
19.02.003 Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a habitable, non-transient, dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from and on the same lot with a single-family dwelling that provides basic requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
19.02.004 Accessory living quarters.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 11
Accessory living quarters is a single residential dwelling unit within a commercial or manufacturing building which is incidental to the commercial or manufacturing use.
19.02.005 Accessory use or structure.
Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
19.02.006 Adult entertainment.
Adult entertainment means any dance, amusement, show, display, merchandise, material, exhibition, pantomime, modeling, or any other like performance of any type, for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public or advertised for the use or benefit of a member of the public where such is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in this chapter, or the exhibition of “specified sexual activities,” also as defined in this chapter, or in the case of live adult entertainment performances, which emphasizes and seeks to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.
Any patron of an adult entertainment business, as defined in EMC 19.02.007, shall be deemed a member of the public.
19.02.007 Adult entertainment business.
Adult entertainment business means any establishment providing adult entertainment as defined in EMC 19.02.006 including, but not limited to, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult motion picture theater, and exotic dance studio, more specifically defined as follows:
A. Adult arcade means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computer-generated or enhanced pornography, panoram, peep show, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for personal viewing, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which provide materials for individual viewing by patrons on the premises of the business which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
B. Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 12
emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
C. Adult retail establishment means any bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, or other similar commercial establishment, business, service, or portion thereof, which, for money or any other form of consideration, provides as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provision for viewing or use off the premises of adult entertainment material as defined in this chapter. For purposes of this provision, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that thirty (30) percent or more of a business’ stock-in-trade in adult retail material, based on either the dollar value (wholesale or retail) or the number of titles of such material, is significant or substantial.
In determining whether or not the presumption is rebutted, the city administrator may consider the following factors, which are not conclusive:
1. Whether minors are prohibited from access to the premises of the establishment due to the adult entertainment nature of the inventory;
2. Whether the establishment is advertised, marketed, or held out to be an adult merchandising facility;
3. Whether adult entertainment material is an establishment’s primary or one of its principal business purposes; or
4. Whether thirty (30) percent or more of an establishment’s revenue is derived from adult entertainment material.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of adult entertainment materials and still be categorized as an adult retail establishment. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult retail establishment so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified adult entertainment materials.
The city administrator shall have full discretion to give appropriate weight to the factors set forth above as well as other factors considered depending on the particular facts and circumstances of each application.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 13
D. Exotic dance studio, also known as “topless bar” and “adult cabaret,” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, or any premises or facility to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live performances to any member of the public, which performances are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” or which emphasize and seek to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.
19.02.008 Adult uses.
Adult uses means and includes any adult entertainment business as defined by EMC 19.02.007.
19.02.009 Adult entertainment material.
Adult entertainment material means any books, magazines, cards, pictures, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video tapes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or visual representations, CD roms, DVDs, disks, electronic media, or other such media, or instruments, devices, equipment, paraphernalia, toys, novelties, games, clothing or other merchandise or material, which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
19.02.010 Agricultural use.
Agricultural use means land primarily devoted to the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, vegetable, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, or livestock, and that has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.
19.02.015 Alley.
Alley means a public or private way not more than thirty (30) feet wide at the rear or side of property affording only secondary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property.
19.02.016 Alteration.
A movement of the components of a structure which changes its height, width, or depth, the moving of a structure from one location to another, or the moving of internal partitions which affect more than one-third of a single floor.
19.02.017 Appeal.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 14
A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
19.02.018 Area of Shallow Flooding.
A designated AO, or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
19.02.019 Area of Special Flood Hazard.
The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
19.02.020 Apartment.
Apartment means a dwelling unit in a multifamily building.
19.02.023 Attached Dwelling.
Attached Dwelling means a dwelling unit connected to one or more dwellings by common roofs, walls, or floors or a dwelling unit or units attached to garages or other nonresidential uses.
19.02.027 Automobile body repair.
Automobile body repair includes those establishments primarily engaged in furnishing automotive vehicle body work and painting.
19.02.028 Automobile detailing.
Automobile detailing means any scratch and oxidation removal, buffing, interior and exterior washing or shampooing, paint overspray removal, stain removal, non-spray touch up painting, power washing, hand drying, window tinting, road tar removal, polishing, deodorizing of any type of passenger vehicles and trucks. Automobile detailing does not include cleaning of engines or engine parts.
19.02.030 Automobile repair.
Automobile repair includes fixing, incidental body or fender work, painting, upholstering, engine tune-up, adjusting lights or brakes, or supplying and installing replacement parts of or for passenger vehicles and trucks.
19.02.035 Automobile service station or gasoline filling station.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 15
Automobile service station or gasoline filling station means a building or lot having pumps and storage tanks where fuels, oils or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold or offered for sale at retail only, repair service is incidental and no storage or parking space is offered for rent.
19.02.040 Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking.
Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking means the dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
19.02.045 Basement.
Basement means any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
19.02.046 Base Flood.
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood". Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
19.02.047 Battery charging station.
Battery charging station means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW, as amended, and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540, as amended.
19.02.048 Battery exchange station.
Battery exchange station means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.27 RCW, as amended, and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540, as amended.
19.02.050 Bed and Breakfast.
Bed and Breakfast means a private owner occupied residence with one or two guestrooms maximum for transient occupancy. The bed and breakfast is subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. Owner shall reside on site during guest stay. There shall be a maximum occupancy load of ten occupants/persons within the dwelling unit, which includes the owner and family, and two guests maximum per guestroom. Guestroom occupancy may include additional children under the age of six. Meals may be provided to guests only but are not required. The property owner shall obtain a city business license prior to operation of the Bed and Breakfast.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 16
19.02.055 Boarding or lodging home.
Boarding or lodging home means a non-transient dwelling or part thereof, other than a motel or hotel, where lodging, with or without meals, is provided, for compensation, for not more than three (3) persons.
19.02.056 Breakaway Wall.
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
19.02.060 Building. Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
19.02.065 Building height. Building height means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
19.02.067 Bulk retail uses.
Bulk retail uses are distinguished from other retail uses in that they typically combine retail sales with warehouse and storage of goods. These uses generally require large, high-ceiling buildings since they store large quantities of inventory on site. They also require large sites since adequate parking is essential.
19.02.070 Canopy. Canopy means a roof like projection.
19.02.071 Cargo containers. Cargo containers means standardized, reusable vessels, designed without an axle or wheels, which were:
1. Originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities; and/or
2. Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car; and/or
3. Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 17
When used for any purpose other than those listed in subsection (1) of this section, a cargo container is a structure.
19.02.072 Charging levels.
Charging levels means the electrical force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. Levels 1, 2, and 3 are the most common electric vehicle charging levels, and include the following specifications:
1. Level 1 is considered slow charging requiring a 15-amp or 20-amp breaker on a 120-volt AC circuit and standard outlet.
2. Level 2 is considered medium charging requiring a 40-amp to 100-amp breaker on a 208-volt or 240-volt AC circuit.
3. Level 3 is considered rapid charging requiring a 60-amp or higher dedicated breaker on a 480-volt or higher three-phase circuit with special grounding equipment. Level 3 charging uses an off-board charger to provide the AC to DC conversion, delivering DC directly to the car battery. Also commonly known as “rapid charging station.”
19.02.073 Clustering or cluster subdivision.
Clustering or cluster subdivision means a development or division of land in which residential building lots are reduced in size and concentrated in specified portion(s) of the original lot, tract, or parcel.
19.02.075 Comprehensive plan.
Comprehensive plan means the document, including maps, adopted by the city council which outlines the city’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted subarea plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.
19.02.080 Combining district.
Combining district means district regulations superimposed on an underlying zoning district which impose additional regulations for specific uses, and which are valid for a stipulated time period. Uses permitted by the underlying zone may also be developed.
19.02.085 Common open space.
Common open space means a parcel of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development, and designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of the residents of such development.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 18
19.02.086 Community Development Director.
Community Development Director means the Senior Planner who is the director of the City of Ephrata Planning and Community Development Department or his/her authorized designee.
19.02.088 Congregate care facilities.
Congregate care facilities mean a building or complex of dwellings which provides for shared use of facilities, such as kitchens, dining areas, and recreation areas. Such complexes may also provide kitchens and dining space in individual dwelling units. Practical nursing care may be provided, but not nursing care as described in a convalescent home.
19.02.089 Convalescent home.
Convalescent home means any home, place, institution or facility which provides convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours for three (3) or more patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable to properly care for themselves. Such establishment shall be duly licensed by the state of Washington as a “nursing home” in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.51 RCW.
19.02.090 Conditional use.
Conditional use means a use permitted in a zoning district only after review and approval by the hearing examiner. Conditional uses are such that they may be compatible only on certain conditions in specific locations in a zoning district, or if the site is regulated in a certain manner.
19.02.091 Condominium.
Condominium means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners, and unless a declaration and a survey map and plans have been recorded.
Condominiums must meet all provisions of Chapter 64.34 RCW.
19.02.092 Critical Facility.
A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 19
19.02.095 Crop and tree farming.
Crop and tree farming means the use of land for horticultural purposes.
19.02.0955 High Intensity computer operations.
High Intensity computer operations means the operation of specialized computer equipment with High Density Load (HDL) electricity use, a high Energy Use Intensity (EUI) where the operating square footage as determined by the Utility is above 250kWh/f/hour and with a high load factor in addition to the use of equipment to cool the hardware and operating space. For the purposes of the associated regulations, high intensity computer operations do not include the exchange of cryptocurrency or any other type of virtual currency nor does it encompass the use, creation, or maintenance of all types of peer-to-peer distributed ledgers.
19.02.096 Density, maximum permitted.
Maximum permitted density refers to the maximum number of dwelling units permitted per acre, subject to lot size and other development standards of Ch. 19.04 EMC. When determining the allowed number of units for a subdivision or short subdivision, all site area may be included in the calculation. If calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows: fractions above one-half (1/2) shall be rounded up, fractions of one-half (1/2) and below shall be rounded down.
19.02.097 Dangerous wastes.
Dangerous wastes means those wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as dangerous wastes. This may include any discarded, useless, unwanted or abandoned substances, including but not limited to certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes:
A. Have short-lived toxic properties that may cause death, injury or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic or carcinogenic properties; or
B. Are corrosive, explosive or flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means.
A moderate risk waste is not a dangerous waste.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 20
19.02.0975 Data Center, Server Farm and Clusters.
A network of computer(s) and or server(s) typically used by organizations for the remote storage, processing, or distribution of large amounts of data. This includes the operation of specialized computer equipment for the primary purpose of mining one or more blockchain based cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin. This activity typically involves the solving of algorithms as part of the development and maintenance of a blockchain which is a type of distributed ledger maintained on a peer-to-peer network. Typical physical characteristics of cryptocurrency mining include specialized computer hardware; High Density Load (HDL) electricity use; a high Energy Use Intensity (EUI) where the operating square footage as determined by the Utility is above 250kWh/ft2/year and with a high load factor in addition to the use of equipment to cool the hardware and operating space. For the purposes of the associated regulations, cryptocurrency mining does not include the exchange of crypto currency or any other type of virtual currency nor does it encompass the use, creation, or maintenance of all types of peer-to-peer distributed ledgers.
19.02.098 Day-care center.
Day-care center means a day-care operation with thirteen (13) or more children in attendance at any one (1) time.
19.02.099 Day-care Family home.
Day-care family home means a facility licensed to provide direct care, supervision and early learning opportunities for twelve (12) or fewer children in their home where the licensee resides and is the primary provider or as defined in WAC 170-296-0020.
19.02.100 Day-care operation.
Day-care operation means the temporary care of persons in a residence or structure (meeting the requirements of Chapter 388-148 WAC) for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day on a regular recurring basis for pay or other valuable consideration, including, but not limited to, the furnishing of shelter, sustenance, supervision, education or other supportive services.
19.02.101 Designated manufactured home.
Designated manufactured home means a manufactured home constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with state and federal requirements for manufactured homes, which:
A. Is comprised of at least two (2) fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than twelve (12) feet wide by thirty-six (36) feet long;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 21
B. Was originally constructed with and now has a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal 3:12 pitch; and
C. Has exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built International Building Code single-family residences.
19.02.102 Designated zone facility.
Designated zone facility means any hazardous waste facility that requires an interim or final status permit under rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC, and that is not a preempted facility as defined in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. A hazardous waste treatment or storage facility is a designated zone facility.
19.02.103 Detached Dwelling.
Detached Dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means except fences, has a permanent foundation, and is surrounded by open space or yards. Also called a single family dwelling.
19.02.104 Development plan.
Development plan means a plan drawn to scale, indicating the proposed use, the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location on the lot of the proposed building or alteration, yards, setbacks, landscaping, off-street parking, ingress and egress, and signs.
19.02.105 Development.
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
19.02.106 Development standards.
Development standards means regulations including but not limited to setbacks, landscaping, screening, height, site coverage, signs, building layout, parking and site design and related features of land use.
19.02.107 Discontinuance.
Discontinuance means the abandonment or nonuse of a building, structure, sign or lot meeting the definition of a non-conforming designation for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 22
19.02.108 Discontinuance - conforming.
Discontinuance-conforming means the abandonment or nonuse of a structure for a period of one hundred eighty days. Resumption of conforming operations after 180 days of non use shall require compliance with all then current rules, regulations and standards as adopted.
19.02.110 District.
District means an area designated by this title, with specific boundaries, in which lie specific zones, which zones are described in this title.
19.02.111 Dock-high loading areas.
Dock-high loading areas means truck maneuvering areas and loading or unloading areas associated with loading doors that are located above the finish grade.
19.02.112 Drainage ditch.
Drainage ditch means a manmade channel with a bed, bank or sides which discharges surface waters into or out of a major or minor creek, lake, pond or wetland.
19.02.113 Drip-line.
Drip-line means a circle drawn at the soil line directly under the outermost branches of a tree.
19.02.114 Drive-in, drive-through facilities.
Drive-in, drive-through facilities means a business or portion of a business where a consumer is permitted or encouraged either by the design of physical facilities or by the provisions of services and/or packaging procedures, to carry on business while seated in a motor vehicle. This definition shall include but not be limited to drive-up windows, drive-through banks, and drive-in/drive-through restaurants.
19.02.115 Duplex.
Duplex means one (1) detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units totally separated from each other by a one (1) hour fire wall or floor, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
19.02.116 Dwelling, single-family.
Single-family dwelling means a detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one (1) family only.
19.02.125 Dwelling, multiple-family.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 23
Multiple-family dwelling means a residential building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
19.02.126 Dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure or on the same property, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
19.02.127 Easement
Authorization by a property owner for another to use the owner’s property for a specified purpose.
19.02.128 Efficiency Apartment.
A small, usually furnished apartment with a private bathroom and kitchenette.
19.02.129 Electric vehicle.
Electric vehicle means any vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purpose. “Electric vehicle” includes a battery electric vehicle (BEV), a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV), a neighborhood electric vehicle, and a medium-speed electric vehicle.
19.02.130 Electric vehicle charging station.
Electric vehicle charging station means a public or private parking space located together with a battery charging station which permits the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other storage device in an electric vehicle.
19.02.131 Electric vehicle infrastructure.
Electric vehicle infrastructure means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations.
19.02.132 Equitable distribution.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 24
Equitable distribution means siting or locating secure community transition facilities in a manner that will not cause a disproportionate grouping of similar facilities either in any one (1) city, or in any one (1) jurisdiction or community within a city, as relevant.
19.02.133 Erosion hazard areas.
Erosion hazard areas are defined as follows:
A. Class 1 erosion hazard areas. Class 1 erosion hazard areas means all areas of the city other than class 2 or 3 erosion hazard areas. These areas are areas where no development limitations are deemed necessary, except where described under Ch. 19.04 EMC pertaining to district regulations.
B. Class 2 erosion hazard areas. Class 2 erosion hazard areas means all soils mapped by the Soil Conservation Service as having moderate to severe erosion hazard potential. These soils in the city include Bakeoven, Malaga, Pedigo, Prosser and Scoon soils.
C. Class 3 erosion hazard areas. Class 3 erosion hazard areas means all soils mapped by the Soil Conservation Service as having a severe to very severe erosion hazard potential. These soils in the city include Lickskillet, Outlook, Starbuck and Zen soils.
The Soil Conservation Service maps referenced in this section are on file with the city community development department.
19.02.134 Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
19.02.135 Expansion To An Existing Manufactured Home Park Subdivision
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be or affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
19.02.136 Established Grade
The curb line grade at the front lot lines as established by the City.
19.02.137 Extremely hazardous waste.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 25
Extremely hazardous waste means those wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as extremely hazardous wastes. This may include any dangerous waste which:
A. Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site and which in its persistent form:
1. Presents a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic makeup of man or wildlife; and
2. Is highly toxic to man or wildlife.
B. Is disposed of at a hazardous waste disposal site in such quantities as would present an extreme hazard to man or the environment.
19.02.138 Family.
Family means one (1) or more individuals related by blood or legal familial relationship, or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not be related by blood or a legal familial relationship, living together in a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, excluding class I, class II and III group homes as defined in EMC 19.02.173.
19.02.140 Fence, sight-obscuring.
The minimum for a sight-obscuring fence is a chain-link fence with woven slats in every row or available space of the fence.
19.02.141 Fence, one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring.
One hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence means a fence constructed of solid wood, metal, or other appropriate material which totally conceals the subject use from adjoining uses at six (6) feet above the base of the fence line, at twenty (20) feet from the subject property line.
19.02.142 Flood.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
19.02.143 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
The official map of Ephrata on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to Ephrata.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 26
19.02.144 Flood Insurance Study.
The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
19.02.145 Floodway.
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
19.02.147 Floor area ratio.
Floor area ratio is a measure of development intensity which is determined by dividing gross floor area by lot area.
19.02.148 Floor, Lowest.
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the flood damage prevention ordinance found at Section 19.11.170(B)(1)(b).
19.02.150 Frontage, building or occupancy.
Building or occupancy frontage means the length of that portion of a building or ground floor occupancy which abuts a street, publicly used parking area or mall appurtenant to such building or occupancy, expressed in lineal feet and fractions thereof.
19.02.155 Garage or carport, private.
Private garage or carport means a building, or a portion of a building, principally for vehicular equipment such as automobiles, boats, etc., not more than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area, in which only motor vehicles used by the tenants of the buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
19.02.160 General conditional uses.
General conditional uses means uses described in EMC 19.08.030. Such uses shall be deemed conditional uses in all districts.
19.02.165 Grade.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 27
Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five (5) feet distant from such wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five (5) feet distant from such wall. In case walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way.
19.02.167 Gross floor area.
Gross floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building expressed in square feet and fractions thereof. The floor area of a building not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projections of the roof or floor above.
19.02.168 Ground cover.
Ground cover means low-growing vegetative materials with a mound or spreading manner of growth that provides solid cover within two (2) years after planting. Examples include sod or seed lawn, ivy, junipers, cotoneaster, etc.
19.02.169 Group home.
A. Class I group home. Class I group home means publicly or privately operated residential facilities such as state-licensed foster homes and group homes for children; group homes for individuals who are developmentally, physically, or mentally disabled; group homes or halfway houses for recovering alcoholics and former drug addicts; and other groups not considered within class II or III group homes.
1. Group home, class I-A. A class I-A group home shall have a maximum of seven (7) residents including resident staff.
2. Group home, class I-B. A class I-B group home shall have a maximum of ten (10) residents including resident staff.
3. Group home, class I-C. The number of residents for a class I-C group home will be based upon the density of the underlying zoning district.
B. Class II group home. Class II group home means publicly or privately operated residential facilities for juveniles under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system. These homes include state-licensed group care homes or halfway homes for juveniles which provide residence in lieu of sentencing or incarceration, and halfway houses providing residence to juveniles needing correction or for juveniles selected to participate in state-
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 28
operated work release and pre-release programs. The community development director shall have the discretion to classify a group home proposing to serve juveniles convicted of the offenses listed under class III group home in this section as a group home class III, and any such home shall be sited according to the regulations contained within the group III classification.
1. Group home, class II-A. A class II-A group home shall have a maximum of eight (8) residents including resident staff.
2. Group home, class II-B. A class II-B group home shall have a maximum of twelve (12) residents including resident staff.
3. Group home, class II-C. A class II-C group home shall have a maximum of eighteen (18) residents including resident staff.
C. Class III group home. Class III group home means privately or publicly operated residential facilities for adults under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system who have entered a pre- or post-charging diversion program, or been selected to participate in state-operated work/training release or other similar programs as provided in Chapters 137-56 and 137-57 WAC. Such groups also involve individuals who have been convicted of a violent crime against a person or a crime against property with a sexual motivation and convicted or charged as a sexual or assaultive violent predator. Secure community transition facilities are considered class III group homes. Secure community transition facilities shall have a maximum of three (3) residents, excluding resident staff, unless the state agency proposing to establish and operate the facility can demonstrate that it has equitably distributed other secure community transition facilities with the same or a greater number of residents in other jurisdictions or communities throughout the entire geographic limits of Grant County.
19.02.170 Guest cottage/Guesthouse.
Guest cottage means an accessory, detached dwelling without any kitchen facilities designed for and used to house nonpaying transient visitors or guests of the occupants of the main building.
19.02.171 Guestroom.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 29
Guestroom means any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a maximum of two (2) guests per room, excluding children under the age of six for living or sleeping purposes.
19.02.174 Habitable Space (room).
Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
19.02.175 Hazardous substance.
Hazardous substance means any liquid, solid, gas or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW or in WAC 173-303-090, 173-303-100, 173-303-101, 173-303-102, or 173-303-103.
19.02.176 Hazardous substance facility buffer zone.
Hazardous substance facility buffer zone means a setback area between the hazardous substance land use facility boundary and the nearest point of the hazardous substance land use property line, necessary to provide added protection to adjacent land uses or resources of beneficial use. All hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities must maintain at least a fifty (50) foot buffer zone.
19.02.177 Hazardous substance land use.
Hazardous substance land use means any use which is permitted under this title and which includes a designated zone facility or the processing or handling of a hazardous substance.
19.02.178 Hazardous substance land use facility.
Hazardous substance land use facility means the projected line enclosing the area of all structures and lands on which hazardous substance land use activities occur, have occurred in the past or will occur in the future. This does not include the application of products for agricultural purposes or the use, storage, or handling of hazardous substances used in public water treatment facilities.
19.02.179 Hazardous substance, processing or handling of.
Processing or handling of a hazardous substance means the compounding, treatment, manufacture, synthesis, use or storage of hazardous substances in excess of the following amounts in bulk quantities: five thousand (5,000) pounds of solid hazardous substances, five hundred (500) gallons of liquid hazardous substances, and six hundred fifty (650) cubic feet of gaseous hazardous substances.
19.02.180 Hazardous waste.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 30
Hazardous waste means any dangerous and extremely hazardous waste, including substances composed of radioactive and hazardous components. A moderate risk waste is not a hazardous waste.
19.02.181 Hazardous waste facility.
Hazardous waste facility means the contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land used for recycling, storing, treating, incinerating or disposing of hazardous waste.
19.02.182 Hazardous waste storage facility.
Hazardous waste storage facility means any designated zone facility which holds hazardous waste for a temporary period not to exceed five (5) years; this does not include accumulation of hazardous waste by the generator on the site of generation, as long as the generator complies with the applicable requirements of WAC 173-303-200 and 173-303-201.
19.02.183 Hazardous waste treatment facility.
Hazardous waste treatment facility means any designated zone facility which processes hazardous waste by physical, chemical or biological means to make such waste nonhazardous or less hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume.
19.02.184 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, offsite.
Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facility means any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility which treats or stores wastes that are generated off the site.
19.02.185 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, onsite.
Onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facility means any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility which treats or stores only those wastes that are generated on the site.
19.02.186 Hearing examiner (land use).
Hearing examiner (land use) means a person appointed by the Mayor to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in the city ordinance creating the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact and conclusions on such applications.
19.02.187 Height of Building
The vertical distance at the center of a building’s principal front, measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 31
roofs, or to the center height between eaves and ridges for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. For buildings set back from the street line, the height may be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building.
19.02.190 Home occupation.
Home occupation means any use customarily carried on within a dwelling by the inhabitants thereof which use is incidental to the residential use and not primarily considered as a business and which complies with the conditions of EMC 19.08.040.
19.02.195 Homeowners’ association.
Homeowners’ association means an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (a) each lot owner is automatically a member, and (b) each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the common property, and (c) a charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
19.02.200 Hotel.
Hotel means any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms which are intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
19.02.202 Impervious surface.
Impervious surface means that hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered under natural conditions preexistent to development, or that hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preexistent to development. Common impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, paved walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water.
19.02.204 Institution.
Institution means a civic, religious, or other similar organization, including, but not limited to, an athletic field, hospital, university, religious institution, and community center.
19.02.205 Interior court.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 32
Interior court means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
19.02.210 Junkyard.
Junkyard means a place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and yards for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment.
19.02.215 Kennel.
Kennel means any premises on which four (4) or more dogs which are five (5) months old or older are kept.
19.02.220 Landscaping.
Landscaping means vegetative cover including shrubs, trees, flowers, seeded lawn or sod, ivy and other similar plant material.
19.02.222 Landslide areas.
A. Class 1 landslide areas. Class 1 landslide areas means all areas of the city other than Class 2 or 3 landslide hazard areas. These areas are areas where no development limitations are deemed necessary, except where described under Ch. 19.04 EMC pertaining to district regulations.
B. Class 2 landslide areas. Class 2 landslide areas means areas with slopes of fifteen (15) percent or greater with permeable subsurface material (predominantly sand and gravel) to base level.
C. Class 3 landslide areas. Class 3 landslide hazard areas means those areas subject to a severe risk of landslide, due to the combination of: (a) slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent, and (b) impermeable subsurface material (typically silt and clay) sometimes interbedded with permeable subsurface material (predominantly wet sand and gravel) between the top and base (foot) elevations, and (c) characterized by springs or seeping groundwater during the wet season (November to February). These areas include both active and currently inactive slides.
19.02.223 Less restrictive alternative.
Less restrictive alternative means court-ordered treatment in a setting less restrictive than total confinement which satisfies the conditions set forth in RCW 71.09.092.
19.02.225 Lot.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 33
Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in this title. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record;
B. A portion of a lot of record;
C. A combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or;
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds;
provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title.
19.02.228 Long term commercial significance.
Long term commercial significance includes the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of the land for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land’s proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense uses of the land.
19.02.230 Lot, corner.
Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.
19.02.231 Lot area.
Lot area means the area included within the property lines of a lot, including any easement area.
19.02.235 Lot frontage.
The front of a lot shall be that portion nearest the street or, if the lot does not abut a street, the portion nearest an ingress/egress easement. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be considered the narrowest part of the lot that fronts on a street, except in industrial and commercial zones, in which case the user of a corner lot has the option of determining which part of the lot fronting on a street shall become the lot frontage.
19.02.240 Lot lines.
Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot.
19.02.245 Lot measurements.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 34
A. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
B. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the side lines connecting front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply.
19.02.250 Lot of record.
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county assessor, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
19.02.255 Lot, through.
Through lot means a lot that has both ends fronting on a street. Either end may be considered the front.
19.02.257 Major nonconforming building or structure.
Major nonconforming building or structure means any nonconforming building or structure located on a parcel which at any point borders or is in a residential district and which is not in compliance with the minimum development standards of the district in which it is located.
19.02.258 Minor nonconforming building or structure.
Minor nonconforming building or structure means any nonconforming building or structure which is not a major nonconforming structure and which is not in compliance with the minimum development standards of the district in which it is located.
19.02.259 Mixed use building or structure.
Mixed use building or structure means a building that contains two (2) or more separate and distinct uses permitted in the zoning district where such building is located.
19.02.260 Mixed use development.
Mixed use development shall mean two (2) or more permitted uses or conditional uses developed in conjunction with one another on the same site. Provided that the aforementioned requirements are met, a mixed use development may include two (2) or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 35
more separate buildings. Provided further, that at least twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area, as defined in EMC 19.02.170, be a permitted commercial use. The residential component of any mixed use development cannot be permitted or occupied prior to the (permitting and/or occupancy of) the commercial component.
19.02.261 Manufactured Home.
A single family dwelling constructed after June 15, 1976 and in accordance with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) requirements. For flood plain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicle or other similar vehicles.
19.02.262 Manufactured Housing Community or Subdivision.
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured housing lots for rent or sale.
19.02.263 Mobile home.
A factory built dwelling fabricated prior to June 15, 1976, to standards other than the Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Code, and acceptable under applicable state codes in effect at the time of construction or introduction of the home into the state. Mobile homes have not been built since the introduction of the HUD Manufacture Home Construction and Safety Standards Act. See Manufactured Home. For flood plain management purposes, the term “mobile home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term “mobile home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicle or other similar vehicles.
19.02.264 Mobile home park.
Mobile home park means an area under one (1) ownership designed to accommodate ten (10) or more manufactured homes.
19.02.267 Moderate risk waste.
Moderate risk waste means those wastes defined in WAC 173-303-040 as moderate risk wastes. This may include any waste that exhibits any of the properties of hazardous waste but is exempt from regulation under Chapter 70.105 RCW solely because the waste is generated in quantities below the threshold for regulation, and any household waste which is generated from the disposal of substances identified by the Department of Ecology as hazardous household substances.
19.02.268 Modular home.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 36
Modular home means a single-family dwelling constructed in a factory and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with applicable provisions of the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, and shall bear the appropriate insignia indicating compliance with those codes. This definition includes “prefabricated,” “panelized,” and “factory built” units.
19.02.269 Motel, including hotel and motor hotel.
Motel, including hotel and motor hotel, means a building or group of buildings comprising individual sleeping or living units for the accommodation of transient guests for compensation.
19.02.270 Motor vehicle.
Motor vehicle means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, or any other vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state, but does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.
19.02.271 Multifamily design review.
Multifamily design review means an administrative process for the purpose of reviewing multifamily development applications for compliance with specific site design, landscape design and building design criteria.
19.02.272 Multifamily transition area.
A multifamily transition area is any portion of an R-2, R-4, R-5 or C-2 low density, medium density or high density multifamily residential district situated within one hundred (100) feet of a single-family district or within one hundred (100) feet of a public street right-of-way. Specifically excluded from this definition is property abutting a right-of-way that will never be developed into a public street as determined by the city public works director, an does not otherwise qualify as a multifamily transition area.
19.02.275 Natural or native areas.
Natural or native areas means all or portions of a parcel of land undisturbed by development and maintained in a manner which preserves the indigenous plant materials.
19.02.277 Net acreage.
Net acreage means the buildable area after the area of street rights-of-way has been subtracted.
19.02.278 New Construction Structures.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 37
Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the date of this ordinance.
19.02.279 New Manufactured Housing Community or Subdivision.
A manufactured housing community or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured housing units are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the flood damage prevention ordinance.
19.02.281 New manufactured home.
New manufactured home means any manufactured home required to be titled under RCW Title 46, which has not been previously titled to a retail purchaser, and is not a “used mobile home” as defined in RCW 82.45.032(2).
19.02.282 Nonconforming lot of record.
Nonconforming lot of record means any validly recorded lot which at the time it was recorded fully complied with the applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply with the lot requirements of this title.
19.02.283 Nonconforming sign.
Nonconforming sign means any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.
19.02.285 Nonconforming use.
Nonconforming use means the use of land, a building or a structure lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located on the effective date of such use regulations.
19.02.286 Nonconformity.
Nonconformity means any land use, structure, lot of record or sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.
19.02.287 Non-transient.
Non-transient means any unit, group of units, dwelling, building, or group of buildings within a single complex of buildings which is rented to residents for periods of at least 30 days or 1 calendar month, whichever is less, or which is advertised or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to residents for periods of at least 30 days or 1 calendar month.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 38
19.02.288 Northern lot line.
Northern lot line means a lot line or lines less than forty-five (45) degrees southeast or southwest of a line drawn east-west and intersecting the northernmost point of the lot. If the northern lot line adjoins any unbuildable area (e.g., streets, alleys, public rights-of-way, parking lots, common areas) other than a required yard area, the northern lot line shall be that portion of the northerly edge of the unbuildable area which is due north from the actual northern lot line of the applicant’s property.
19.02.289 North-south lot dimension.
North-south lot dimension means the average distance between lines from the corners of the northern lot line south to a line drawn east-west and intersecting the southernmost point of the lot.
19.02.295 Occupancy.
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
19.02.300 Official map.
Official map means maps showing the designation, location and boundaries of the various districts which have been adopted and made a part of this title.
19.02.305 Open green area.
Open green area means landscaped areas and areas of natural or native vegetation.
19.02.315 Outside storage.
Outside storage means all or part of a lot which is used for the keeping of materials or products in an open, uncovered yard or in an unwalled building. Such materials shall not be for general public consumption or viewing. Such materials shall include tractors, backhoes, heavy equipment, construction materials and other similar items which detract from the appearance of the zone in which they are located.
19.02.317 Overlay district.
Overlay district means a defined geographic area where a set of development regulations are established to achieve a specific public purpose. These regulations are in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. Where a conflict exists between the regulations of the overlay district and the underlying zoning, the regulations of the overlay district shall apply.
19.02.318 Owner occupied
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 39
Owner occupied is defined as the property owner as reflected in title records, who makes his or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle registration, or similar means, and actually resides at the site more than six months out of any given year.
19.02.320 Parking space or parking stall.
Parking space or parking stall is any off-street space intended for the use of vehicular parking, with ingress or egress to the space easily identifiable.
19.02.325 Parking, temporary.
Temporary Parking means parking facilities specifically designed to accommodate not less than fifty-one (51) vehicles and intended for public use for a period of not more than five (5) years, subject to annual maintenance review by the public works department. Temporary parking shall not be in lieu of specified off-street parking as required in EMC Chapter 19.05 pertaining to off-street parking and loading requirements. See page 116.
19.02.327 Pedestrian-oriented use.
Pedestrian-oriented use means a commercial use whose customers commonly arrive on foot, or where signage, advertising, window display and entry ways are oriented toward pedestrian traffic on a public sidewalk. Pedestrian-oriented businesses may include restaurants, retail shops, personal service businesses, travel services, banks, (except drive-through windows), and similar establishments.
19.02.330 Performance standards.
Performance standards means regulations for the control of dangerous or objectionable elements, as defined in EMC 19.08.050(A).
19.02.332 Planned unit development.
Planned unit development is a development built under those provisions of this title which permit departures from the conventional siting, setback and density requirements of other sections of this title in the interest of achieving superior site development, creating open space and encouraging imaginative design by permitting design flexibility.
19.02.333 Preempted facility.
Preempted facility means any hazardous waste facility defined as a preempted facility in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. This may include any facility that includes as a significant part of its activities any of the following hazardous waste operations: (a)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 40
landfill, (b) incineration, (c) land treatment, (d) surface impoundment to be closed as a landfill, or (e) waste pile to be closed as a landfill.
19.02.334 Preschool.
Preschool means establishments providing exclusively educational programs for prekindergarten or preschool children, but excluding day-care uses as defined in EMC 19.02.100.
19.02.335 Public area.
Public area means public or private roadways, pedestrian paths, parks, open spaces, or other common spaces.
19.02.336 Recreational vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles mean motorized vehicles that include a cabin for living accommodations and are commonly used for recreational travel and touring. Vehicles included in this category come in several forms: travel trailers, tent trailers, and camping trailers, all of which must be towed by a car; and truck campers, motor homes, and camper vans, all of which have the motor within the body of the vehicle.
B. Recreational vehicles may also include any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, boat, boat trailer, or other vehicle to be used for recreational purposes.
19.02.337 Recreational Vehicle Lot.
Recreational Vehicle Lot means a designated portion of an RV park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle and its accessory structures.
19.02.338 Recreational Vehicle Park.
Recreation vehicle park means a lot or portion of a lot designed for exclusive occupancy by recreational vehicles.
19.02.339 Revegetation.
Revegetation means the planting of vegetation to cover any land areas which have been disturbed during construction. This vegetation shall be maintained to ensure its survival and shall be consistent with planting requirements of the city landscape regulations as set out in Ch. 19.07 EMC.
19.02.340 Recyclables:
Recyclables means newspaper, uncoated mixed paper, aluminum, glass and metal food and beverage containers, polyethylene terepthalate (PET #1) plastic bottles, high density
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 41
polyethylene (HDPE #2) plastic bottles, and such other materials that the City and contractor determine to be recyclable.
19.02.341 Recycling collection and processing center:
Recycling collection and processing center means a facility where collected recyclable items are brought for sorting, compaction, transfer, and/or processing including changing the form of materials.
19.02.342 Recycling collection station:
Recycling collection station means a container or containers for the collection of secondhand goods and recyclable materials.
19.02.343 Risk potential activity or risk potential facility.
Risk potential activity or risk potential facility means an activity or facility that provides a higher incidence of risk to the public from persons conditionally released from the special commitment center. Risk potential activities and facilities include: public and private schools, school bus stops, licensed day care and licensed preschool facilities, public parks, publicly dedicated trails, sports fields, playgrounds, recreational and community centers, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques or other religious facilities and places of worship, public libraries, and others identified by the department following the hearings on a potential site required in RCW 71.09.315. The term school bus stops does not include bus stops established primarily for public transit.
19.02.345 Roadside stand. Roadside stand means a temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural products primarily produced on the premises upon which such a stand is located.
19.02.346 Secure community transition facility.
Secure community transition facility means a residential facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative under Chapter 71.09 RCW. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security, and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facilities established pursuant to RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under Chapter 71.09 RCW and operated by the Secretary of the State of Washington Department of Social and Health Services or under contract with the Secretary.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 42
19.02.347 Seismic hazard areas.
A. Class 1 seismic hazard areas. Class 1 seismic hazard areas means all areas of the city other than class 2 or 3 seismic hazard areas. These areas are areas where no development limitations are deemed necessary, except where described under Ch. 19.04 EMC pertaining to district regulations.
B. Class 2 seismic hazard areas. Class 2 seismic hazard areas means those areas where soils are characterized by moderately well-drained alluvium of moderate density.
C. Class 3 seismic hazard areas. Class 3 seismic hazard areas means those areas subject to severe risk of earthquake damage due to soils of low density, due to poorly drained or impervious alluvium, due to highly saturated organic material or due to slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent.
19.02.348 Service uses or activities.
Service uses or activities means a business which sells the knowledge or work of its people rather than a tangible product.
19.02.349 Setback, average.
The average setback is the mean or average depth of yard (setback) measured from the property line to the building. The average setback is computed along the full length of the property line, utilizing a designated property depth.
19.02.350 Shopping center.
Shopping center means a retail shopping area designed as a unit, which utilizes a common parking area.
19.02.351 Short Term Vacation Rental.
Short Term Vacation Rental means an attached or detached, transient dwelling rented or leased as a unit that has five or less guest rooms, a maximum occupant load of ten (10) occupants, and a maximum guestroom occupancy of two occupants per room. Guestroom occupancy may include additional children under the age of six. Short term vacation rentals do not contemplate food services other than a standard residential kitchen for guest use. The property owner shall obtain a city business license prior to operation of the Short Term Vacation Rental facility.
19.02.354 Sign.
Sign means any structure, device, letter, figure, character, poster, picture, trademark, or reading matter which is used or designed to announce, declare, demonstrate, display, or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 43
otherwise identify or advertise, or attract the attention of the public. However, a sign shall not include the following:
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public officer.
B. Direction, warning, or information sign authorized by federal, state, or municipal authority.
C. The official flag, emblem, or insignia of a government, school, or religious group or agency.
D. A memorial plaque or tablet, or cornerstones indicating the name of a building and date of construction, when cut or carved into any masonry surface or when made of bronze or other incombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure.
19.02.355 Sign area.
Sign area means the total area of all faces of a sign expressed in square feet. Area is measured from the outside perimeters, including backup, molding, framing, decorative scrollwork, etc. The area of a group of individual mounted letters or figures shall be the area of the geometric form necessary to enclose the group of letters or figures.
19.02.360 Sign height.
Sign height means the distance from ground level to the highest point on the sign structure.
19.02.365 Sign, abandoned.
Abandoned sign means any sign which has been deserted and its effective use terminated, and which no longer fulfills the purpose for which it was constructed.
19.02.370 Sign, advertising.
Advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, or service or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises and only incidentally on the premises.
19.02.375 Sign, business.
Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on the premises.
19.02.380 Sign, canopy.
Canopy sign means a sign attached to the underside of a canopy.
19.02.385 Sign, construction.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 44
Construction sign means a temporary sign placed in advance of occupancy of a building or structure indicating the name of the building or structure, the architects, the contractors, and other information regarding the building or structure.
19.02.390 Sign, directional or informational.
Directional or informational sign means a sign designated to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicles.
19.02.395 Sign, flashing.
Flashing sign means an illuminated sign with action or motion, or light or color changes.
19.02.400 Sign, freestanding.
Freestanding sign means a sign standing directly upon the ground or having one (1) or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or structure.
19.02.405 Sign, gate or entrance.
Gate or entrance sign means a sign attached or adjacent to an entranceway of a residential site or subdivision, which identifies the site or subdivision.
19.02.410 Sign, identification.
Identification sign means a sign used only for the purpose of identifying the occupancy of a building, structure, or property.
19.02.415 Sign, illuminated.
Illuminated sign means a sign designed to give forth any artificial light or reflect such light from an artificial source.
19.02.420 Sign, indirectly illuminated.
Indirectly illuminated sign means an illuminated non-flashing sign whose illumination is derived entirely from an external artificial source and which is so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or the street.
19.02.425 Sign, institutional.
Institutional sign means a sign used only for the purpose of identifying an institution.
19.02.430 Sign, off-premises.
Off-premises sign means a sign that contains a message or directs attention to a business, profession, product, activity, or service that is not related to a use or activity conducted or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 45
offered on the premises or at the location where the sign is located, excluding road directional signs, and is generally available by means of rental or lease to persons other than the owner of the sign. An off-premises sign includes the sign face(s) that contains the message or direction noted above, as well as the pole or other structure upon which the sign face is attached.
19.02.435 Sign, on-premises.
On-premises sign means a sign identifying a business, product, service, or activity conducted or sold on the same premises as that on which the sign is located.
19.02.440 Sign, painted.
Painted sign means a sign which is painted on any office, wall, window, fence, or structure of any kind.
19.02.445 Sign, political.
Political sign means a sign advertising a candidate for political office or a measure scheduled for election.
19.02.450 Sign, portable.
Portable sign means a sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building or structure and which may be easily moved.
19.02.455 Sign, projecting.
Projecting sign means a sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed faces perpendicular to the plane of such wall.
19.02.460 Sign, roof.
Roof sign means a sign attached to a building which projects above the structure of the building. This definition refers to the architectural unity of a building or structure.
19.02.465 Sign, rotating.
Rotating sign means a sign containing moving parts.
19.02.470 Sign, subdivision.
Subdivision sign means a sign erected and maintained within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision and indicating the name of the subdivision, the name of the contractor or subdivider, and the name of the owner or agent, and giving information regarding directions, price, or terms.
19.02.475 Sign, temporary.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 46
Temporary sign means a sign intended to advertise community or civic projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, or other special events on a temporary basis.
19.02.480 Sign, wall.
Wall sign means a sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the plane of such wall.
19.02.485 Sign, window.
Window sign means a sign painted on, affixed to, or placed in an exterior window with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the plane of such window.
19.02.487 Single-family zoning district.
A single-family zoning district is a zoning district with any of the following designations: single-family residential (R-1), small lot single family residential (R-3) and suburban-residential (S-R).
19.02.490 Site coverage.
Site coverage means that portion of a lot covered by buildings or structures.
19.02.495 Slope line.
Slope line is defined as the line perpendicular to the contour lines crossing the property. The precise bearing or heading of the slope line shall be determined by the planning department.
19.02.496 Solid waste incinerator.
Solid waste incinerator means the processing of solid wastes by means of pyrolysis, refuse-derived fuel, or mass incineration within an enclosed structure. These processes may include the recovery of energy resources from such waste or the conversion of the energy in such wastes to more useful forms or combinations thereof. This definition refers to citywide or regional-scale operations and does not include solid waste incineration which is accessory to an individual principal use.
19.02.497 Special life safety measures.
Special life safety measures means upper story rescue windows accessible from the front and rear of a home, or a fire department-approved automatic fire suppression system.
19.02.500 Special use.
Special use means use permitted in a district provided such use meets specific development standards as outlined in EMC 19.08.020.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 47
19.02.501 Special trees.
Special trees means trees significant due to their size, age, species and variety, or historical importance.
19.02.502 Specified anatomical areas.
Specified anatomical areas means:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
19.02.503 Specified sexual activities.
Specified sexual activities means:
A. The caressing, touching, fondling, or other intentional or erotic touching of male genitals, female genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts of oneself or of one person by another; or
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, intercourse, oral copulation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or
C. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence or visual state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this section.
19.02.504 Stacking space.
Stacking space means the space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles whose occupants will be patronizing a drive-in business. Such space is considered to be located directly alongside a drive-in window, facility, or entrance used by patrons and in lanes leading up to and away from the business establishment.
19.02.505 Start of Construction
Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvements was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start date means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 48
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
19.02.506 Stadium.
Stadium means a large oval, round, or U-shaped open structure, as for football, baseball, track events, etc., surrounded by tiers of seats.
19.02.510 Structure
Anything constructed or erected which requires a location on the ground or that is attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including fences seven (7) feet or less in height. For flood plain management purposes, a structure is any walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
19.02.515 Story.
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space is more than six (6) feet above grade for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story.
19.02.520 Street.
Street means a public way thirty (30) feet or more in right-of-way width which affords a primary means of access to property.
19.02.522 Substantial Damage
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
19.02.523 Substantial Improvement
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure where the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 49
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
19.02.524 Townhouse.
Townhouse means a multifamily residential dwelling unit which is attached to other dwelling units along one (1) or both sides and which occupies the building area from ground level to the roof with no dwelling units located above or below.
19.02.525 Townhouse with ownership interest.
Townhouse with ownership interest means real property formed as a townhouse, where portions are designated for separate ownership and the remainder is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions, with an undivided interest in the common elements vested in the unit owners. Real property is not considered a townhouse with ownership interest until after a declaration encompassing and outlining the above requirements is recorded.
19.02.526 Trade, retail.
Retail trade means the sale or rental of goods and merchandise for final use or consumption.
19.02.527 Transient.
Transient means the right to use, occupy or possess, or the use, occupancy, or possession of, a dwelling unit or a habitable unit for a period of twenty-nine (29) consecutive calendar days or less.
19.02.528 Transitional housing.
Transitional housing means a facility operated publicly or privately to provide housing for individuals or families who are otherwise homeless and have no other immediate living
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 50
options available to them. Transitional housing shall not exceed a twenty-four (24) month period per family or individual.
19.02.529 Tree.
Tree means any living woody plant characterized by one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches, and having a diameter of six (6) inches or more measured at three (3) feet above ground level.
19.02.530 Undeveloped land.
Undeveloped land means a parcel of land which does not have an inhabitable building or where the inhabited buildings occupy no more than three (3) percent of the total parcel area.
19.02.531 Unique and fragile area.
Unique and fragile area means an area of special environmental significance for wildlife habitat, threatened plant communities or natural scenic quality.
19.02.532 Urban separators.
Urban separators are low-density lands that define community or municipal identities and boundaries, protect adjacent resource lands, rural areas, and environmentally sensitive areas, and create open space corridors within and between urban areas which provide environmental, visual, recreational, and wildlife benefits.
19.02.533 Use.
Use means an activity for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
19.02.534 Use, change of.
A change of use shall be determined to have occurred when it is found that the general character of the operation has been modified. This determination shall include review of but not be limited to: (1) hours of operation, (2) materials processed or sold, (3) required parking, (4) traffic generation, (5) impact on public utilities, (6) clientele, and (7) general appearance and location.
19.02.535 Use, temporary.
Temporary use means any activity or structure permitted under the provisions of EMC 19.08.205 which is intended to exist or operate for a limited period of time and which does not comply with the development standards and requirements set out in this title as specified for the zoning district in which it is located.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 51
19.02.536 Used.
The word “used” in the definition of the term “adult entertainment or adult entertainment business” in this chapter describes a continuing course of conduct of exhibiting specific sexual activities and specified anatomical areas in a manner which appeals to a prurient interest.
19.02.537 Variance
An adjustment, which requires review by the hearing examiner, in the specific regulations of this ordinance regarding a piece of property where the strict application of the development standards would cause undue hardship to the owner as a result of existing physical constraints on the property. For flood plain management purposes, a variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of the flood damage prevention ordinance permitting construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by that ordinance.
19.02.541 Vegetative aid.
Vegetative aid means bark mulch, gravel and other nonvegetative materials which promote vegetative growth by retaining moisture or preventing weeds. These materials are not a substitute for vegetative cover.
19.02.545 Veterinary clinic.
Veterinary clinic means any premises to which animals are brought, or where they are temporarily kept, solely for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of any illness or injury, which does not have outdoor runs.
19.02.550 Veterinary hospital.
Veterinary hospital means any premises to which animals are brought, or where they are temporarily kept, solely for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of any illness or injury, which may have outdoor runs.
19.02.552 Water Dependent
A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.
19.02.565 Yard.
Yard means the land unoccupied or unobstructed, from the ground upward, except for such encroachments as may be permitted by this title, surrounding a building site.
19.02.570 Yard, front.
Front yard means an open space, other than a court, on the same lot with the building, between the front line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front property line, including the full width of the lot to its side line.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 52
19.02.575 Yard, rear.
Rear yard means an open space on the same lot with the building between the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps, porches, and accessory buildings) and the rear line of the lot, including the full width of the lot to its side lines.
19.02.580 Yard, side.
Side yard means an open space on the same lot with the building between the side wall line of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from front yard to rear yard. No portion of a structure shall project into any side yard, except cornices, canopies, eaves, chimney runs, or other architectural features, which may project two (2) feet, zero inches.
19.02.585 Zoning.
Zoning means the regulation of the use of private lands or the manner of construction related thereto in the interest of implementing the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. Zoning includes both the division of land into separate and distinct zoning districts, and the specific use and development standards which regulate development. Such regulation shall also govern those public and quasi-public land use and buildings which provide for government activities and proprietary type services for the community’s benefit, except as prohibited by law. State and federal governmental activities are encouraged to cooperate under these regulations to secure harmonious city development.
19.02.588 Zoning districts redefined.
Any references in the Ephrata Municipal Code to the former zoning districts R-R shall mean the zoning districts designated as follows: Former Zone Current Zone R-R S-R
19.02.590 Zoning lot.
Zoning lot means a tract of land occupied or to be occupied by a principal building and its accessory facilities, together with such open spaces and yards as are required under the provisions of this title, having not less than the minimum area required by this title for a zoning purpose in the district in which such land is situated, and having its principal frontage on a public street of standard width and improvement. A zoning lot need not necessarily
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 53
coincide with the record lot, which refers to land designated as a separate and distinct parcel on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed filed in the records of the county.
19.02.595 Zoning permit.
Zoning permit means a certificate, issued prior to a building permit, stating that the proposed use is in accordance with the requirements and standards of this title.
(Ord. 10-09 2010; Ord. 13-12 2013; Ord. 18-09 2018; Ord. 18-13 2018; Ord 18-28 2018; Ord 19-05 2019)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 54
Chapter 19.03 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED – ZONING MAP
Sections:
19.03.010 Establishment and designation of districts.
19.03.020 Official zoning map.
19.03.030 Interpretation of district boundaries.
19.03.040 Application of district regulations.
19.03.045 Building construction restrictions
19.03.050 Minimum requirements.
19.03.010 Establishment and designation of districts.
The various districts established by this title and into which the city is divided are designated as follows:
S-R Suburban Residential Zone
The S-R Suburban District is a classification within the City of Ephrata suitable for single-family residential use on land parcels typically no larger than one acre in size. Uses are limited to residential and agricultural uses. This zoning district may serve as a transitional zone between densities. It is intended that the larger lots will provide for a limited number of farm-type animals and agricultural and the continued and uninterrupted use of established irrigation wells and water rights including the ability to drill, refurbish, re-drill or repair said irrigation wells in accordance with EMC 13.16 Water System-Backflow Protection and Cross-Connections, and RCW Chapter 90.14 Water Rights Registration-Waiver and Relinquishment, in accordance with the standards relative to the land area required to protect public health and welfare.
R-1 Single Family Residential Zone
It is the purpose and intent of the R-1 Residential District to preserve a single-family residential district, together with recreational, religious, educational and other municipal facilities required to serve the community. The regulations for this district are designed and intended to establish, maintain and protect the essential neighborhood characteristics of the district, to develop and sustain a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature and those which would tend to be inharmonious with or injurious to the preservation of a residential environment.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 55
R-2 Attached Housing Residential Zone
The purpose of the R-2 Residential District is to ensure adequate land area exists for a variety of housing options and a range of costs for housing in Ephrata. This district is suitable for multi-family as well as single-family residential units. Uses are limited to residential uses and under certain conditions recreational, religious, educational and other municipal facilities required to serve the community.
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential Zone
It is the purpose and intent of the R-3 Residential District to preserve a single-family district and provide for a variety of housing types including manufactured homes. The regulations for this district are designed and intended to establish, maintain and protect the essential neighborhood characteristics of the district, to develop and sustain a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families, and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature and those which would tend to be inharmonious with or injurious to the preservation of a residential environment.
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multi-Family Residential Zone
The purpose of the R-4 Residential District is to ensure adequate land area exists for a variety of single-family housing options and range of costs for housing in Ephrata. The R-4 district provides for a moderate increase in population density and allows for a greater variety of housing types.
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
It is the purpose of the R-5 districts to provide suitable locations for high density multifamily residential development where home ownership is encouraged consistent with the comprehensive plan.
C-1 Central Business Zone
The purpose of the C-1 Commercial District is to provide for commercial use of land within the community’s traditional central business district. This district provides for the continuation of business and office activity, along with the mixing of residential uses in upper floors, in the city’s core, maintaining the “main street” character of this area.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 56
C-2 General Commercial Zone
The purpose of the C-2 Commercial District is to provide for the continued development of moderate intensity commercial uses along the community’s arterial streets and highways. This type of development may be characterized by shopping centers, service stations, automobile sales lots and other general or service commercial uses requiring more land and increased automobile access than would be available in the central business district.
C-3 Office and Service Commercial Zone
The purpose of the C-3 Commercial District is to provide for the development of neighborhood commercial and office centers, allowing for a clustered project, providing a variety of uses intending to serve the surrounding neighborhood area.
I-1 Light Industrial Zone
The purpose of the I-1 Industrial District is to ensure adequate land area exists for a variety of commercial and lighter industrial uses in the City of Ephrata. This district is characterized by permitting all uses permitted in the C-2 district as well as a range of more land-intensive light industrial uses, such as warehousing or materials storage.
I-2 Heavy Industrial Zone
The purpose of the I-2 Industrial District is to ensure adequate land area exists for a variety of heavy industrial uses in the City of Ephrata. This district permits the widest range of land uses, allowing virtually any non-residential use of land that has not been determined a nuisance in a court of record or which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise.
OSR Open Space Recreational Zone
The Open Space Recreational (OSR) District provides for breathing space, visual relief, psychological relief and solitude needs of community residents. Those areas may include recreational opportunities, sports fields, parks, historical areas or view-shed areas.
UR Open Space Urban Reserve Zone
Land within the Open Space Urban Reserve (UR) District serves a temporary function as open space until needed for urban development. Those areas are restricted to agricultural and recreational uses until the full range of urban services are available.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 57
PF Public Facilities Zone
The purpose of Public Facilities (PF) Zone is to provide areas that are available for public facilities, such as governmental facilities, parks, schools, infrastructure facilities, and other developments intended primarily for public use.
AE Airport Enterprise Zone
The purpose of Airport Enterprise (AE) Zone is to provide for the coordinated, managed and safe development of land adjacent to the Ephrata Airport. The development and use of land shall be as provided in the Airport Master Plan, the document adopted by both the Port of Ephrata and the City of Ephrata to establish development and land use standards on Port property.
CZ Airport Clear Zone Overlay District
The purpose of the Airport Clear Zone (CZ) Overlay District is to ensure that any proposed development or use of land in that area within the approach or departure pattern of the Ephrata Municipal Airport is consistent with aviation and personal safety, limiting the exposure of persons on the ground to injury due to aviation accidents and reducing hazards to flight during approach and departure. Obstructions within the clear zones have the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the Ephrata Municipal Airport and property of occupants of land in its vicinity. Obstructions may affect future instrument approach minimums to the airport and may reduce the size of the area available for landing, take-off and maneuvering of aircraft. Obstructions would tend to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the public’s investment and are potential public nuisances.
In the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation should be prevented. The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
It is the purpose of this designation to prevent the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation; to eliminate, remove, alter or mitigate hazards to air navigation; and to provide for the marking and lighting of obstructions, for which the City may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interest in land.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 58
HM Hillside Management Overlay Zone
The purpose of the hillside management overlay zoning district is to ensure that development in areas of steeper slopes is of a low enough intensity to allow for appropriate access, to minimize fire hazards and to minimize the negative erosion and aesthetic impacts of extensive grading.
PUD Planned Unit Development District
The intent of the PUD is to create a process to promote diversity and creativity in site design, and protect and enhance natural and community features. The process is provided to encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of residential, commercial, and industrial uses. By using flexibility in the application of development standards, this process will promote developments that will benefit citizens that live and work within the city.
The purpose of Planned Development (PD) is to permit more flexibility in site planning and the design of structures in situations where modification of specific provisions of this title will not be contrary to the intent and purpose of the zone and will not be harmful to the neighborhood in which the development occurs. The Planned Development is intended to achieve land economies in development, maintenance, street systems and utility networks, while allowing for the grouping of buildings for privacy, usable and attractive open spaces, safe circulation, mixed uses when in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and the general well being of the residents.
The purpose of a planned development, generally applied for in conjunction with a plat or binding site plan, is to:
1) Produce a development project which is as good or better than what is allowed using the traditional lot-by-lot development, by applying to large areas, whether consisting of consolidated lots or unsubdivided property, the same principles and purposes inherent in the required provisions applying to individual lots or minimum area parcels;
2) Correlate comprehensively the provisions of this title and other ordinances and codes of the City, to permit developments which will provide a desirable and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area;
3) Permit flexibility that will encourage a more creative approach in the development of land and will result in a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area, while at
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 59
the same time, maintaining substantially the same population density and area coverage permitted in the zone in which the project is located;
4) Permit flexibility in design, placement of buildings, use of open spaces, off-street parking areas and to best utilize the potential of sites characterized by special features of critical resource areas, geography, topography, size or shape but maintaining a grid or modified grid system of streets.
19.03.020 Official zoning map.
A. Adoption. The designation, location, and boundaries of the various districts are shown on the official zoning map. The official zoning map is hereby adopted and made a part of this title.
B. Location; identification. The official zoning map shall be on file in the community development department office. The map shall be identified by the signature of the city clerk and city attorney and bear the title, “City of Ephrata Official Zoning Map, Ordinance 10-02.”
C. Display zoning map. In addition to the official zoning map there may be a display zoning map, which may be used to generally indicate the various districts, but not to locate precise boundaries.
D. Amendments. If changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters portrayed by the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map after the amendment has been approved by the city council. The signature of the city clerk and the city attorney shall be entered on the official zoning map with the ordinance number of the amendment. Each amendment shall be filed as part of the official zoning record.
E. Unclassified property. All property not otherwise classified on the official zoning map shall be treated as follows:
1. Interim zoning. All property not otherwise classified on the official zoning map is hereby placed in an interim zone. Such an interim zone shall be governed by provisions applicable to the S-R Suburban residential district.
2. Upon annexation of property, or upon the city otherwise being made aware of property in the interim zoning designation, the community development director shall commence all necessary steps to zone such property. Interim zoning of property shall be for six (6) months unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 60
19.03.030 Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed as to be midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, canals, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (A) through (E) of this section, the community development director shall interpret the district boundaries.
H. Where a zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map divides a lot of record at the time of adoption of this chapter, the property owner shall have the option of choosing either of the two districts to apply to the entire parcel area, or may subdivide the lot to retain both districts as mapped, provided that all of the standards and requirements, including relevant density and dimensional requirements, and performance standards can be met.
19.03.040 Application of district regulations.
Except as otherwise provided in this title:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 61
A. No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure, or premises be used, designated, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in this title as permitted in the district in which such building, land, or premises are located.
B. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit designated in this title for the district in which such building is located.
C. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt or moved into any district, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site area, and building location regulations designated in this title for the district in which such building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one (1) building lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building lot.
19.03.045 – Building construction restrictions
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established in this title for any district in which the building or structure is located, provided, however, that said height limits shall not apply to any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator in compliance with FCC regulation PRB-1, as amended.
The Planning Commission may permit any use not specifically described in this title, provided that the use is not prohibited, or is not expressly allowed in a less restrictive zone. For purposes of this section, the Single-family Residential shall be considered the most restrictive zone.
(Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.03.050 Minimum requirements.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control.
(Ord. 13-12, 2013)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 62
Chapter 19.04 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
19.04.010 Interpretation of land use tables.
19.04.020 Residential land uses.
19.04.030 Residential land use development conditions.
19.04.040 Manufacturing land uses.
19.04.050 Manufacturing land use development conditions.
19.04.060 Transportation, public, and utilities land uses.
19.04.065 Transportation, public, and utilities land use development conditions.
19.04.070 Wholesale and retail land uses.
19.04.080 Wholesale and retail land use development conditions.
19.04.090 Service land uses.
19.04.100 Service land use development conditions.
19.04.110 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land uses.
19.04.120 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land use development conditions.
19.04.130 Resource land uses.
19.04.140 Resource land use development conditions.
19.04.150 Special use combining district, SU.
19.04.160 Development standards.
19.04.170 Residential zone development standards.
19.04.180 Residential land use development standard conditions.
19.04.190 Commercial and industrial zone development standards.
19.04.195 Commercial and industrial land use development standard conditions.
19.04.200 Mixed use overlay development standards.
19.04.205 Mixed use land use development standard conditions.
19.04.210 Airport Clear Zones
19.04.215 Airport Clear Zone Height Limitations.
19.04.220 Use Restrictions.
19.04.225 Future Uses.
19.04.230 Existing Uses.
19.04.235 Variances.
19.04.240 Obstruction Marking and Lighting.
19.04.245 Conflicting Regulations.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 63
19.04.010 Interpretation of land use tables.
A. Land use tables. The land use tables in EMC 19.04.020 through 19.04.140 determine whether a specific use is allowed in a zoning district. The zoning districts are located in the vertical columns and the land uses are located on the horizontal rows of these tables. A purpose statement for each zoning district is included in Ch. 19.03 EMC.
B. Principally permitted uses. If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Ch. 19.09 EMC, the development conditions following the land use table, and any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.
C. Special uses. If the letter “S” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Ch. 19.09 EMC, the development conditions following the land use table, any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.
D. Conditional uses. If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Ch. 19.09 EMC, the development conditions following the land use table, the review criteria stated in EMC 19.09.030, any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.
E. Accessory uses. If the letter “A” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Ch. 19.09 EMC, the development conditions following the land use table and any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.
F. Development conditions. If a number appears next to the land use or in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code, and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number in subsection immediately following each land use table.
G. Multiple development conditions. If more than one (1) letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitations or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code, and the specific conditions
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 64
indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.
H. Overlay zones. Overlay zones provide policies and regulations in addition to those in the underlying zoning district. Overlay zones include the mixed use, Hillside Management and Airport Clear Zone overlay districts.
I. Applicable requirements. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section.
J. Interpretation of other uses. Any other unnamed use shall be permitted if it is determined by the community development director to be of the same general character as the principally permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, per EMC 19.09.065.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 65
19.04.020 Residential land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
One Single Family dwelling per lot
P
P
P
P
P
P
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
One duplex per lot
P
P
P
One modular home per lot
P
P
P
P
P
P
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
A(1)
Multifamily townhouse units
P
P
P(13)
P(3)
C(4)
P(2)
P(2)
Multifamily
dwellings
P
P
P
P(3)
C(4)
P(2)
C(16)
P(3)
Mobile Home
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
Manufactured Home
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
Mobile home
parks
C
C
C
Designated manufactured home
P(15)
P(15)
P(15)
P(15)
P(15)
P(15)
Group homes Class I-A
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Group homes Class I-B
P
P
P
P
C
P
Group homes Class I-C
C
C
C
P
C
P
Group homes Class II-A
C
C
C
C
C
C
Group homes Class II-B
C
C
C
C
C
C
Group homes Class II-C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Group homes Class III
C
Rebuild existing dwellings
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
Rebuild/accessory uses for existing dwellings
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
Transitional housing
C(6)
Guest cottages and houses
A(7)
(14)
A(7)
(14)
A(7)
(14)
A(7)
(14)
A(7)
(14)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 66
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Bed and breakfast
P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
A(18, 20)
A(18, 20)
A(18, 20)
Rooming and boarding of not more than three (3) persons non-transient use
A
A
A
A
Short Term Vacation Rentals, AirBnB
P(19)
P(19)
P(19)
P(19)
P(19)
P(19)
C(19)
C(19)
C(19)
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A(12)
A
A
A
A
A
Accessory dwelling units
A(8)
A(8)
A(8)
A(8)
A(8)
A(8)
C(8)
C(8)
Accessory living quarters
A(10)
A(10)
A(10)
A(10)
A(10)
Home occupations
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
A(9)
Storage buildings and storage of recreational vehicles
A(11)
A(11)
A(11)
A(11)
A(11)
A(11)
Welfare facilities, retirements homes, convalescent homes and other welfare facilities whether privately or publicly operated, facilities for rehabilitation or correction, etc.
C
C
C
C
C
Cargo Containers
C(17)
P
P
P
P
(Ord. 10-07, 2010)(Ord. 10-09, 2010)(Ord. 13-12, 2013)(Ord. 18-09, 2018)
19.04.030 Residential land use development conditions.
1. Dwelling units, limited to not more than one (1) per establishment, for security or maintenance personnel and their families, when located on the premises where they are employed in such capacity. No other residential use shall be permitted.
2. Multifamily residential use shall be permitted only in the mixed-use overlay when included within a mixed use development.
3. Multifamily residential uses, when established in buildings with commercial or office uses, and not located on the ground floor.
4. Multifamily residential uses, when not combined with commercial or office uses.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 67
5. Existing dwellings may be rebuilt, repaired, and otherwise changed for human occupancy. Accessory uses for existing dwellings may be constructed. Such uses are garages, carports, storage sheds, and fences.
6. Transitional housing facilities, limited to a maximum of twenty (20) residents at any one (1) time and four (4) resident staff.
7. Guesthouses not rented or otherwise conducted as a business.
8. Accessory dwelling units shall not be included in calculating the maximum density. Accessory dwelling units are allowed subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.350.
9. Customary incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.040.
10. Accessory living quarters are allowed per the provisions of EMC 19.08.359.
11. Recreational vehicle storage is permitted as an accessory use in accordance with EMC 19.08.090 – 19.08.097.
12. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.
13. All multifamily townhouse developments in the R-5 zone shall be recorded as townhouses with ownership interest, as defined in EMC 19.02.525, prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy by the city.
14. Subject to EMC 19.08.160(A) and (B), Accessory buildings.
15. A designated manufactured home is a permitted use with the following conditions:
a. A designated manufactured home that is older than 60 months shall not be placed on a lot within the City of Ephrata, unless the structure is located within an approved manufactured home community or mobile home park, in which case the structure shall meet the most recent requirements of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, as it exists now or hereafter amended.;
b. The designated manufactured home shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and the space from the bottom of the home to the ground
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 68
shall be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product that can be either load bearing or decorative with its lowest finished floor no higher than 16” above grade unless in flood hazard area in which case all flood zone requirements found in EMC 19.11 apply;
c. The designated manufactured home shall comply with all city design standards applicable to all other single-family homes;
d. The designated manufactured home shall be thermally equivalent to the State Energy Code;
e. The designated manufactured home shall meet all other requirements for a designated manufactured home as defined in RCW 35.63.160;
f. Roof pitch shall not be less than a three (3) foot rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and
g. The structure shall have exterior siding and roofing which, in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used in residential dwellings.
16. Conditions for permitting Multi-Family Structures in C2-Commercial Zone.
a. Multi-Family structures shall only be permitted in the C2-Commercial zone after a public hearing before the Hearing Examiner and findings that:
i. The use will not create traffic congestion or parking problems;
ii. The use will not be harmful to the property value or aesthetic of the surrounding properties or their uses because of appearances, noise, use, or other quantifiable features;
iii. The use will meet all standards and regulations for the zone in which it is to be located, and
iv. The use will not create undesirable environmental problems.
b. Minimum number of Units - There shall be a minimum of seven dwelling units for residential developments in the C2-Commercial zone when such development is completed.
c. Area required - For every dwelling unit there shall be provided a site area at least equivalent to 900 square feet for each dwelling unit and there shall be maintained upon the same site with the dwelling a space open and landscaped having an area at least equivalent to 300 square feet for each dwelling unit in addition to any area required for off-street parking.
d. Maximum Height - thirty five feet (35') or three stories.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 69
e. Parking Lots - Parking lots shall have perimeter-screening, with a minimum of ten feet (10') in width between the parking lot and adjacent properties, or street.
i. Two spaces for each dwelling unit plus one centralized guest space for every five (5) units shall be provided.
ii. Off-street parking areas shall be paved.
iii. All parking spaces shall be provided with adequate ingress and egress.
iv. Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in length and nine feet (9') in width for a standard space.
v. Compact car spaces shall be eighteen feet (18') in length and eight feet (8') in width.
vi. No more than one third required parking spaces shall be compact car spaces. All such spaces shall be labeled as “Compact Car.”
vii. Off-street parking areas which flank a single family residential use on adjoining property shall be separated from such property by a sight-obscuring fence or compact landscaping such as a hedge, not less than six feet (6') in height.
f. Interior Landscaping - Landscaping for parking areas shall be provided to the following minimum requirements:
i. Landscaping shall be provided at a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area.
ii. One (1) tree for every 7/14 (single/double) row parking spaces shall be provided for summer shade.
iii. Minimum tree size at planting shall be two inch (2") caliper.
iv. Trees shall be planted a minimum three feet (3') from curbs and sidewalks.
v. Screening shall include shrubs suitable to be maintained at a height of three feet (3'), and avoid obstructing views of crosswalks, intersections, and streetlights.
g. Loading Area - There shall be provided a loading/unloading area no less than ten feet (10') in width and twenty-five feet (25') in length and fourteen feet (14') in height. No off-street loading area shall be located in a front yard.
h. Walkways - The site will have designated hard-surface walking paths between the parking facilities and dwelling units and between locations where pedestrian traffic might interfere with vehicular traffic.
i. Maximum Lot Coverage - Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 70
j. The Hearing Examiner can make special requirements in conjunction with its decision following a public hearing, if they are necessary to more closely fulfill the intent of the zone in which a development is permitted.
k. Conditions, if any, which may be imposed on any proposed project requiring a conditional use permit, shall be endorsed on the conditional use permit and failure to comply therewith shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. Revocation of the conditional use permit shall be final after thirty (30) days written notice of the violation is given by certified mail to the owner and/or occupant of the land or improvements for which the conditional use permit was issued, if in the mean time, the violation is not corrected.
17. Provisions as defined in EMC 9.56.035 shall apply.
18. Conditions for permitting Bed and Breakfasts (B&B) in the Residential zones and Commercial Zones.
a. Intent. The city provides these Bed and Breakfasts (B&B) regulations for the following purposes:
i. To make it more comfortable for people to retain their homes because a limited use Bed and Breakfast allowance can provide them with added income.
ii. To make better use of existing public investment in streets, transit, water, sewer, and other utilities.
b. A maximum of five guest rooms are allowed out-right within all residential zones in the city. A maximum of ten (10) occupants, including children under the age of six are allowed including the owner and their immediate family.
c. A B&B may be established in a new or existing single-family dwelling by creating the unit within the dwelling.
d. Any modifications or additions to the dwelling unit must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.
e. The design and size of a B&B unit shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes.
f. The site/property shall be owner occupied.
g. If the site/property ceases to be owner occupied the B&B unit permit shall be deemed revoked and use of the unit as a Bed and Breakfast must cease immediately.
h. The size of a B&B contained within or attached to an existing single family structure shall be limited by the existing structure’s applicable zoning
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 71
requirements. A B&B incorporated in the construction of a new single-family house shall be limited to 800 square feet.
i. The owner shall take every effort to avoid additional entrances or other visible changes on the street façade of the house which indicates the presence of a B&B.
j. Food services may only be provided to overnight guests of a bed and breakfast facility. The proprietor must contact the local health authority to determine if a food service permit is required.
k. A permit application must be completed and approved for all B&Bs. The planning department shall determine the application form for a B&B permit.
l. Adjacent neighbors of a B&B applicant shall be notified of the B&B zoning permit application. This city notification is informational only. The decision by the planning department to grant a B&B zoning permit is non-appealable by the neighbors of the permit holder.
m. Maximum length of stay under a Bed and Breakfast business license shall be limited to twenty-nine days.
n. A city business license to operate the Bed and Breakfast Facility is required prior to operation.
19. Conditions for permitting Short Term Vacation Rentals in the Residential zones and Commercial zones.
a. Short Term Vacation Rentals shall be permitted in the S-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning district. Short Term Vacation Rentals in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning
districts may be permitted after a public hearing before the Hearing Examiner. Approval shall be based on findings that:
i. The use will not create traffic congestion or parking problems;
ii. The use will not be harmful to the property values or aesthetics of the surrounding properties or their uses because of appearances, noise, use, or other quantifiable features;
iii. The use will meet all standards and regulations for the zone in which it is to be located, and
iv. The use will not create undesirable environmental problems.
b. Number of Unites – There shall be a maximum of five (5) guestrooms and
maximum of ten (10) occupants, including children under the age of six, for Short Term Vacation Rental developments in the allowed zones. The property owner/manager shall be responsible for ensuring that the dwelling unit is in conformance with its maximum occupancy allowance.
c. Maximum Height – shall be limited to height restrictions of underlying zoning
district.
d. Food Services – No commercial Food services shall be provided unless allowed by
underlying zoning district.
e. Standards and criteria.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 72
i. A Short Term Vacation Rental may be established in a new or existing structure by creating the unit(s) within or in addition to the dwelling, or as an existing detached unit from the principal dwelling.
ii. Any modifications or additions to the dwelling or existing detached unit must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements of the underlying zone.
iii. The design and size of a Short Term Vacation Rental unit shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes.
iv. Maximum length of stay under a short term vacation rental business license shall be limited to twenty-nine days or less.
v. The property owner shall obtain a city business license to operate the Short Term Vacation Rental Facility and is required prior to operation. Verification that appropriate taxes are being paid are also required and shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
f. A permit application must be completed and approved for all Short Term Vacation Rentals. The planning department shall determine the application form for a Short
Vacation Rental permit.
g. Local Property Representative: The local representative or property owner shall be responsible for responding to complaints about the rental. The name, address, and
telephone contact number of the property owner or local representative shall be kept on file at the Community Development Department. If the local representative changes, the owner of the vacation rental property shall be required to notify the city in writing.
h. Solid Waste Collection: Weekly solid waste collection is required during all months. In the event that normal weekly collection is insufficient for the use, the property owner or local property representative shall make arrangements for additional solid waste removal.
i. Informational sign: A sign shall be posted at all exits of the Short Term Vacation Rental unit and an additional plan shall be posted where it is clearly visible in each guest room to provide information on maximum occupancy, contact information for the property owner or local representative and any alternate representatives, evacuation routes, and the renter’s responsibility not to trespass on private property or to create disturbances.
j. Responsible Person: A responsible person (aged eighteen (18) or older) who is an occupant of the vacation rental dwelling and is legally responsible for ensuring that all occupants and/or their guests comply with all laws and regulations during their stay shall be identified for each rental.
k. Inspection: A dwelling unit proposed for a Short Term Vacation Rental shall be inspected prior to the beginning of operation by the Building Official or designee
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 73
and the Fire Chief or designee to determine its conformance with the Short Term Vacation Rental endorsement, the standards of this chapter, and the basic health and safety elements as required by any applicable code. Any corrective action required shall be completed before the dwelling unit can be rented. The time frame for such inspection is subject to the City’s discretion and available resources.
l. Non-Transferability: A Short Term Vacation Rental approval is issued to a specific owner of a Short Term Vacation vacation rentals.
m. Violations: Penalties, as specified in subsection 19.04.030(19)(n)(B), may be imposed for one (1) or more i.Advertising, renting, using, or offering for use, occupancy, or rent a Short Term Vacation Rental where the owner does not hold a valid endorsement issued pursuant to this chapter.
ii.Advertising, renting, using, or offering for use, occupancy, or rent a Short Term Vacation Rental in a manner that does not comply with the approval requirements if any as provided in the permit approval.
iii.Failure by the owner to pay the special excise tax required by EMC Chapter 3.14
iv.Failure of the owner’s designated contact to respond to tenant, citizen, or city complaints or inquiries within twenty-four hours of the first attempt to contact the designated contact or any listed alternate. “Failure to respond” occurs if City staff is unable to reach the designated contact after three (3) attempts within 24 hours, using the information that the owner has on file with the City. Contact shall be attempted by a minimum of two telephone calls and one site visit with door knocker.
v.Failure of the owner or any occupant to comply with any of the provisions and/or requirements of subsection 19.04.030(19)
n. Enforcement, Penalties, and Appeal:
i. Enforcement: This chapter may be enforced by any authorized representative of the City including, but not limited to, the Police Chief, Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Community Development Director, City Administrator, or designee.
ii.Penalties:
A. For the first two (2) violations within twelve (12) month period, the City shall issue a written warning to the owner. This written warning may also be accompanied by the issuance of a Notice of
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 74
Violation and/or Notice of Infraction as may be appropriate pursuant to EMC Chapter 1.22.
B. For the third violation within a twelve (12) month period,
the Community Development Director shall revoke the
owner’s vacation rental dwelling permit approval.
C. Penalties under this section shall be deemed to be separate
from any other applicable penalty provisions including
license and tax penalties.
iii. Appeal: Any owner wishing to appeal the revocation of the
vacation rental dwelling approval may request an appeal to the
City Adminstrator by filing a written notice with the City
Administrator within ten (10) calendar days after the date of revocation. Any endorsement that has been revoked cannot be
reapplied for or issued for a period of at least one (1) year from
the date the endorsement was revoked and shall only be issued
after compliance with all applicable code provisions and remittance
of any monetary penalty in addition to any other fees necessary
for permit issuance.
20. B&B’s in the commercial zones are allowed as an accessory use only if the property is an
existing residence being maintained as an existing legally allowed non-conforming use.
(Ord. 10-07, 2010; Ord. 13-12, 2013; Ord. 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 75
19.04.040 Manufacturing land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Manufacturing, processing, blending, and packaging of food and beverage products.
P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
C(1)
P(18)
C(1)
Manufacturing, processing, blending, and packaging of drugs, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and cosmetics
P
P
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing, processing, blending, and packaging of dairy products and byproducts
P
P
P
P
Industrial laundry and dyeing (including linen supply and diaper services)
P
P
P
Printing, publishing, and allied industries
P(17)
P
P
P
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Chemicals and related products manufacturing
C(1)
C(1)
C(1)
Contractor shops
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Custom arts and crafts product manufacturing
P
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Computers, office machines, and equipment manufacturing
P(2)
P
P
P
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 76
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Manufacturing and assembly of electrical equipment, appliances, lighting, radio, TV communications, equipment, and components
P(2)
P
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Fabricating metal products manufacturing; custom sheet metal manufacturing, containers, hand tools, heating equipment, screw products, extrusion, coating, and plating
P(2)
P
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing and assembly of electronic and electrical devices, and automotive, airframe and similar products
P(20)
P(20)
C(1)
P(20)
C(1)
Hazardous substance land uses
A(4)
A(10)
C(11)
A(10)
C(12)
A(10)
C(12)
Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a principally permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
A
P
P
P
Warehousing and distribution facilities
P(13)
P(19)
C(1)
P(13)
Rail-truck transfer uses
P(14)
P(14)
P(9)
C(1)
P(9)
C(1)
Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, EMC 19.04.190 and 19.04.195)
C
A
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Miniwarehouses, self storage
P(15)
P(13)
P(15)
P(15)
Manufacturing of soaps, detergents, and other basic cleaning and cleansing preparations
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing of plastics and synthetic resins
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing of synthetic and natural fiber and cloth
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 77
S-R
M-H
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Manufacturing of plywood, composition wallboard, and similar structural wood products
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing of nonmetallic mineral products such as abrasives, asbestos, chalk, pumice, and putty
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing of heat-resisting or structural clay products (brick, tile, or pipe)or porcelain products
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing of machinery and heavy machine tool equipment for general industry and mining, agricultural, construction, or service industries
C
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing, processing, assembling, and packaging of articles, products, or merchandise made from previously prepared natural or synthetic materials
P(16)
(21)
(23)
P
C(1)
P
C(1)
Manufacturing, processing, treating, assembling, and packaging of articles, products, or merchandise from previously prepared ferrous, nonferrous, or alloyed metals
P(16)
(21)
P(21)
C(1)
P(21)
C(1)
Complexes which include a combination of uses, including a mixture of office, storage, and light manufacturing uses
C
P
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A(22)
A
A
A
A
A(8)
A(5)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Impound lots
C(1)
P
P
Mining Activities
C(1)
C(1)
Data Centers, Server Farm and Clusters
P
P
Junkyards/
Salvage Yards
C(1)
C(1)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 78
Welding Shops
C(24)
P
P
P
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
$-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Recreational Marijuana Production
P(25)
P(25)
Recreational Marijuana Processing
P(25)
P(25)
(Ord. 15-02, 2015; Ord. 18-09, 2018; Ord 19-05, 2019)
19.04.050 Manufacturing land use development conditions.
1. The following uses require a conditional use permit:
a. Manufacture of such types of basic materials as follows:
(1) Gum and wood chemicals and fertilizers, and basic industrial organic and inorganic chemicals or products such as alkalis and chlorine, industrial and liquid petroleum, gases, cellophane, coal tar products, dyes and dye products, impregnated products, tanning compounds, and glue and gelatin.
(2) Hydraulic cement, concrete, gypsum, lime, carbon, carbon black, graphite, coke, glass, and similar products.
b. Manufacture of products such as the following:
(1) Ammunition, explosives, fireworks, matches, photographic film, missile propellants, and similar combustibles.
(2) Rubber from natural, synthetic, or reclaimed materials.
(3) Paving and roofing materials or other products from petroleum derivatives.
(4) Paint.
c. Refining of materials such as petroleum and petroleum products, metals and metal ores, sugar, and fats and oils.
d. Distilling of materials such as bone, coal, coal tar, coke, wood, and other similar distillates.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 79
e. Heavy metal processes, such as ore reduction or smelting, including blast furnaces, and including drop forging, drop hammering, boiler plate works, and similar heavy metal operations:
(1) Asphalt batching plants.
(2) Concrete mixing and batching plants, including ready-mix concrete facilities.
(3) Rock crushing plants and aggregate dryers.
(4) Sandblasting plants.
(5) Surface mining.
f. Animal and food processing, including the following and similar operations:
(1) Tanning, dressing, and finishing of hides, skins, and furs.
(2) Meat and seafood products, curing, canning, rendering, and slaughtering.
(3) Nitrating of cotton and other materials.
(4) Rendering of animal grease or tallow, fish oil, and similar materials.
(5) Slaughtering, stockyard, feedlot, dairy, and similar operations.
(6) Pickling and brine curing processes.
(7) Wholesale produce markets.
g. Salvage, wrecking, and disposal activities, including the following and similar operations:
(1) Automobile and building wrecking and salvage.
(2) Salvage of industrial waste materials such as metal, paper, glass, rags, and similar materials.
(3) Sewage disposal and treatment plants.
(4) Dump and sump operations for such uses as rubbish, garbage, trash, and other liquid and solid wastes.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 80
h. Storage of the following kinds of goods:
(1) Bulk storage of oil, gas, petroleum, butane, propane, liquid petroleum gas, and similar products, and bulk stations and plants.
(2) Used building materials, mover’s equipment, relocated buildings, impounded vehicles, and similar materials.
(3) Explosives or fireworks, except where incidental to a principally permitted use.
(4) Fertilizer or manure.
2. Small scale, light industrial, or manufacturing operations where the building, structure, or total operation does not encompass more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of area. The five thousand (5,000) square feet total shall include all indoor and outdoor storage areas associated with the manufacturing operation. Only one (1) of these uses shall be allowed per lot.
4. For permitted accessory uses, hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements and which do not accumulate more than five thousand (5,000) pounds of hazardous substances or wastes or any combination thereof at any one (1) time on the site, subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.050, except offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which are not permitted in this district.
5. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.
8. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.
9. Including transportation and transit terminals with repair and storage facilities, and rail-truck stations, except classification yards in the category of “hump yards.”
10. For permitted uses, hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements and which do not accumulate more than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds of hazardous substances or wastes or any combination thereof at any one (1) time on the site, subject to the provisions of section 19.08.050. Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities are not permitted in this district, except through a special use combining district.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 81
11. For permitted uses, accessory hazardous substance land uses which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements and which accumulate more than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds of hazardous substances or wastes or any combination thereof at any one (1) time on the site, subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.050. Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities are not permitted in this district, except through a special use combining district.
12. For permitted uses, accessory hazardous substance land uses which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements and which accumulate more than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds of hazardous substances or wastes or any combination thereof at any one (1) time on the site, subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.050, except offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which require a conditional use permit in this district.
a. Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.050.
b. Any hazardous substance land use that is not an accessory use to a principally permitted use.
13. Warehousing and distribution facilities and the storage of goods or products, except for those goods or products specifically described as permitted to be stored only as conditional uses in the I-2 district.
14. Warehousing and distribution facilities and the storage of goods or products, including rail-truck transfer facilities.
15. Miniwarehouses; provided, that the following development standards shall apply for miniwarehouses, superseding those set out in EMC 19.04.190 and 19.04.200:
a. Frontage use. The first one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot depth, measured from the property line or right-of-way inward from the street frontage, shall be reserved for principally permitted uses for this district, defined by the provisions of EMC 19.04.100(A)(1), or for the office or onsite manager’s unit, signage, parking, and access. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the frontage may be used for access to the storage unit area; provided, that in no case shall the access area exceed seventy-five (75) feet in width. No storage units or structures shall be permitted within this one hundred fifty (150) feet of commercial frontage depth.
b. Lot size. Minimum lot size is one (1) acre; maximum lot size is four (4) acres.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 82
c. Site coverage. Site coverage shall be in accordance with the underlying zoning district requirements.
d. Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard: Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Side yard: Ten (10) feet.
(3) Rear yard: Ten (10) feet.
e. Height limitation. The height limitation is one (1) story.
f. Signs. The sign requirements of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply.
g. Off-street parking.
(1) The off-street parking requirements of Ch. 19.05 EMC shall apply.
(2) Off-street parking may be located in required yards, except in areas required to be landscaped.
h. Development plan review. Development plan approval is required as provided in EMC 19.09.010.
k. Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as follows:
(1) Front yard: Twenty (20) feet, type III (earth berms).
(2) Side yard: Ten (10) feet, type II abutting commercial uses or districts; type I abutting residential uses or districts.
(3) Rear yard: Ten (10) feet, type II abutting commercial uses or districts; type I abutting residential uses or districts.
For maintenance purposes, underground irrigation systems shall be provided for all landscaped areas.
l. Onsite manager. A resident manager may be allowed to place a residence on the site and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of the approval. The community development department shall establish
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 83
requirements for parking and loading areas sufficient to accommodate the needs of the resident manager and the customers of the facility.
m. Drive aisles. Drive aisle width and parking requirements are as follows:
(1) Fifteen (15) foot drive aisle and ten (10) foot parking aisle.
(2) Parking for manager’s quarters and visitor parking.
n. Building lengths. The horizontal dimension of any structure facing the perimeter of the site shall be offset at intervals not to exceed one hundred (100) feet. The offset shall be no less than twenty (20) feet in the horizontal dimension, with a minimum depth of five (5) feet.
o. Building materials. If abutting a residential use or zone, residential design elements such as brick veneer, wood siding, pitched roofs with shingles, landscaping, and fencing shall be used. No uncomplimentary building colors should be used when abutting a residential use or zone.
p. Prohibited uses. Use is restricted to dead storage only. The following are specifically prohibited:
(1) Auctions (other than tenant lien sales), commercial, wholesale or retail sales, or garage sales.
(2) The servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar equipment.
(3) The operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment.
(4) The establishment of a transfer and storage business.
(5) Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odor, dust, noise, fumes, or vibration.
(6) Storage of hazardous or toxic materials and chemicals or explosive substances.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 84
16. Prohibited are those manufacturing activities having potentially deleterious operational characteristics, such as initial processing of raw materials (forging, smeltering, refining, and forming).
17. The ground level or street level portion of all buildings in the C-1 district (as shown in EMC 19.04.080) must be retail or pedestrian-oriented. Pedestrian-oriented development shall have the main ground floor entry located adjacent to a public street and be physically and visually accessible by pedestrians from the sidewalk; and may include the following uses:
a. Retail establishments, including but not limited to convenience goods, department and variety stores, specialty shops such as apparel and accessories, gift shops, toy shops, cards and paper goods, home and home accessory shops, florists, antique shops, and book shops;
b. Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning;
c. Repair services, including but not limited to television, radio, computer, jewelry, and shoe repair;
d. Food-related shops, including but not limited to restaurants (including outdoor seating areas and excluding drive-in restaurants) and taverns;
e. Copy establishments;
f. Professional services, including but not limited to law offices and consulting services; and
g. Any other use that is determined by the Community development director to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, pursuant to EMC 19.09.065, Use interpretations.
18. Excluding slaughtering, rendering, curing, or canning of meat products.
19. Except for those goods or products specifically described as permitted to be stored as conditional uses.
20. Excluding explosive fuels and propellants.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 85
21. Excluding predominantly drop forge and drop hammer operations.
22. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.
23. Excluding paint boiling processes.
24. Conditions for permitting Machine/Fabrication Shops in C2-Commercial Zone.
a. The machine/fabrication shop, whether located in a single structure, or an aggregate of structures, may not exceed 5,000 square feet of floor area. Adjacent commercial uses which share a common purchase/service desk or storage areas shall be considered as one commercial establishment. This maximum floor area restriction shall apply to all new machine/fabrication shops and to all expansions of existing machine/fabrication shops.
b. Operation of machine fabrication shop shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. Structural modifications and utilities requiring natural air circulation, unobstructed view, or other technical consideration necessary for proper operation may be exempt from this provision. This exception does not include storing of any materials.
c. There shall be no outside storage of materials.
d. Sufficient area shall be provided (a) to adequately screen permitted uses from adjacent business and residential districts and (b) for off-street parking of vehicles incidental to the operation, its employees and clients.
25. State licensed marijuana producers and processors may locate in the City of Ephrata pursuant to the following restrictions:
a. Marijuana producers and processors must comply with all requirements of state law and the Washington State Liquor Control Board's regulations.
b. Marijuana producers and processors shall not locate on a site or in a building in which non-conforming production or processing uses have been established in any zone other than the Industrial-I, Light Industrial zone, and Industrial-II, Heavy Industrial zone.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 86
c. Marijuana producers and processors shall not operate as an accessory or subordinate use to a different primary use or as a home occupation.
d. Marijuana producers and processors shall insure that all processing activities shall occur within an enclosed structure.
e. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited.
f. Marijuana producers and processors shall not locate within one thousand feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any elementary or secondary school, playground, recreation center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, or library, or any game arcade admission to which is not restricted to persons aged twenty-one years or older. This distance shall be measured as the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the proposed building/business location to the property line of the entities listed above.
g. Marijuana production and processing facilities shall be ventilated so that the odor from the marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell from any adjoining use or property.
h. A screened and secured loading dock, approved by the Community Development Director shall be required. The objective of the this requirement is to provide a secure, visual screen from the public right of way and adjoining properties, and prevent the escape of orders when delivering or transferring marijuana, useable marijuana, and marijuana-infused products.
i. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, security, glare, and traffic impacts.
j. During non-business hours, all recreational marijuana producers and processors shall store all useable marijuana, marijuana-infused product, and cash in a safe or in a substantially constructed and locked cabinet. The safe or cabinet shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For useable marijuana products that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, these products may be stored in a locked refrigerator or freezer container in a manner approved by the Community Development Director, provided the container is affixed to the building structure.
k. Marijuana producers and marijuana processors are required to acquire all necessary business licenses and are required to comply with municipal tax regulations and all other applicable City ordinances.
Ord. 15-02 (2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 87
19.04.060 Transportation, public, and utilities land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Commercial parking lots or structures
C
C
C
P
P
P
Hospitals
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Transportation and transit facilities
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P(6)
C
P(6)
P
Railway and bus depots, taxi stands
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
Utility and transportation facilities: Electrical substations, pumping or regulating devices for the transmission of water, gas, steam, petroleum, etc.
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
C
P
P
Public facilities: Firehouses, police stations, libraries, and administrative offices of governmental agencies, primary and secondary schools, vocational schools, and colleges
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
C
C
P
P
C
P
P
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
P
Wireless telecommunications facilities (WTCF) by administrative approval
P(2)(3)
P(2)(3)
P(2)(3)
P(2)
(3)
P(1)(3)
P(1)(3)
P(1)
(3)
P(3)
(5)
P
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 88
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-3
P-F
Wireless telecommunications facilities (WTCF) by conditional use permit
C(5)
(3)
C(5)
(3)
C(5)(3)
C(5)
(3)
C(5)(3)
C(5)
(3)
C(4)(3)
C(5)
(3)
C(4)
(3)
C(4)(3)
C(4)
(3)
C(4)
(3)
C(4)
(3)
P
Battery Exchange Station
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
P
P
Electric vehicle charging station, Level 1 and 2
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
P
P
Electric vehicle charging station, Level 3
P
P
P
P
P
A
P
P
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 89
19.04.065 Transportation, public, and utilities land use development conditions.
1. For WTCF towers ninety (90) feet or less for a single user and up to one hundred twenty (120) feet for two (2) or more users.
2. For WTCF towers that are within the allowable building height for the district in which they are located.
3. All WTCFs are subject to applicable portions of EMC 19.08.035.
4. A conditional use permit for a WTCF is required if it is greater than ninety (90) feet for a single user or one hundred twenty (120) feet for two (2) or more users.
5. A conditional use permit is required if the WTCF exceeds the allowable building height of the district.
6. Transportation and transit terminal, including repair and storage facilities and rail-truck stations, except classification yards in the category of “hump yards.”
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 90
19.04.070 Wholesale and retail land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Bakeries and confectioneries
P
P
C
P
P
Wholesale bakery
P
C
P
P
P
Bulk Retail
P
P(1)
P(1)
Recycling centers
P
C
P
P
Retail sales of lumber, tools, and other building materials, including preassembled products
P
P
P
Hardware, paint, tile, and wallpaper (retail)
P
P
P
P
P
Farm equipment
P
P
P
P
General merchandise: Dry goods, variety, and department stores (retail)
P
P
P
Food and convenience stores (retail)
P
P
S(4)
S(4)
Automobile, aircraft, motorcycle, boat, and recreational vehicle sales (retail)
P
P
P
P
Automotive, aircraft, motorcycle, and marine accessories (retail)
P
P
P
P
P
Gasoline service stations
S(3)
S(3)
P
P
Apparel and accessories (retail)
P
P
P
P
Furniture, home furnishings (retail)
P
P
P
P
Eating and drinking establishments (no drive-through)
P
P
P
P
A
A
Eating and drinking establishments (with drive-through)
S(9)
S(9)
Eating facilities for employees
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Planned development retail sales
C(5)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 91
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Drive-through/drive-up businesses (commercial/retail – other than eating/drinking establishments)
P(9)
P(9)
Miscellaneous retail: Drugs, antiques, books, sporting goods, jewelry, florist, photo supplies, video rental, computer supplies, etc.
P
P
P
P
Liquor store
P
P
P
Farm supplies, hay, grain, feed, fencing, etc.
P
P
P
P
Nurseries, greenhouses, garden supplies, tools, etc.
P
P
P
Pet shops (retail and grooming)
P
P
P(2)
P
Computers and electronics (retail)
P
P
P
P(2)
P(2)
Hotels and motels
P
P
C
Complexes which include combinations of uses, including a mixture of office, light manufacturing, storage, and commercial uses
P
P
Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, EMC 19.04.190 and 19.04.195
A(8)
A(8)
P(8)
P(8)
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
A
A(7)
A(6)
A(7)
A
A
A
A
A
A
Agriculturally related retail
P
P
Recreational Marijuana Retail sales
P(10)
(Ord 15-02, 2015; Ord 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 92
19.04.080 Wholesale and retail land use development conditions.
1. Bulk retail uses which provide goods for regional retail and wholesale markets; provided, that each use occupy no less than forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of gross floor area.
2. All sales, storage, and display occur within enclosed buildings.
3. Special uses must conform to the development standards listed.
Gasoline service stations (with or without retail convenience grocery sales). The provision of gasoline pumps shall not be considered incidental or secondary to a permitted use, and must conform to the requirements of this section.
a. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
b. Lot frontage. There shall be at least one hundred twenty (120) feet of frontage on a public street.
c. Pump setbacks. The pump island shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way and any property lines.
d. Lubrication facilities. Lubrication shall be done within an enclosed building.
e. Buffering of adjacent property. A solid or woven fence, free of advertising, shall be maintained along property lines which flank residential districts.
f. Lighting. Lighting devices shall be shaded so as not to glare into residential districts.
g. Hours. Gasoline service stations providing automobile repair services abutting residential districts shall limit their hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.. Signs shall not be lit when the service station is closed.
h. Ingress and egress. Driveway widths and separation shall be reviewed and approved by the public works department. There shall be not more than two (2) driveways per public right-of-way.
i. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Ch. 19.05 EMC.
j. Signs. The sign regulations of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply.
k. Grocery sales facilities. Convenience grocery sales facilities shall be limited to a maximum size of three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area in zones which do not allow retail grocery sales as a principally permitted use.
l. General development standards. Development standards and criteria of the underlying zoning district shall apply unless otherwise noted in this section.
m. Storage of motor fuels. Quantity limitations on hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, shall not apply to motor fuels that may be stored on the site for the permitted use.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 93
4. Retail convenience grocery sales are allowed in conjunction with a gasoline service station as a special permit use subject to the development standards listed in EMC 19.04.080(3).
5. Retail sales are permitted as part of a planned development where at least fifty (50) percent of the total development is for office use. Drive-in restaurants, service stations, drive-in cleaning establishments, and other similar retail establishments are not permitted.
6. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.
7. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.
8. Reference EMC 19.07.040(C), outdoor storage landscaping.
9. Whenever feasible, drive-up/drive-through facilities shall be accessed from the rear of a site and run along an interior lot line or building elevation. Landscaping, sufficient to soften the visual impact of vehicle stacking areas, may be required. Additionally, the following standards must be met:
a. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
b. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.
c. Side yard. Each side yard shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width.
d. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.
e. Ingress and egress. Driveway standards as provided in the City of Ephrata Community Street and Utility Standards shall be met. There shall be not more than two (2) driveways per public right-of-way.
f. Landscaping. A Ten (10) foot strip is required along street rights-of-way, except at points of ingress and egress to the property. A five (5) foot strip of landscaping along side lot lines shall be provided.
g. Parking areas shall be screened from residential uses to limit vehicle headlight and noise intrusion off site. Parking areas shall be lighted and designed to limit glare beyond property lines.
10. State licensed marijuana retailers may locate in the City of Ephrata pursuant to the following restrictions:
a. Marijuana retailers must comply with all requirements of state law and the Washington State Liquor Control Board's regulations.
b. Marijuana retailers may locate only in the Commercial-2 zone and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zone, including the Commercial-1 and Commercial-3 zones, all Residential zones, all Industrial zones, and the Suburban-Residential, Open Space Reserve, Urban Reserve, Public Facilities, and Airport Enterprise zones.
c. Marijuana retailers shall not locate in a building in which non-conforming retail uses have been established in any residential or office zone.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 94
d. Marijuana retailers shall not operate as an accessory or subordinate use to a primary use or as a home occupation.
e. Marijuana retailers shall not locate within one thousand feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any elementary or secondary school, playground, recreation center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, or library, or any game arcade admission to which is not restricted to persons aged twenty-one years or older. This distance shall be measured as the shortest straight line distance from the property line of the proposed building/business location to the property line of the entities listed above.
f. Marijuana odor shall be contained within the retail outlet so that odor from the marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell from any abutting use or property. If marijuana odor can be smelled from any abutting use or property, the marijuana retailer shall be required to implement measures, including but not limited to, the installation of ventilation equipment necessary to contain the odor.
g. The facility shall be designed, located, constructed and buffered to blend in with its surroundings and mitigate significant adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. Special attention shall be given to minimizing odor, noise, light, security, glare and traffic impacts.
h. During non-business hours, all recreational marijuana retailers shall store all useable marijuana, marijuana-infused product, and cash in a safe or in a substantially constructed and locked cabinet. The safe or cabinet shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For useable marijuana products that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, these products may be stored in a locked refrigerator or freezer container in a manner approved by the Community Development Director, provided the container is affixed to the building structure.
i. Marijuana retailers are required to acquire all necessary business licenses and are required to comply with municipal tax regulations and all other applicable City ordinances.
(Ord. 15-02 2015; Ord. 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 95
19.04.090 Service land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Finance, insurance, real estate services
P
P
P
P
Personal services: Laundry, dry cleaning, barber, salons, shoe repair, launderettes
P
P
P
P
Mortuaries
P
P
C
P
Home day-care
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Day-care center
C
C
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
Business services, duplicating and blue printing, travel agencies, and employment agencies
P
P
P
P
P
P
Building maintenance and pest control
P
P
P
P
Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, EMC 19.04.190 and 19.04.195
A
A
C(4)
P
P
Rental and leasing services for cars, trucks, trailers, furniture, and tools
P
P
P
Auto repair and washing services (including body work)
P
P
P
P
Repair services: Watch, TV, electrical, electronic, upholstery
P
P
P
P
P
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 96
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Professional services: Medical, clinics, and other health care-related services
P
P
P(11)
P
P
Heavy equipment and truck repair
P
P
P
P
Contract construction service offices: Building construction, plumbing, paving, and landscaping
P(7)
P(8)
P(8)
P(8)
Educational services: Vocational, trade, art, music, dancing, barber, and beauty
P
P
P
P
Churches
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
S(1)
Administrative and professional offices – general
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Municipal uses and buildings
C
C
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P(5)
P
Research, development and testing
P
P
P(6)
P(6)
Planned development retail sales
C(2)
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
A
A(10)
A(9)
A(10)
A
A
A
A
Boarding kennels and breeding establishments
C
C
C
C
Veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals
P(3)
P(3)
P
P
Administrative or executive offices which are part of a predominant industrial operation
P
P
P
Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a principally permitted use
A
A
A
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 97
19.04.100 Service land use development conditions.
1. Church uses must conform to the development standards listed below (excluding drive-in churches, which are conditional uses).
a. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is one (1) acre in SR zones; in other zoning districts it shall be the minimum lot area of the underlying district and shall include area for sufficient parking for Chapter 19.05.
b. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.
c. Side yard. Each side yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width.
d. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.
e. Ingress and egress. A separate entrance and exit shall be provided. Loading and unloading areas shall be provided and shall be located off public streets.
f. Landscaping. All yard areas must be landscaped.
g. Parking areas shall be screened from residential uses to limit vehicle headlight and noise intrusion off site. Parking areas shall be lighted and designed to limit glare beyond property lines.
h. Signs. Sign regulations as provided in Chapter 19.06 shall be observed.
2. Retail sales are permitted as part of a planned development where at least fifty (50) percent of the total development is for office use. Drive-in restaurants, service stations, drive-in cleaning establishments, and other similar retail establishments are not permitted.
3. Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals when located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to any residential use, providing the animals are housed indoors, with no outside runs, and the building is soundproofed. Soundproofing must be designed by a competent acoustical engineers and shall meet the performance standards as defined in EMC 19.08.050.
4. Those uses that are principally permitted in the I-2 zone may be permitted in the I-1 zone via a conditional use permit.
5. Except for such uses and buildings subject to EMC 19.04.150.
6. Conducted in conjunction with a principally permitted use.
7. Contract construction services office use does not include contractor storage yards, which is a separate use listed in EMC 19.04.040.
8. Outside storage or operations yards are permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure.
9. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.
10. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 98
11. Shall only apply to medical and dental offices and/or neighborhood clinics.
(Ord. 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 99
19.04.110 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Performing and cultural arts uses, such as art galleries/studios
C
C
P
P
P
C
P
C
P
Historic and monument sites
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Public assembly (indoor): Sports facilities, arenas, auditoriums and exhibit halls, bowling alleys, dart-playing facilities, skating rinks, community clubs, athletic clubs, recreation centers, theaters (excluding school facilities)
P
P
P
P
P
Public assembly (outdoor): Fairgrounds and amusement parks, tennis courts, athletic fields, miniature golf, go-cart tracks, drive-in theaters, etc.
P
P
P
P
P
Open Space use: Cemeteries, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other recreation facilities, including buildings or structures associated therewith
C
C
C
C
C
C
P(2)
C
C
C
P
C
C
P
C
P
Employee recreation areas
A
A
A
A
A
A
Private clubs, fraternal lodges, etc.
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P(1)
C
C
C
P
P
C
P
Recreational vehicle parks
C
C
C
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 100
S-R
H-M
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
U-R
I-1
I-2
OSR
A-E
P-F
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
p
Recreational buildings in MHP
A
A
A
(Ord 10-09, 2010)(Ord 13-12, 2013; Ord 18-09, 2018)
19.04.120 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land use development conditions.
1. Business, civic, social, and fraternal associations and service offices are principally permitted uses.
2. Principally permitted uses are limited to parks and playgrounds.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 101
19.04.130 Resource land uses.
Zoning Districts
Key
P = Principally
Permitted Use
S = Special Uses
C = Conditional Uses
A = Accessory Uses
S-R Suburban Residential
H-M Hillside Management District
R-1 Single Family Residential
R-2 Attached Housing Residential
R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential
R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential
R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse
C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Office and Service Commercial
U-R Urban Reserve
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
OSR Open Space Recreational
AE Airport Enterprise
PF Public Facility
Agricultural uses such as planting and harvesting of crops, animal husbandry (including wholesale nurseries and greenhouses)
(((not to include recreational marijuana production)))
P
P
P
Crop and tree farming
(((not to include recreational marijuana production)))
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Storage, manufacturing, processing, and conversion of agricultural products (not including slaughtering or meat packing)
P
P
P
Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use
A(1)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Roadside stands
A(2)
A(2)
(Ord. 15-02, 2015)
19.04.140 Resource land use development conditions.
1. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 102
2. Roadside stands not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in floor area, and not over twenty (20) lineal feet on any side, primarily for sale of agricultural products on the premises.
19.04.150 Special use combining district, SU.
It is the purpose of the SU district to provide for special controls for certain uses which do not clearly fit into other districts, which may be due to technological and social changes, or which are of such unique character as to warrant special attention in the interest of the city’s optimum development and the preservation and enhancement of its environmental quality. A special use combining district is imposed on an existing zoning district, permitting the special use as well as uses permitted by the underlying zone. The combining district becomes void if substantial construction has not begun within a one-year period, and the district reverts to its original zoning designation. It is the intent of the special use combining regulations to provide the city with adequate procedures for controlling and reviewing such uses and to discourage application for speculative rezoning.
A. Uses subject to special use combining district regulations. The following list is illustrative of the types of uses subject to special use combining district regulations and is not intended to be exclusive:
1. Uses which occupy or would occupy large areas of land.
2. Uses which would involve the construction of buildings or other structures of unusual height or mass.
3. Uses which house, employ, or serve large numbers of people.
4. Uses which generate heavy traffic.
5. Uses which have unusual impact on environmental quality of the area.
6. Any use which does not lend itself to an interpretation of substantial similarity to other uses identified or described in this title.
7. Uses which, in the judgment of the community development director, warrant review by the planning commission and the city council.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 103
8. Examples of uses subject to review as described in this subsection would include but are not limited to the following:
a. Commercial uses: sports stadiums, rodeos, fairgrounds, exhibition or convention halls, merchandise marts, and drive-in theaters.
b. Special environmental problems posed by: refineries, nuclear power generating plants, airports, heliports, sanitary landfills, extractive industries, solid waste incinerators, or energy/resource recovery facilities.
c. Hazardous wastes: offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities in I-2 and AE districts only, subject to the provisions of EMC 19.08.050.
B. Application procedures. The application procedure for a special use combining district shall be the same as for an amendment to this title as provided in EMC 19.09.050, except that development plan approval is concurrent with the combining district.
C. Documentation required. Required documentation is as follows:
1. A vicinity map drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch to one thousand (1,000) feet showing the site in relation to its surrounding area, including streets, roads or other bodies of water, the development characteristics and zoning pattern of the area, and a scale and north arrow. The vicinity map may be in sketch form but shall be drawn with sufficient accuracy to reasonably orient the reader to the vicinity, and to adequately convey the required information.
2. A map or drawing of the site drawn to a scale acceptable to the planning department, generally one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet. The map or drawing shall show the following information:
a. Dimensions and names of streets bounding or touching the site.
b. Such existing or proposed features as streams or other bodies of water, rights-of-way, easements, and other physical or legal features which may affect or be affected by the proposed development.
c. Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals of not more than five (5) feet in areas having slopes exceeding three (3) percent, and not more than two (2) feet in areas having slopes of less than three (3) percent.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 104
d. Accurate legal description of the property.
e. Existing and proposed structures or buildings, including the identification of types and proposed use of the structures. All uses must be compatible with the major use.
f. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
g. Dimensions of the site, distances from property lines, and space between structures.
h. Tentative routing of domestic water lines, storm drains, sanitary sewers, and other utilities, including an identification of planned disposal or runoff.
i. Elevations, perspective renderings, or such other graphic material or evidence to illustrate effect on the view enjoyed by and from other properties in the vicinity, if required by the community development department.
j. Architectural renderings of buildings.
k. A written statement providing the following information:
(1) Program for development, including staging or timing.
(2) Proposed ownership pattern upon completion of development.
(3) Basic content of restrictive covenants, if any.
(4) Provisions to ensure permanence and maintenance of open space through means acceptable to the city.
(5) Statement or tabulation of number of persons to be employed, served, or housed in the proposed development.
(6) Statement describing the relationship of the proposed development to the city comprehensive plan.
(7) Statement indicating availability of existing or proposed sanitary sewers.
3. Such other data or information as the community development department may require.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 105
D. Development standards. In reviewing and approving proposed developments falling under the purview of this section, the city council shall make the following findings:
1. That the location for the proposed use is reasonable.
2. That existing or proposed trafficways are adequate to serve new development.
3. That setback, height, and bulk of buildings are acceptable for the proposed use and for the vicinity in which it is located.
4. That landscaping and other site improvements are comparable to the highest standards set forth for other developments as set out in this title.
5. That the performance standards pertaining to air and water pollution, noise levels, etc., are comparable to the highest standards specified for other uses as set out in this title.
6. That the proposed development is in the public interest and serves a need of community-wide or regional importance.
In reviewing and approving special uses, the city council may impose such conditions as they deem necessary in the interest of the welfare of the city and the protection of the environment.
E. Period of validity. Any special use combining district shall remain effective only for one (1) year unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within one (1) year of the granting of the special use combining district, the combining district shall become invalid, and the original zoning designation of the land shall apply.
F. Minor and major adjustments.
1. If minor adjustments are made following the adoption of the final development plan and approval of the combining district, such adjustments shall be approved by the community development director prior to the issuance of a building permit. Minor adjustments are those which may affect the precise dimensions or siting of buildings approved in the final plan, or the density of the development or open space provided.
2. Major adjustments are those which, as determined by the community development director, substantially change the basic design, density, open space uses, or other similar
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 106
requirements or provisions. Authorization for major adjustments shall be made by the city council.
3. The provisions of this subsection pertaining to minor and major adjustments shall apply to various parts of a staged development.
19.04.160 Development standards.
The development standards tables in EMC 19.04.170 and 19.04.190 determine the specific development standards for a zoning district. The development standards are located on the horizontal rows and the zoning districts are located on the vertical columns of these tables. The minimum dimensional requirements are located in the box at the intersection of the column and the row. The parenthetical numbers in the boxes identify specific requirements applicable either to a special use or the entire zone. The parenthetical numbers correspond to numbers in the subsection immediately following each table.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 107
19.04.170 Agricultural and residential zone development standards. Zoning Districts S-R Suburban Residential R-1 Single Family Residential R-2 Attached Housing Residential R-3 Small Lot Single Family Residential R-4 Small Lot Single Family and Multifamily Residential R-5 Multifamily Residential Townhouse SF Duplex MF SF Duplex MF SF Duplex MF Maximum density: dwelling units per acre 4 dus/ac 7 dus/ac 8 dus/ac 8 dus/ac 16 dus/ac 7 dus/ac 8 dus/ac 8 dus/ac 16 dus/ac 12 dus/ac 12 dus/ac 16 dus/ac Minimum Density: dwelling units per acre 1 du/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac 3 dus/ac Minimum lot area: square feet or acres, as noted 10,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. (1) 6,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. (1) 4,000 sq. ft. 4,000 sq. ft. 4,000 sq. ft. (1) Minimum lot width: feet (2) 60 ft 60 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft Maximum site coverage: percent of site 30% 40% 55% (3) 50% (3) 50% (3) 55% (3) 55% (3) 50% (3) 50% (3) 55% (3) 50% (3) 50% (3) Minimum yard requirements: feet Front yard setback 20 ft (4)(6) 20 ft (4) (6) 20 ft (4) (6) 20 ft (4) (6) 20 ft (4) (6) 20 ft (4) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) 15 ft (4) (5) (6) Side yard setback 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft (7) Side yard on flanking street of a corner lot setback 15 ft 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft (6) 15 ft Rear yard setback 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) 5 ft (17) Additional setbacks/ distances between buildings
(14) (14) (18) (10) (9) (14) (14) (14) (9) (10) (14) (18) (14) (14) (9) (10) (14) (18)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 108
S-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 SF Duplex MF SF Duplex MF SF Duplex MF Height limitation: in stories/not to exceed in feet 2 stry/ 35 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 3 stry/ 35 ft 3 stry/ 35 ft 3 stry/ 35 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 3 stry/ 35 ft Maximum impervious surface: percent of total parcel area 50% 50% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% Zero lot line and clustering (11) The provisions in EMC 19.08.300, 19.08.310, 19.08.320, and 19.08.330 shall apply. Signs The sign regulations of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply. Off-street parking The off-street parking requirements of Ch. 19.05 EMC shall apply. Landscaping The landscaping requirements of Ch. 19.07 EMC shall apply. Multifamily transition area
(12) Multifamily design review (13) (13) (13) Additional standards Additional standards for specific uses are contained in Chs. 19.08 and 19.09 EMC. (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) Outside Storage (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19)
(Ord. 10-07, 2010)(Ord. 13-12, 2013)
19.04.180 Residential land use development standard conditions.
1. Minimum lot area is eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet for the first two (2) dwelling units, and nine hundred (900) square feet for each additional dwelling unit and there shall be maintained upon the same lot with the dwelling a space open and landscaped having an area at least equivalent to 300 square feet for each dwelling unit in addition to any required off street parking area.
2. To determine minimum lot width for irregular lots, a circle of applicable diameter (the minimum lot width permitted) shall be scaled within the proposed boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement to another lot is not included within the circle.
3. Interior yards shall not be computed as part of the site coverage.
4. Uncovered Porches and private shared courtyard features may be built within the front building setback line.
5. Proposed front yards less than twenty (20) feet in depth are subject to approval by the community development director, based on review and recommendation from the public works
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 109
department relative to the existing and future traffic volumes and right-of-way requirements as specified in the city comprehensive transportation plan and city construction standards.
6. At least twenty (20) linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport, or other primary parking area and the street property line with the exception of an alley property line.
7. Each side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the lot width; however, regardless of lot width, the yard width need not be more than thirty (30) feet. For multifamily townhouse developments that attach three (3) units or less, in the R-2 or R-5 zoning districts the aggregate yard width need not be more than thirty (30) feet, but in no case shall a yard be less than ten (10) feet.
9. An inner court providing access to a double-row building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
10. The distance between principal buildings shall be at least one-half the sum of the height of both buildings; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than twelve (12) feet. This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same building separated from each other by a court or other open space.
11. Minimum lot width, building setbacks, and minimum lot size regulations may be modified consistent with provisions for zero lot line and clustering housing development.
12. The requirements of EMC 19.08.215 shall apply in any multifamily transition area, which includes any portion of a multifamily district within one hundred (100) feet of a single-family district or within one hundred (100) feet of a public street right-of-way.
13. The requirements of EMC 19.09.045 for multifamily design review shall apply to any multifamily dwelling of three (3) or more units.
14. For multifamily townhouse developments that attach three (3) units, the minimum building to building separation shall be ten (10) feet. For duplex and single-family condominium townhouse developments, the minimum building to building separation shall be established through the International Building Code (IBC) or International Residential Code (IRC), as may be applicable.
15. Cargo containers proposed to be located in a residential zone must be enclosed completely within a woodframe/stick-built structure with a peaked roof and building materials similar to that of the principal residence on the site. No containers greater than ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet may be placed in residential districts. This restriction does not apply to containers collecting debris or accepting household goods for moving that are located on residential property for less than sixty
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 110
(60) days. Additionally, institutional uses are exempt from these requirements except when a cargo container is proposed to be located adjacent to or within sight of a residential use.
17. No rear yard setback is required in residentially zoned districts when property abuts an alley. In no case shall any portion of the structure extend beyond the property line.
18. Two (2) story multifamily structures shall maintain a 25 foot buffer from an adjacent single family residential lot lines to exterior wall of multifamily dwelling. A three (3) story multifamily structures shall maintain a 50 foot buffer from an adjacent single family residential lot lines to exterior wall of the multifamily dwelling.
19. Outdoor storage areas as defined in EMC 19.02.315 are prohibited.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 111
19.04.190 Commercial and industrial zone development standards. Zoning Districts C-1 Central Business C-2 General Commercial C-3 Office and Service Commercial I-1 Light Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial A-E Airport Enterprise OSR Open Space Recreation U-R Urban Reserve HMO Hillside Management Area PF Public Facility Minimum Lot Area 5,000 square feet (1) 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet 10,000 sq. ft. 1 Acre 5,000 Square feet Maximum site coverage: percent 100% 100% 35% 45% 100% 100% 25% 25% 25%
Minimum yard requirements: feet Front yard 0 ft (2) 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 15 ft 20 ft 20 ft 10 ft Side yard 0 ft (2) (3) 0 ft(4) (5) 0 ft(4) (5) 0 ft (4) 0 ft (4) 0 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 10 ft Side yard on flanking street of a corner lot 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 0 ft 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft 10 ft Rear yard 0 ft (2)(3) 0 ft (2) (4) (6) 0 ft (4)(6) 0 ft (4)(7) 0 ft (4)(7) 0 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 10 ft Height limitation: in stories/not to exceed in feet 2 stry/ 35 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft (9) 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry/ 35 ft(9) 2 stry/ 35 ft(10) 2 stry/ 35 ft (10) 2 stry/ 30 ft 2 stry 30 ft 2 stry 35 ft 3 stry 35 ft Signs The sign regulations of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply. Off-street parking The off-street parking requirements of Ch. 19.05 EMC shall apply. Landscaping The landscaping requirements of Ch. 19.07 EMC shall apply. Outdoor storage (11) (12) (11) (13) (14) (14) (11) (11) (11) Loading Areas (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) (15) Additional standards (8)(16) (18) (8)(16) (18) (16)(18) (16)(17)(18) (16)(17) (18) (16)(17) (18)
(Ord 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 112
19.04.195 Commercial and industrial land use development standard conditions.
1. Minimum lot of record or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is less.
2. None, except as required by landscaping, or if off-street parking is provided onsite. See the downtown design review criteria outlined in EMC 19.09.046.
3. No minimum setback is required. If a rear and/or side yard abuts a residential district, a ten (10) foot landscaped rear and/or side yard setback may be required. See the downtown design review criteria outlined in EMC 19.09.046.
4. No side or rear yard is required, except when abutting a district other than C-1, and then the yard shall be not less than three (3) feet in width, unless the abutting district or use is residential and then the yard shall be ten (10) feet in width and fully landscaped.
5. No side yard is required, except abutting a residential district, and then the side yard shall be ten (10) feet minimum with three (3) feet minimum landscaping.
6. No rear yard is required, except abutting a residential district, and then the rear yard shall be ten (10) feet minimum with three (3) feet minimum landscaping.
7. No rear yard is required, except as may be required by transitional conditions.
8. The downtown design review requirements of EMC 19.09.046 shall apply.
9. Beyond this height, to a height not greater than either four (4) stories or sixty (60) feet, there shall be added one (1) additional foot of yard for each one (1) foot of additional building height. The Community development director shall be authorized to approve one (1) additional story, provided such height does not detract from the continuity of the industrial area, and may impose such conditions as may be necessary to reduce any incompatibility with surrounding uses. Any additional height increase may be granted by the planning commission.
10. The height limitation is two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. Beyond this height, to a height not greater than either four (4) stories or sixty (60) feet, there shall be added one (1) additional foot of yard for each two (2) feet of additional building height. The Community development director shall be authorized to approve one (1) additional story, provided such height does not detract from the continuity of the industrial area, and may impose such conditions as may be necessary to reduce any incompatibility with surrounding uses. Any additional height increases may be granted by the planning commission.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 113
11. Outdoor storage areas are prohibited.
12. Outdoor storage areas shall be fenced for security and public safety by a sight-obscuring fence unless it is determined through the development plan review that a sight-obscuring fence is not necessary.
13. Outside storage or operations yards shall be confined to the area to the rear of a line which is an extension of the front wall of the principal building, and shall be reasonably screened from view from any street by appropriate walls, fencing, earth mounds, or Type II landscaping as defined in EMC 19.07.050.
14. Outside storage or operations areas shall be fenced for security and public safety at the property line to a Type II landscaping standard as defined in EMC 19.07.050.
15. Loading areas must be located in such a manner that no loading, unloading, or maneuvering of trucks associated therewith takes place on public rights-of-way.
16. Development plan approval is required as provided in EMC 19.09.010.
17. Multitenant buildings shall be permitted.
18. The performance standards as provided in EMC 19.08.050 shall apply.
(Ord 18-09-2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 114
19.04.200 Mixed use overlay development standards. Overlay Districts C2-MU C3-MU C1-MU Floor area ratio .40 for commercial uses. .50 for commercial uses combined with residential uses; provided, that commercial floor area may be increased by one (1) square foot for each square foot of residential floor area provided up to a maximum commercial FAR of .5. 1.0 for residential uses; provided, that residential FAR may be increased by .5 if parking is provided below grade, up to a maximum of 1.5. .40 for commercial uses. .50 for commercial uses combined with residential uses; provided, that commercial floor area may be increased by one (1) square foot for each square foot of residential floor area provided up to a maximum commercial FAR of .5. 1.0 for residential uses; provided, that residential FAR may be increased by .5 if parking is provided below grade, up to a maximum of 1.5. .40 for commercial uses. .50 for commercial uses combined with residential uses; provided, that commercial floor area may be increased by one (1) square foot for each square foot of residential floor area provided up to a maximum commercial FAR of .5. 1.0 for residential uses; provided, that residential FAR may be increased by .5 if parking is provided below grade, up to a maximum of 1.5. Site Coverage Forty (40) percent for commercial uses. Sixty (60) percent for commercial uses with residential uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area is residential use. Forty (40) percent for commercial uses. Sixty (60) percent for commercial uses with residential uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area is residential use. Forty (40) percent for commercial uses. Sixty (60) percent for commercial uses with residential uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area is residential use. Height Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, that basic heights may be increased up to the maximum height of forty (40) feet. (1) Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, that basic heights may be increased up to the maximum height of forty (40) feet. (1) Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, that basic heights may be increased up to the maximum height of forty (40) feet. (1) Front yard Zero (0) feet; provided, that some setback may be required in the front yard to accommodate a sidewalk which shall be at least ten (10) feet in width. Zero (0) feet; provided, that some setback may be required in the front yard to accommodate a sidewalk which shall be at least ten (10) feet in width. Zero (0) feet; provided, that some setback may be required in the front yard to accommodate a sidewalk which shall be at least ten (10) feet in width.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 115
Rear and side yard Zero (0) feet; provided, that setbacks of at least twenty (20) feet will be required in any rear or side yards that are adjacent to a residential zoning district. Zero (0) feet; provided, that setbacks of at least twenty (20) feet will be required in any rear or side yards that are adjacent to a residential zoning district. Zero (0) feet; provided, that setbacks of at least twenty (20) feet will be required in any rear or side yards that are adjacent to a residential zoning district. Off-street parking Retail/office uses: Four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. (2) Residential uses (3) Retail/office uses: Four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. (2) Residential uses (3) Retail/office uses: Four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. (2) Residential uses (3) (Ord. 10-07, 2010; Ord. 13-12, 2013)
19.04.205 Mixed use land use development standard conditions.
1. The following height modifications shall apply:
a. Five (5) foot increases for developments containing residential uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of gross floor area is in residential use.
b. Five (5) foot increases for parking under the building.
c. Five (5) foot increases for using a pitched roof form.
d. Five (5) foot increase for stepping back from the top floor (minimum of five (5) feet).
2. The first three hundred (300) square feet of retail or office space that is a part of an individual residential unit is exempt.
3. The following parking requirements shall apply:
a. Studio: .75 parking spaces per dwelling unit (du) without commercial uses; .50/du with commercial uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses.
b. One-bedroom: 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit without commercial uses; 1.0 parking spaces per dwelling unit with commercial uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 116
c. Two-bedroom: 2.0 parking spaces per dwelling unit without commercial uses; 1.25 parking spaces per dwelling unit with commercial uses; provided, that twenty-five (25) percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses. (Ord. 10-07, 2010)
19.04.210 – Airport Clear Zones
To carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the airport. Such zones are shown on the airport zoning map consisting of one sheet prepared by the Grant County planning department, dated September 6, 1978. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are established and defined as follows:
1) Runway larger than utility visual approach zone – The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
2) Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone – The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
3) Precision instrument runway approach zone – The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
4) Transitional zones – The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
5) Horizontal zone – The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 117
19.04.215 – Airport Clear Zone Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are established for each of the zones in question as follows:
1) Runway larger than utility visual approach zone – Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
2) Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone – Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
3) Precision instrument runway approach zone – Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
4) Transitional zone - Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
5) Horizontal zone – Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation.
6) Conical zone – Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 118
7) Accepted height limitations – Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any tree to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.04.220 – Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, take off or maneuvering of aircraft intended to use the airport. Further, all new constructions and developments shall use the current Best Management Practices as defined in the most current Storm Water Management Plan for Eastern Washington adopted by the Washington State Department of Ecology. Open water retention/detention ponds are prohibited outright within 3000 feet of the centerline of all runways at the port of Ephrata. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.04.225 – Future Uses
Except as specifically provided in this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit to the planning commission shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with this chapter.
1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet in height.
2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet in height except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 119
3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transitional zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet in height. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.04.230 – Existing Uses
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.04.235 – Variances
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Hearing Examiner for a variance from such regulations. The application for a variance must be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration and the Port of Ephrata as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space. The applicant shall demonstrate that the findings contained in Section 19.09.040 can be met and shall additionally demonstrate that granting relief from a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would not be contrary to the public interest, would not create a hazard to air navigation and would be in accordance with the spirit of the Airport Clear Zone regulations. (Ord. 10-09, 2010; Ord. 13-12, 2013)
19.04.240 – Obstruction Marking and Lighting
The owner of any structure or tree permitted to exceed height limitations shall install, operate and maintain such markings and lights as necessary to ensure the obstruction’s visibility to pilots. (Ord. 10-09, 2010)
19.04.245 – Conflicting Regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 10-09, 2010)(Ord. 13-12, 2013)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 120
Chapter 19.05 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS*
Sections:
19.05.010 Purpose.
19.05.020 Categories of uses and conditions of uses covered by chapter.
19.05.030 Location of off-street parking.
19.05.040 Parking standards for specific activities.
19.05.050 Drive-in businesses.
19.05.060 Loading space.
19.05.070 Off-street parking regulations for central business zone.
19.05.080 Size and design standards.
19.05.090 Overhang exception, landscaping, paving, wheel stops, drainage, lighting and curbing.
19.05.100 Off-street parking plans.
19.05.010 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to specify the off-street parking and loading requirements for all uses permitted in this title, and to describe design standards and other required improvements.
B. The community development director shall have the authority to waive or modify specific requirements of this chapter or to impose additional off-street parking requirements in unique circumstances to ensure that the intent of this chapter is met and to allow for flexibility and innovation in design. Unique circumstances may include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Proximity to transit stations, transfer points, or transit stops;
2. Flexible work hour scheduling for employees;
3. Documentation of parking patterns and demand of employees and patrons;
4. Physical circumstances of the site such as topography, lot size/shape, and environmentally sensitive areas.
19.05.020 Categories of uses and conditions of uses covered by chapter.
A. New construction. New construction is covered by this chapter as follows:
1. Buildings constructed or enlarged.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 121
2. Other structures or use areas constructed or enlarged.
3. Parking lots constructed or enlarged as follows:
a. If new or adding the equivalent of fifty (50) percent or more of the existing parking lot area, the entire parking facility must meet the standards of this title.
b. If adding less than fifty (50) percent of the existing parking lot area, only the new portion must meet the standards of this title.
B. Change in use. When the occupancy of any land use, structure or building, or any part of a building, structure or land use, is changed to another use, parking shall be provided to meet the parking requirements of the new use.
19.05.030 Location of off-street parking.
A. Single-family dwellings. Required parking for a single-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot as the building it is to serve.
B. Multifamily dwellings. Required parking for multifamily dwellings may be on a contiguous lot if located within five hundred (500) feet of the dwelling units. The lot shall be legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means to ensure continuous use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval of the city attorney.
C. Other uses. For uses other than those described in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, required parking may be in areas other than on the premises if the required amount of parking area is set aside for a particular use in such a lot and such area is not located more than five hundred (500) feet from the premises. The lot or area to be utilized shall be legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means to ensure continuous use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval of the city attorney.
19.05.040 Parking standards for specific activities.
A. Standards for the number of parking spaces for specific activities are indicated in the following chart:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 122
SPECIFIC LAND USE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT Living activities Single-family Two (2) parking spaces per single-family dwelling. Duplex Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit. Multifamily 1 One (1) parking space per unit for efficiency apartments in all sized developments; two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit for developments with forty-nine (49) or less dwelling units; one and eight-tenths (1.8) parking spaces per dwelling unit for developments of fifty (50) or more dwelling units. For developments of fifty (50) or more dwelling units, one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15) dwelling units for recreation vehicles. Multiple dwellings for low-income elderly One (1) parking space for each two (2) dwelling units. Accessory dwelling unit One off-street parking space per accessory unit is required in addition to the required parking for the single-family home. The community development director may waive this requirement where there are special circumstances related to the property and its location. The surface of a required ADU off-street parking space shall comply with EMC 19.05.090(C). Boardinghouses, Bed and Breakfast facilities and lodging houses One (1) parking space for the proprietor, plus one (1) space per sleeping room for boarders or lodging use, plus one (1) additional space for each four (4) persons employed on the premises. Mobile and manufactured home parks Two (2) parking spaces for each mobile home site, plus one (1) screened space for each ten (10) lots for recreation vehicles. Recreational vehicle park One (1) parking space for each site. Hotels/Motels One (1) parking space for each guest room, plus two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) employees. Commercial Activities Banks One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center. Professional and business offices One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center. Shopping centers Four and one-half (4.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leaseable area (GLA) for centers having GLA of less than four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet, and five (5.0) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of GLA for centers having a GLA of over four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet. Restaurants, nightclubs, taverns and lounges One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center. Take out Restaurants Five (5) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center. Retail stores, supermarkets, department stores and personal service shops One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 123
SPECIFIC LAND USE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT Other retail establishments; furniture, appliance, electronics, hardware stores, household equipment service shops, clothing or shoe repair shops One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center. Drive-in business One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center. Uncovered commercial area, new and used car lots, plant nursery One (1) parking space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of retail sales area in addition to any parking requirements for buildings, except when located in a shopping center. Motor vehicle repair and services One (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center. Industrial showroom and display One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of display area. Bulk retail stores One (1) parking space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. Industrial Activities Manufacturing, research and testing laboratories, creameries, bottling establishments, bakeries, canneries, printing and engraving shops One (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. For parking requirements for associated office areas, see “Professional and business offices”. Warehouses and storage buildings One (1) parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area. Maximum office area of two (2) percent of gross floor area may be included without additional parking requirements. Speculative warehouse and industrial buildings with multiple use or tenant potential One (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area if building size is less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, or one (1) parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for buildings which exceed one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet gross of floor area. This is a minimum requirement and valid for construction permit purposes only. Final parking requirements will be based upon actual occupancy. Recreation-Amusement Activities Auditoriums, theaters, places of public assembly, stadiums and outdoor sports areas One (1) parking space for each four (4) fixed seats, or one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area of main auditorium or of principal place of assembly not containing fixed seats, whichever is greater. Bowling alleys Five (5) spaces for each alley, except when located in a shopping center. Dance halls and skating rinks One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center. Golf driving ranges One (1) parking space for each driving station. Miniature golf courses One (1) parking space for each hole.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 124
SPECIFIC LAND USE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT Recreational buildings, whether independent or associated with a multifamily complex One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. Such spaces shall be located adjacent to the building and shall be designated for visitors by signing or other special markings. Educational Activities Senior high schools, public, parochial and private One (1) space for each employee plus one (1) space for each ten (10) students enrolled. In addition, if buses for the transportation of students are kept at the school, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus. One (1) additional parking space for each one hundred (100) students shall be provided for visitors in the vicinity of or adjacent to the administration portion of the building or complex. Such parking spaces shall be so designated by signing or other special marking as approved by the public works director. Colleges and universities and business and vocational schools Two and one-half (2 1/2) parking spaces for each employee, plus one (1) space for each three (3) students residing on campus, plus one (1) space for each five (5) day students not residing on campus. In addition, if buses for transportation of students are kept at the school, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus. One (1) additional parking space for each one hundred (100) students shall be provided for visitors in the vicinity of or adjacent to the administration portion of the building or complex. Such parking spaces shall be so designated by signing or other special marking as approved by the public works director. Elementary and junior high Two and one-half (2 1/2) parking spaces for each employee. In addition, if buses for transportation of students are kept at the school, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus. One (1) additional parking space for each one hundred (100) students shall be provided for visitors in the vicinity of or adjacent to the administration portion of the building or complex. Such parking spaces shall be so designated by signing or other special marking as approved by the public works director. Libraries and museums One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet in office and public use. Day-care centers One (1) parking space for each employee, plus loading and unloading areas. Medical Activities Medical and dental offices One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center. Convalescent, nursing and health institutions One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees, plus one (1) parking space for each three (3) beds. Hospitals One (1) parking space for each three (3) beds, plus one (1) parking space for each staff doctor, plus one (1) parking space for each three (3) employees. Religious Activities Churches One (1) space for each five (5) seats in the main auditorium; provided, that the spaces for any church shall not be less than ten (10). For all existing churches enlarging the seating capacity of their auditoriums, one (1) additional parking space shall be provided for each five (5) additional seats provided by the new construction. For all existing churches making structural alterations or additions which do not increase the seating capacity of the auditorium, no additional parking need be provided. Mortuaries or funeral homes One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area of assembly rooms. Other uses For uses not specifically identified in this section, the amount of parking required shall be determined by the planning department, based on staff experience, parking required for similar uses, and, if appropriate, documentation provided by the applicant.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 125
(1) Recreational vehicle parking spaces shall be in defined, fenced and screened areas with a minimum of a six (6) foot high sight-obscuring fence or landscaping as determined by the planning department, or the developer may provide areas of usable open space equal to that area that would be required for recreational vehicle parking. A vehicle less than twenty (20) feet long that is used as primary transportation is not subject to recreational vehicle parking regulations. If open space in lieu of recreational vehicle parking is provided, its appropriateness will be determined at the time of development plan review by the planning department. Where enclosed garages are utilized to provide parking required by this title, an eighteen (18) foot stacking space shall be provided in front of such garage units. Provided, however, the Community development director shall have the authority to approve alternative plans where the developer can assure that such garage units will continue to be available for parking purposes and will not cause onsite parking or circulation problems. These assurances include but are not limited to:
(a) covenants that run with the land or homeowners’ association that require garages to be utilized for the storage of vehicles,
(b) maintenance of drive aisle widths of twenty-six (26) feet in front of each garage unit, and
(c) maintenance of minimum clearances for fire lanes on the site.
A. Exceptions for senior citizen apartments in multifamily buildings in the central business
district:
a. Approved building plans must show one and eight-tenths (1.8) spaces per dwelling unit and also shall show which spaces are not to be initially installed. The additional spaces, plus any required landscaping, shall be installed if at any time the structure is not used for senior citizen apartments or if the facility shows a continued shortage of parking.
b. The requirement of one (1) space per dwelling unit may be reduced to no less than one (1) space for every two (2) dwelling units plus employee parking as determined by the Community development director. The Community development director shall base his decision on the following:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 126
(1) Availability of private, convenient, regular transportation services to meet the needs of the tenants;
(2) Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation;
(3) Pedestrian access to health, medical and shopping facilities;
(4) Minimum age requirement to reside in subject apartments;
(5) Special support services offered by the facility.
c. Special parking for recreational vehicles will not be required as long as the facility does not permit recreational vehicles other than campers or vehicles that will fit into a normal-sized parking stall. If recreational vehicles are to be permitted on the development, they must be screened and fenced.
d. Compact stalls will not be permitted except for one-third (0.33) of the required employee parking.
B. Mixed occupancies or mixed use if one (1) occupancy. In the case of two (2) or more uses in the same building, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses computed separately; except in shopping centers, and except as provided in the mixed use overlay EMC 19.04.200. Off-street parking facilities for one (1) use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as permitted in subsection (C) of this section pertaining to joint use.
C. Joint use. The minimum amount of off-street parking required by EMC 19.05.040(A) may be reduced by the Community development director when shared parking facilities for two (2) or more uses are proposed if:
1. The total parking area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet;
2. The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single onsite common parking facility, or as a system of onsite and offsite facilities if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and located within five hundred (500) feet of the buildings or use areas they are intended to serve;
3. The amount of reduction in off-street parking does not exceed ten (10) percent per use unless it is documented that the peak parking demand hours of two (2) or more uses are separate by at least one (1) hour;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 127
4. The subject properties are legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means which provide for continuous joint use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval by the city attorney; and
5. The total number of parking spaces in the shared parking facility is not less than the minimum required by any single use.
D. Employee parking. Where employee parking will be maintained separately and in addition to parking for the general public, the regulations of this subsection shall apply:
1. Minimum parking stall sizes, aisle widths and percentage of compact car stalls shall be as per other requirements in this chapter.
2. Employee parking must be clearly identified as such and not become parking for the general public.
3. If the employee parking is changed to parking for the general public, the normal regulations for off-street parking shall be in force.
4. Employee parking shall not be in lieu of parking requirements per activity as stated in this section.
E. Temporary parking facilities. Temporary parking facilities may be permitted by the Community development director when it has been shown that:
1. The existing use of the subject property has adequate legal nonconforming parking or that existing parking conforms to the applicable standards of this title.
2. The temporary parking facility is primarily intended to serve the public at large and not the existing use on the property.
3. The temporary parking facility serves a public need.
4. The temporary facility meets the following minimum standards:
a. There shall be a minimum of two hundred eighty-five (285) square feet gross area per stall.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 128
b. The pavement section shall be a minimum of four (4) inches of five-eighths (5/8) inch minus C.R. crushed rock with bituminous surface treatment, subject to public works department review.
c. Onsite drainage control and detention shall be provided per the Eastern Washington Storm Water Manual.
d. Ingress and egress and interior circulation and perimeter control shall be subject to public works director approval.
F. Compact car parking.
1. Parking stall size shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by seventeen (17) feet. Aisle width shall be per the requirements of EMC 19.05.080 and diagram No. 1 following this chapter.
2. Compact car parking spaces shall be clearly identified by signing or other marking as approved by the city public works director.
3. Compact car parking spaces shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total required parking, and shall be interspersed equally throughout the entire parking area.
4. See EMC 19.05.080 and diagram No. 2 following this chapter for typical compact car stall arrangements.
5. No more than four (4) compact car parking stalls shall be placed side-by-side, or eight (8) head-to-head.
19.05.050 Drive-in businesses.
Stacking spaces (queue spaces) shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets and to allow the safe conduct of drive-through transactions without interference by or to other on-site activities.
A. Applicability.
Any site with new development, redevelopment, or change in use that uses drive-through facilities for some or all of its transactions shall comply with this section.
B. Existing Nonconformities
Existing sites not meeting the requirements contained in this section shall be brought into full compliance under one or more of the following conditions:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 129
1. If an existing use is improved or remodeled in a value of fifty (50) percent or more of the valuation of the existing principal structure as reflected on the Property Appraiser’s current records.
2. If an amendment, other than a minor amendment, is required to an existing approved site plan.
3. If a change in use generates a requirement for more or larger loading spaces.
C. Stacking Space Requirements.
1. Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities:
a. Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on- and off-site traffic movements by blocking vehicular or pedestrian circulation. The minimum standards given herein may be adjusted upward if the project vehicle type warrants such adjustment in the review process.
b. Drive-through lanes shall be separated from parking areas by distinctly delineating the lane through striping or other means.
c. Queuing spaces shall not offset required number of parking spaces.
d. Alleys or driveways in residentially zoned areas adjacent to drive-through facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer traffic.
e. Stacking lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following minimum widths:
(1) One (1) lane = twelve (12) feet per lane.
(2) Two (2) or more lanes = ten (10) feet per lane.
f. All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten (10) feet if the bypass has no parking spaces or is not a required drive aisle for nondrive-through traffic.
g. Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 10’ x 20’.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 130
Stacking spaces shall be provided as follows:
a. Financial institutions with drive-through windows:
(1) Six (6) stacking spaces for the first drive-through window and three (3) stacking spaces for each additional window.
b. Car wash:
(1) Three (3) stacking spaces per bay/stall for self-service establishments, and four (4) stacking spaces per bay/stall for an automated establishment.
c. Drive-in or fast food restaurant:
(1) Seven (7) stacking spaces per drive-through window measured from the order board or station to driveway.
d. All other uses:
(1) Three (3) stacking spaces for each window.
D. Businesses located in shopping centers. When located in a shopping center, drive-in facilities shall provide sufficient stacking space to handle peak business demands and shall not in any way obstruct the normal circulation pattern of the shopping center.
19.05.060 Loading space.
For all buildings hereafter erected, reconstructed or enlarged, adequate permanent off-street loading space shall be provided if the activity carried on is such that the building requires deliveries to it or shipments from it of people or merchandise. Such space shall be shown on a plan and submitted for approval by the planning department and the city public works director. No portion of a vehicle taking part in loading, unloading or maneuvering activities shall project into a public street, alley or interior pedestrian area. Loading space or maneuvering areas shall be in addition to required off-street parking spaces.
A. Relationship of loading space to residential areas. Loading berths shall be located not closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district, unless wholly enclosed within a building, or unless screened from such residential area by a wall or uniformly painted fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 131
B. Relationship to open space. Space for loading berths may occupy all or any part of any required setback or open space as long as the loading berth is uncovered. A covered loading area shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the district.
C. Types of uses for which loading space shall be provided. Loading space shall be provided for the following types of buildings or businesses: warehouses, supermarkets, department stores, office buildings with a floorspace in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, industrial or manufacturing establishments, freight terminals, railroad yards, mortuaries and such other commercial and industrial buildings which, in the judgment of the Community development director, are similar in nature in regard to loading space requirements.
D. Maneuvering area for buildings with dock-high loading doors. Buildings which utilize dock-high loading doors shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. See the following diagram:
E. Maneuvering area for buildings with ground level loading doors. Buildings which utilize ground level service or loading doors shall provide a minimum of forty-five (45) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. See the following diagram:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 132
F. Driveways. Ingress and egress points from public rights-of-way (driveways) shall be designed and located in such a manner as to preclude offsite or on-street maneuvering of vehicles.
19.05.070 Off-street parking regulations for the downtown commercial areas.
The area bounded by 3rd Ave. NW, Alder Street, 3rd Ave. SW and C Street is exempt from the requirements of off street parking on existing or remodeled existing buildings with no increase in building area. New buildings or buildings that are expanded beyond the original footprint of the building within this boundary shall meet at least 50% of the required number of parking spaces delineated in this section.
19.05.080 Size and design standards.
A. Parking stall size. Parking stall size shall be as follows:
Standard 9 feet by 19 feet (1) (3)
Compact 8 feet by 17 feet (2) (3)
Employee 8-1/2 feet by 18 feet (3)
Parallel 9 feet by 23 feet
Notes:
1. Dimensions may include overhang. See EMC 19.05.090(F) for exceptions.
2. See diagram No. 2 following this chapter for typical compact stall placement with required landscape area.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 133
3. Parking stall length may be reduced by a maximum of two (2) feet with corresponding increases in aisle width.
B. Minimum design standards and typical parking stall arrangements. For minimum design standards and typical parking stall arrangements, see the diagrams at the end of this chapter.
C. Units of measurement.
1. Benches. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty (20) inches of width of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under this title.
2. Fractions. When a unit of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to but not including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions one-half (1/2) and over shall require one (1) parking space.
19.05.090 Overhang exception, landscaping, paving, wheel stops, drainage, lighting and curbing.
A. Landscaping generally. The landscaping requirements of Ch. 19.07 EMC and diagram No. 2 following this chapter shall apply with respect to off-street parking facilities.
B. Landscape islands. Landscape islands with a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet shall be located in the following areas to protect vehicles and to enhance the appearance of parking areas:
1. At the ends of all parking rows.
2. Where loading doors or maneuvering areas are in close proximity to parking areas or stalls.
C. Paving. All vehicular maneuvering areas, including but not limited to off-street parking areas, truck and mobile equipment loading, unloading, storage and maneuvering areas, and related accesses to and from public right-of-way shall be paved with asphalt or equivalent material, to be approved by the public works director or his/her designee. The Community development director may waive the paving requirement in the following instances:
1. Areas used primarily for the storage and operation of heavy equipment, tracked vehicles, trucks and other large-tire vehicles, where such areas are not generally used for regular deliveries or access by the general public; and
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 134
2. Driveways for single-family residential development, except that at least the first twenty (20) feet of the drive way shall be paved.
D. Wheel stops. Wheel stops, a minimum of two (2) feet from any obstruction or the end of the parking stall, shall be required in the following locations:
1. Where the parking stall abuts a building or where vehicles may overhang a property line.
2. Where the parking stall abuts a pedestrian walkway of less than six (6) feet in width, or a walkway which is not raised creating its own barrier.
3. Where a parking stall abuts any physical object which may be impacted (i.e., light standards, fire hydrants, fences, power vaults, utility poles, etc.).
4. Where a hazardous grade difference exists between the parking area and the abutting property.
5. Where other hazardous situations may exist as determined by the public works director.
E. Lighting. Any lighting of a parking lot or storage area shall illuminate only the parking lot or storage area. All lighting shall be designed and located so as to avoid undue glare or reflection of light onto adjoining properties or public rights-of-way.
Light standards shall not be located so as to interfere with parking stalls, maneuvering areas, or ingress and egress areas.
F. Vehicle overhang exception. Where sufficient area is available to allow safe and efficient overhang of a vehicle, the planning department may permit the standard parking stall length to be reduced by two (2) feet with corresponding increase in adjacent walkway or landscaping width. (See diagram No. 2 following this chapter.)
G. Concrete curb placement. In addition to wheel stop requirements as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all landscape areas within or abutting parking areas shall be separated from the paved area by concrete curbing or other acceptable method as approved by the community development director and the public works director.
H. Parking structures. Multiple level parking structures, developed either as a single use structure or as parking incorporated into a structure, shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the dimensional and numeric requirements of this chapter.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 135
19.05.100 Off-street parking plans.
A. Off-street parking plans shall be subject to review and approval by the planning department and public works director or his/her designee. The planning department shall review plans for compliance with the requirements of this title. The public works director shall review plans based upon the following criteria:
1. Safety and efficiency of interior circulation.
2. Safety of ingress and egress points.
3. Effects of access on public streets with regard to street capacity, congestion and delay.
4. Compliance with construction standards relating to storm water runoff.
B. All plans must be complete with the information as requested by the Community development director. (Ord. 13-12, 2013) A B C D E F G1 G2 H I J Aisle Width Angle Stall Width (feet) Stall Depth (feet) Curb Length (feet) Starting Loss (feet) Depth to Wall (feet) One-Way (feet) Two-Way (feet) Depth to Inter-lock (feet) Setback (feet) Gross Stall Area (square feet) 0° 9.0 23.0 23.0 0.0 9.0 12.0 20.0 9.0 23.0 207 10° 8.0 17.0 46.1 61.4 10.8 12.0 20.0 6.9 16.7 499 9.0 19.0 51.8 69.0 12.2 12.0 20.0 7.7 18.7 630 20° 8.0 17.0 23.4 36.6 13.3 12.0 20.0 9.6 16.0 312 9.0 19.0 26.3 41.1 15.0 12.0 20.0 10.7 17.9 394 30° 8.0 17.0 16.0 26.7 15.4 12.5 20.0 12.0 14.7 247 9.0 19.0 18.0 30.0 17.3 12.0 20.0 13.4 16.5 311 36.9° 8.0 17.0 13.3 22.1 16.6 13.5 20.0 13.4 13.6 221 9.0 19.0 15.0 24.8 18.6 13.5 20.0 15.0 15.2 279 40° 8.0 17.0 12.4 20.3 17.1 13.5 20.0 14.0 13.0 212
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 136
A B C D E F G1 G2 H I J Aisle Width
Angle Stall Width (feet) Stall Depth (feet) Curb Length (feet) Starting Loss (feet) Depth to Wall (feet) One-Way (feet) Two-Way (feet) Depth to Inter-lock (feet) Setback (feet) Gross Stall Area (square feet) 9.0 19.0 14.0 22.8 19.1 13.5 20.0 15.7 14.6 268 45° 8.0 17.0 11.3 17.7 17.7 14.5 20.0 14.8 12.0 200 9.0 19.0 12.7 19.8 19.8 14.5 20.0 16.6 13.4 252 50° 8.0 17.0 10.4 15.2 18.2 15.5 20.0 15.6 10.9 190 9.0 19.0 11.7 17.1 20.3 15.5 20.0 17.4 12.2 239 53.1° 8.0 17.0 10.0 13.8 18.4 16.5 20.0 16.0 10.2 184 9.0 19.0 11.3 15.5 20.6 16.5 20.0 17.9 11.4 232 60° 8.0 17.0 9.2 10.8 18.7 17.0 20.0 16.7 8.5 173 9.0 19.0 10.4 12.1 21.0 17.0 20.0 18.7 9.5 218 70° 8.0 17.0 8.5 6.8 18.7 20.0 22.0 17.3 5.8 159 9.0 19.0 9.6 7.6 20.9 20.0 22.0 19.4 6.5 200 80° 8.0 17.0 8.1 5.0 18.1 23.0 24.0 17.4 3.0 147 9.0 19.0 9.1 5.0 20.3 23.0 24.0 19.5 3.3 185 90° 8.0 17.0 8.0 5.0 17.0 24.0 24.0 17.0 0.0 136 9.0 19.0 9.0 5.0 19.0 24.0 24.0 19.0 0.0 171
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 137
DIAGRAM 1. MINIMUM PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 138
DIAGRAM 2
(Ord. 13-12, 2013)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 139
Chapter 19.06 SIGN REGULATIONS
Sections:
19.06.010 Purpose.
19.06.020 Scope.
19.06.030 Prohibited signs.
19.06.040 General restrictions and limitations for all districts.
19.06.050 Regulations for specific districts.
19.06.070 Structural safety and maintenance of signs.
19.06.075 Nonconforming Signs
19.06.080 Administrative procedures.
19.06.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for signs in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. It is further the intention of this chapter to harmonize the legitimate private purposes of signs, that is, the identification and promotion of the seller to the buyer, with public purposes. Public purposes include considerations of traffic safety and economic and aesthetic welfare. Unregulated signs may divert the driver’s attention from the road, causing a traffic hazard. In addition, conflicts between private signs and traffic control signs result in unsafe traffic conditions. The economic base of the city is, to some extent, dependent upon maintaining an attractive area, both as to natural and manmade features, in which to visit, live and work.
B. Regulation of signs also serves to promote the private purposes of signs. Signs have become larger, more numerous and more expensive as a result of competition for attention. This competition of signs has, in some cases, defeated the very purposes for which they were created. The elimination of destructive competition between signs thus enhances the private purposes of signs as well as promotes the public health, safety and general welfare.
19.06.020 Scope.
This chapter applies to all existing and future signs within the corporate boundaries of the city, but does not apply to signs located within a building or structure.
19.06.030 Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all districts within the municipal boundaries of the city, except as specifically allowed as temporary signs:
A. Banners, streamers, pennants and balloons (See EMC 19.06.040.Q.4).
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 140
B. Any sign using the words “stop,” “look” or “danger,” or any other word, symbol or character which might confuse traffic or detract from any legal traffic control devices.
C. Stationary motor vehicles, trailers and related devices used to circumvent the intent of this chapter.
D. Signs which are pasted or attached to utility poles, trees or other signs, or to natural features.
E. Signs within seventy-five (75) feet of the public right-of-way which are revolving more than eight (8) revolutions per minute, blinking or flashing, except public service signs such as those which give the time, temperature and humidity.
F. Roof signs.
G. All lighted signs which are adjacent to and directed toward a residential district and which detract from the welfare of the residential district.
H. Portable signs, except temporary signs as permitted under EMC 19.06.040(Q).
19.06.040 General restrictions and limitations for all districts.
A. Signs in street right-of-way or future street right-of-way. No sign shall be located in or project into the present or future right-of-way of any public street unless such location or projection is specifically authorized by other provisions of this section. No sign except approved safety or emergency signs shall be placed with the right-of-way of a state highway (SR-28 or SR-282) without prior written consent of the Washington State Department of Transportation.
B. Signs interfering with sight distance. No sign shall be so designed or constructed as to interfere with the sight distance of motorists proceeding on or approaching adjacent streets, alleys, driveways or parking areas, or of pedestrians proceeding on or approaching adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
C. Signs over driveways. No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a driveway located on private property shall be situated at a height of less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the driveway.
D. Signs over public sidewalks and pedestrian ways. No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a public sidewalk or pedestrian way shall be situated at a height of less than eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet above the surface of the sidewalk or pedestrian way, and no sign may project more than seventy-five (75) percent of the distance between the property line and the curb-line except for signs attached to the underside of a canopy or other architectural projection.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 141
E. Directional signs. Directional signs and signs indicating entrances, exits, service areas and parking areas shall be excluded from the sign provisions of this title, and may be erected on private property upon approval of the building official, public works director and planning director. These signs shall not contain advertising or promotional information, and may be restricted in size.
F. Removal of signs on closure of business. Upon the closure and vacation of business or activity, the owner of the business or activity shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of closure to remove all signs related to the business or activity.
G. Window signs. The total surface area of all window signs shall not exceed 15 square feet, or 10 percent of the window area. Such signs shall not be included in determining the number of primary signs, nor in determining the permissible sign area for each façade.
H. Painted signs. Signs advertising the associated business painted on exterior wall or structure of any kind shall be computed as part of the aggregate sign area and number of signs.
I. Barber poles. In addition to any other signs authorized by the provisions of this chapter, any barbershop shall be entitled to display a barber pole. The design of the pole and its location and manner of erection shall be subject to the approval of the building official.
J. Credit card signs. Signs indicating credit cards honored may be displayed in window areas only. Such signs are not computed as part of the aggregate sign area and do not require a permit.
K. Institutional signs. For churches, schools, hospitals, public facilities and institutional uses, one (1) double-faced freestanding or wall identification sign is permitted for each street frontage. The sign may have an aggregate area of one (1) square foot for each ten (10) lineal feet of street frontage. However, each use is guaranteed a minimum sign area of eight (8) square feet per display face regardless of street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet above the surface of the nearest street. The sign may be illuminated. Freestanding symbols of sculpture used as identification may be permitted with the approval of the planning department. Wall signs, lettering or symbols may also be approved by the planning department. Institutional signs located adjacent to State Highway SR-28, SR-282 and SR-283 shall comply with those standards required in RCW 47.42 and WAC 468-66.
L. Gate or entrance sign. Gate or entrance signs may be permitted, and may be located in public rights-of-way when not found to create a sight obstruction for the traveling public, if approved by the public works director and shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Signs shall not exceed five feet in height and 25 square feet in surface area.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 142
M. Community bulletin board. Subdivisions and residential communities may be allowed to erect a permanent structure as a community bulletin board if approved by the building official and public works director when the public works director finds that the proposed location will not create a sight obstruction to the traveling public.
N. Business hours signs. Signs stating business hours shall be excluded from the provisions of this title, and may be erected upon private property upon the approval of the building official and planning director. These signs shall not contain advertising or promotional information. Maximum number permitted shall be one (1) per entrance, with a maximum size of four (4) square feet.
O. Public service signs. Non-advertising or non-promotional signs may be erected as a public service to the community by public service clubs or other nonprofit organizations. Such signs may be located in any zone upon approval by the building official and public works director when the public works director finds that the proposed location will not create a sight obstruction to the traveling public.
P. Real estate agent/agency signs (For sale signs). Real estate signs are permitted as follows. No sign permit is required.
1. Residential uses.
a. Single-family dwellings and duplexes. One (1) real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of a lot. The sign may have two (2) faces, shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the surface of the street unless placed in a window, shall not exceed an area of four (4) square feet per face, and shall be unlighted.
b. Multiple-family dwellings. One (1) real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of a development. The sign shall not exceed an area of twelve (12) square feet, shall be attached flat against a principal building, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet of the building, and shall be unlighted.
2. Commercial and industrial uses. One (1) real estate sign shall be permitted for each public entrance, but there shall not be more than four (4) signs per lot. The sign shall not exceed an area of thirty-two (32) square feet, shall be attached flat against the building or freestanding, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet of the building, and shall be unlighted.
3. Unimproved acreage. One (1) real estate sign shall be permitted for each lot. The sign shall not exceed an area of one-fourth (1/4) square foot for each foot of lot frontage and shall not in
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 143
any event exceed fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet above the surface of the nearest street, and shall be unlighted.
Q. Temporary signs. Temporary signs may be authorized by the planning department for a time period specified for each type of temporary sign.
1. Temporary subdivision or apartment signs. A temporary real estate sign declaring a group of lots, dwellings or occupancies within a subdivision or apartment complex for sale or rent shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. One (1) such sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of the premises being sold or leased. The sign shall be located on the premises being sold or leased.
b. The area of such signs shall not exceed an area of twenty-five (25) square feet each.
c. The signs shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet above the level of the street.
d. The signs shall be unlighted.
e. The signs shall not interfere with the sight distance of pedestrians and motorists proceeding on or approaching adjacent streets.
f. The signs may remain as long as the project remains unsold or unleased, or for one (1) year, whichever period shall be lesser; provided, however, that the planning director shall have the authority to extend the time period one (1) year.
2. Nonpolitical campaign signs. Temporary nonpolitical signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization may be allowed upon any lot. Such signs may be posted thirty (30) days prior to the event, drive, campaign, etc. Such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the event, drive, campaign, etc.
3. Construction signs. One (1) sign identifying a project under construction shall be permitted for each street frontage of the building or structure under construction. The sign may contain the name of the building contractor and his subcontractors, the architect and the engineer. The sign shall be permitted during the period of construction, and shall not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet for all faces.
4. Grand openings and special events signs. Special permits may be issued by the planning department for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for banners, streamers and temporary or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 144
portable signs for special events such as carnivals, outdoor affairs and sales, grand openings and events of a similar nature.
R. Off-premises signs.
1. Districts where permitted. Off-premises signs are permitted in I-1, I-2 and C-2 districts. Off-premises signs not in one of the above zones shall be categorized as legal nonconforming signs.
2. Standards.
a. Maximum size. As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection, the maximum size per sign face is two hundred (200) square feet.
b. Maximum height. Maximum height is twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Distance from any intersection. Off-premises signs shall be located a distance of three hundred (300) feet from any intersection.
d. Double-faced signs. An off-premises sign structure may contain up to two (2) sign faces arranged either back-to-back or in a V-shape arrangement. The use of tri-vision panels on a sign face shall not in itself constitute attached sign faces.
e. Spacing. Not more than four (4) sign structures per one thousand (1,000) lineal feet are permitted.
3. Permits. Off-premises signs shall not be altered with regard to size, shape, orientation, height, or location without the prior issuance of a building permit. Ordinary maintenance shall not require building permits. Off-premises sign copy replacement may occur at any time and is exempt from the requirement for building permits.
4. Hazard or nuisance. All off-premises signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation and safety. If an off-premises sign is determined by the Ephrata building official to be in a state of disrepair so as to constitute a safety hazard or a nuisance as defined by the building code or Ephrata Municipal Code, the building official may initiate enforcement proceedings pursuant to the EMC.
5. Enforcement. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection (R) shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the EMC.
S. Portable A-frame sandwich board signs.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 145
1. A portable A-frame or similarly designed sign which is no greater than thirty-six (36) inches wide by forty-two (42) inches tall.
a. Not more than two (2) sandwich board signs may be utilized by retail uses in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 districts. They are not permitted in any other districts.
b. Portable A-frame sandwich board signs are permitted to be placed on the business premises only. These signs may be placed within the right-of-way but shall be located behind the curb line. No sign placed on the sidewalk/frontage shall limit free passage of pedestrians and there shall be no less than four (4) feet of unobstructed walkway remaining as shown in Figure 1 below.
FIGURE 1
T. Any signs other than those approved by the Manual on Uniform Control Devices (MUTCD) and are visible to a state highway shall comply with the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) Manual 22-95 titled Washington State Revised Code and Administrative rules for Highway Advertising Control.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 146
U. Permanent Subdivision or Neighborhood Designation Signs. Permanent subdivision or neighborhood designation signs shall conform with the following requirements:
1. Signs shall not exceed five feet in height and 25 square feet in surface area.
2. Signs shall be located between the building line and the property line unless a location on excess city right-of-way is approved by the public works director.
19.06.050 Regulations for specific districts.
In all districts the building official shall have the option to waive sign type requirements in unique and special cases where due to building design or other special circumstance the development is unable to conform to stated standards.
A. Signs permitted in residential districts.
1. Identification signs for single-family dwellings and duplexes. One (1) identification sign shall be permitted for each occupancy. The sign shall not exceed an area of two (2) square feet, shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above the surface of the street, shall be attached directly to a building, fence, standard, or mailbox, and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination. Home occupations shall not be allowed additional sign area.
2. Identification signs for multifamily dwellings. One (1) identification sign shall be permitted for each development, except that multiple-family dwellings with more than one (1) street frontage may be allowed an additional sign for each street frontage of such lot. Each sign shall not exceed an area of twenty-five (25) square feet, may be a wall or freestanding sign, shall be unlighted or indirectly lighted, and shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above the ground if freestanding.
B. Signs permitted in general commercial, industrial and airport-enterprise districts. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet for each foot of street frontage. Aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each foot of street frontage. Lots with less than thirty-five (35) feet of frontage shall be allowed an aggregate sign area of no less than fifty (50) square feet. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.
1. Identification signs for occupancies. Each business establishment may have one (1) freestanding sign as defined below in 19.06.050(B.1.a) for each street frontage if not located in a shopping center, and no more than three (3) attached signs.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 147
a. Freestanding sign. The freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet. The maximum sign area permitted is two hundred (200) square feet for the total of all faces. No one (1) face shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The sign may be illuminated. When calculating aggregate sign area only one side of a free standing sign shall be counted against said allowance.
b. Attached signs. Three (3) attached signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
i. The total area of all signs, graphics, or other advertising shall not be more than ten (10) percent of the building facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed when the lot frontage on a public street is more than thirty (35) feet. When the lot frontage (width) is less than thirty-five (35) feet in length, the total area of signs, graphics or other advertising shall not be more than twenty five (25) percent of the building façade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.
ii. On properties where a pole sign cannot be erected due to setback requirements or building placement, a projecting sign may be allowed in lieu of the permitted freestanding sign. The projecting sign may not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in outside dimension.
3. Automobile service station signs. The aggregate sign area for any corner lot shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each foot of lot frontage, and the aggregate sign area for any interior lot shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet for each foot of lot frontage; and the permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.
a. Freestanding signs. One (1) freestanding lighted double-faced identification sign, not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet for the total of all faces, with no such face exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, is permitted. Such sign shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. If on a corner lot, two (2) monument signs not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet per sign for the total of all faces are permitted. Such monument signs shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. Freestanding signs shall be lighted during business hours only.
b. Attached signs. Three (3) attached signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: the total area of all signs, graphics, or other advertising shall not be more than
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 148
ten (10) percent of the building facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.
c. Fuel price signs. Fuel price signs shall be included in the aggregate sign area.
C. Signs permitted in central business district (C-1). The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet for each foot of street frontage. The aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed one (1) foot for each foot of street frontage. Lots with less than thirty-five (35) feet of frontage (width) shall be allowed an aggregate sign area of no less than fifty (50) square feet. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.
1. Identification signs for multitenant buildings.
a. Attached Signs. Each multitenant building may have one (1) identification wall sign for the building’s identification for each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a total of five (5) percent of the facade to which it is attached. Aggregate sign area shall apply. A multitenant building will have the option of the sign described in this subsection (C)(1)(a) or the identification sign described in subsection (C)(2) of this section.
i. The total area of all signs, graphics, or other advertising shall not be more than ten (10) percent of the building façade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed when the lot frontage on a public street is more than thirty-five (35) feet. When the lot frontage (width) is less than thirty-five (35) feet in length, the total area of signs, graphics or other advertising shall not be more than twenty-five (25) percent of the building façade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.
ii. On properties where a pole sign cannot be erected due to setback requirements or building placement, a projecting sign may be allowed in lieu of the permitted freestanding sign. The projecting sign may not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in outside dimension.
b. Freestanding sign. Each building may have one (1) freestanding sign on each street frontage. The sign may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. The maximum sign area permitted for the freestanding sign is one hundred (100) square feet for the total of all faces. No one (1) face shall exceed fifty (50) square feet. When
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 149
calculating aggregate sign area, only one side of a free standing sign shall be counted against said allowance.
2. Identification signs for occupancies. Each occupant of a multitenant building shall be permitted two (2) wall signs. Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the facade of the individual business unit. Aggregate sign area shall not apply.
3. Identification signs for single-tenant buildings.
a. Each building may have one (1) freestanding sign for each street frontage. The sign may not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. The maximum sign area permitted for the freestanding sign is one hundred (100) square feet for the total of all faces. No one (1) face shall exceed fifty (50) square feet.
b. Three (3) attached signs shall be permitted. All signs are subject to the aggregate sign area allowed. The total area of all signs, graphics, or other types of signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.
D. Signs permitted in office and service commercial district (C-3).
1. Generally. One (1) freestanding double-faced identification sign shall be permitted for each lot. The sign shall not exceed a maximum area of fifty (50) square feet for the total of all faces. No one (1) face shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination.
2. Identification signs for buildings. One (1) identification sign shall be permitted for each principal building. The sign shall not exceed an area of five (5) percent of the facade to which it is attached, shall be attached flat against the building, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet, and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination. Such signs shall not advertise or name individual tenants of the building.
3. Identification signs for occupancies. Signs not exceeding a total of five (5) percent of the facade of the business unit to which they are attached shall be permitted for each occupancy in a multitenant building when the occupancy has outside frontage.
F. Signs permitted in planned unit developments, and for conditional uses. All signs in planned unit developments, and mobile home parks and for conditional uses shall be incorporated as part of the developmental plan and approved with the developmental plan.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 150
Subsequent changes which conform to the adopted signing program may be granted by the planning director.
G. Signs permitted in shopping centers. The aggregate sign area for each occupant of a shopping center shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the front facade of the unit. Wall signs are permitted on each exterior wall of the individual business unit. A minimum of thirty (30) square feet shall be permitted for any occupancy. No combination of signs shall exceed ten (10) percent of the facade to which they are attached. If there is an attached canopy or overhang, a ten (10) square foot sign may be attached to the canopy or overhang in addition to the other permitted signs. Such sign shall be at least eight (8) feet above any pedestrian walkway.
Identification signs for shopping centers. One (1) freestanding identification sign, which may list the names of the occupants of the shopping center, shall be permitted for each street frontage of each shopping center. The maximum sign area permitted for a freestanding sign is two hundred (200) square feet for the total of all faces. No one (1) face shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet, and may be illuminated.
19.06.070 Structural safety and maintenance of signs.
All parts, portions, units, and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, supports, or anchorage thereto, shall be maintained in a proper state of safety and repair and a proper state of preservation. The surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted.
19.06.075 Nonconforming signs.
A. Any sign lawfully existing under all codes and ordinances in effect at the time this Chapter is enacted or amended may continue to be maintained and operated as a legal nonconforming sign so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided that:
1. No sign shall be changed in any manner that increases its noncompliance with the provisions of this Code; and
2. If the sign is structurally altered or moved, its legal nonconforming status shall be voided, and the sign will be required to conform to the provisions of this Code.
3. The sign is not a hazardous or abandoned sign.
19.06.080 Administrative procedures.
A. Permits.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 151
1. To ensure compliance with the regulations of this chapter, a permit shall be required for all signs hereafter installed or altered within the corporate boundaries of the city, except those signs enumerated in subsection (A)(2) of this section. No sign shall be erected, installed, applied, affixed, altered, or relocated without a permit from the building department and the planning department. The sign permit shall certify that the sign, as represented by plans, drawings, or statements, is in conformance with the regulations of this chapter.
2. The following signs must conform with the regulations of this chapter but may be erected, installed, affixed, altered, or relocated without a sign permit:
a. For sale, lease, or rent signs.
b. Residential signs for single-family dwellings.
3. The following information must be provided as part of the application for a sign permit:
a. Name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
b. Name, address, and phone number of the owner of the property.
c. Name and address of the activity for which the sign is intended, parcel number of land on which it is to be placed, and necessary lot dimensions as required to calculate allowable sign area.
d. Two (2) copies of a diagram, plan or illustration clearly depicting the sign dimensions and design, indicating the colors of the proposed sign, materials to be used, anchoring or mounting system, and type of illumination, if applicable.
e. Two (2) copies of a site plan clearly indicating the location of the proposed sign relative to existing signs, buildings, and other structures and to streets/rights-of-way and property lines.
f. If required, proof of compliance with State Electrical Code for illuminated and electrical signs shall be submitted with the application.
g. Attached building permit, if required, with construction details, including attachment and footing details, wind load calculations, ULI number, point of electrical
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 152
connection and/or location of associated electrical fixtures and structural engineer’s wet stamp.
h. Include such other information as may be required by the Building Official to ensure compliance with this Code and other applicable ordinances.
B. Fees and deposits. Fees shall be governed by the fee schedule contained in the building code adopted by the city.
C. The building official shall make the final decision on a sign permit application submitted pursuant to Ch. 19.06 EMC. Any appeal from the final decision of the building official shall be to the hearing examiner pursuant to the requirements of Ch. 19.06 EMC and the appeal provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
D. Violations – Nuisance Abatement and Civil Infractions.
1. Any sign that violates the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be in lien against the property on which the sign was maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner. The property owner shall first be served with a notice to abate the nuisance, except in the case of portable signs. Illegal portable signs may be immediately removed by the city, and the owner shall be given notice that the sign will be destroyed if not claimed within ten (10) days. Appeal of the abatement notice may be made to the hearing examiner. If, after such a hearing, the hearing examiner orders agents of the city to remove the nuisance, they shall have authority to enter upon private property to remove the nuisance.
2. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1.22.
E. Variances.
1. A sign variance is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be granted by the hearing examiner upon proper application. Variances may be granted when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict interpretation of the regulations of this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 153
2. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.
(Ord. 13-12, 2013)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 154
Chapter 19.07 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
Sections:
19.07.010 Purpose and intent.
19.07.020 Applicability.
19.07.030 General requirements.
19.07.040 Specific requirements.
19.07.050 Landscape buffers—Types and descriptions.
19.07.060 Submittal requirements.
19.07.070 Approval of landscape plan and installation of landscaping.
19.07.090 Maintenance requirements.
19.07.100 Prohibited plants.
19.07.110 Alteration of landscape requirements.
19.07.120 Deviations.
19.07.130 Enforcement.
19.07.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish landscaping provisions to achieve the following:
A. Provide a smooth transition between adjacent properties and buffer different intensities of land uses.
B. Maintain and enhance the character and appearance of the city.
C. Soften the visual impact of paved surfaces and blank building walls.
D. Reduce the effects of light, noise, glare, exhaust fumes, heat, wind, dust, all forms of erosion, and other adverse effects.
E. Provide shade.
19.07.020 Applicability.
A. Other than the exceptions listed in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all of the following:
1. New development.
2. Any change in the use of a property requiring a land use permit.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 155
3. Any change in the use of a property requiring a change of occupancy permit.
4. Any addition, remodel, alteration, or repair of a structure that increases the gross floor area by more than fifty percent or where the cost of the addition, remodel, alteration, or repair exceeds fifty percent of the existing assessed value of the structure.
B. Exceptions.
1. This chapter does not apply to any use or development in the C-1 zone and the Bomanite Paving District area, other than parking lots.
2. An individual one- or two-family dwelling unit on an individual lot that is not part of a subdivision or planned development district application is only required to comply with the following sections of this chapter:
a. Section 19.07.040(c)(1), residential front yard setbacks;
b. Section 19.07.090, Maintenance requirements;
c. Section 19.07.100, Prohibited plants.
19.07.030 General requirements.
All required landscaped areas shall comply with the following:
A. Landscaping shall consist of combinations of trees, shrubs, and ground cover. Nonliving natural features may also be incorporated.
B. Required landscape plantings shall be suited to the climate, location, and physical conditions of the site. The use of drought-tolerant species is encouraged.
C. All landscaped areas shall be graded to prevent erosion and to facilitate the installation, growth, and maintenance of the landscaping. All turf areas located in public rights-of-way shall have a grade of no greater than 4(h):1(v).
D. Trees and shrubs shall be chosen and located to avoid interference with underground and overhead utility lines or public improvements.
E. Landscaping shall be designed to ensure adequate visibility and safety of vehicular traffic, bicyclists, pedestrians, and other users, on and off the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 156
proposed site. Height and/or spacing of landscaping may be modified to accommodate sight distances.
F. Other than a fence around an individual one-or two-family dwelling, all fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping.
G. Minimum Plant Sizes at Installation:
Type of Plant
Minimum Size at Installation
Street trees and other deciduous trees
Two-inch caliper
Multi-stemmed trees, e.g., vine maple
Six feet tall
Evergreen trees
Six feet tall
Small shrubs
Twelve inches tall
Medium and tall shrubs
Eighteen inches tall
H. Living ground covers shall provide at least fifty percent coverage at the time of planting and one hundred percent coverage within three years, except that grass sod areas shall provide one hundred percent coverage at installation.
I. If approved by the city, required street frontage landscaping may be placed in city right-of-way. This area shall be maintained by the owner of the property that abuts the right-of-way. The city and other public services shall have the right to remove landscaping placed on city right-of-way for repair, replacement, or installation of utility services. The city will not accept liability for damages to said landscaping from future street expansion, meter reading, or utility installation, inspection, or repair.
J. All required landscaping shall be served by irrigation systems appropriate for the plants.
K. The incorporation of existing vegetation, especially healthy trees, is strongly encouraged. Where existing trees and associated vegetation serve the same or similar function as the required landscaping, they may substitute for the required landscaping, provided trees are healthy, not included in the prohibited species list and appropriate for the site at mature size. When
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 157
necessary, existing vegetation shall be supplemented with new plantings to accomplish the specific intent and purpose of this chapter.
L. In the event of a conflict between the content of this chapter and other regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
M. All trash containers shall be screened from abutting properties and streets by a one hundred (100%) percent sight-obscuring fence or wall and appropriate landscaping. (Ord. 18-09, 2018)
19.07.040 Specific requirements.
A. Buffers. When adjacent to the uses listed, the subject property shall provide the type and width of landscaping listed in the table below along the entire property line between the subject property and the adjacent use, except for vehicular and pedestrian access points.
SUBJECT PROPERTY USE
ADJACENT USE
1 & 2 Family Subdivision
Multifamily
Manufactured Home Park
Commercial/ Institutional
Industrial
Highway
Type I
20 feet wide
Type I
20 feet wide
Type I
20 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Street frontage
Type III
5 feet wide
Type III
5 feet wide
Type I
5 feet wide
Type III
10 feet wide
Type II
20 feet wide
1 & 2 Family or vacant land zoned R-1, R-3 and S-R
Type II
5 feet wide
Type I
10 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type I
15 feet wide
Multifamily or vacant land zoned R-2, R-4 and R-5
Type II
10 feet wide
Type III
5 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type I
15 feet wide
Manufactured Home Park
Type I
10 feet wide
Type III
5 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type I
15 feet wide
Commercial/Institutional or vacant land zoned C-1 or C-2
Type II
10 feet wide
Type II
5 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Industrial or vacant land zoned I-L
Type II
10 feet wide
Type I
5 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
Type II
10 feet wide
B. All parking areas of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of the parking area, maneuvering area, and loading space landscaped as a means to reduce the barren appearance of the lot and to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff. Perimeter landscaping, required adjacent to property lines, shall not be calculated as part of the ten (10) percent figure.
C. Residential Landscaping.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 158
1. Front Yard Setback. The required front yard setback of all residential uses shall be landscaped within one year of occupancy and maintained. For the purposes of this section, “landscaping” shall be defined as the addition of lawn, trees, plants, shrubs, and other natural and decorative features.
2. Multifamily Structures. Multifamily residential uses shall also landscape the required open space areas so that they are usable for outdoor recreation.
3. Manufactured Home Parks. All areas not in hardscape, hardscape meaning built structures, roadways, paved and gravel pathways and utility facilities, within the boundaries of the manufactured home park shall be landscaped. All lawns, trees, landscaping, occupied and unoccupied manufactured home spaces, recreation areas, and open space areas shall be continually maintained. A permanent irrigation system shall be installed and maintained for planted common areas.
D. Building Facade Landscaping. Blank building facades more than twenty feet in height or fifty feet in width or length shall be landscaped with Type III landscaping to provide visual relief and soften the effect of the new building on the surrounding area.
19.07.050 Landscape buffers—Types and descriptions.
Type I Solid Screen Type II Visual Screen Type III Visual Buffer Purpose Type I landscaping is intended to provide a solid sight barrier to totally separate incompatible uses. Type II landscaping is intended to create a visual separation that is not necessarily one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring between incompatible uses. Type III landscaping is intended to provided visual separation of uses from streets and main arterials and between compatible uses so as to soften the appearance of streets, parking lots and building facades. Description Type I landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or tall shrubs with a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting, which will provide a one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring screen within two (2) years from the time of planting; or a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs backed by one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence. Type II landscaping shall be evergreen or a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees with large shrubs and ground cover interspersed with the trees. (See also A, B, and C below) Type III landscaping shall be evergreen and deciduous trees planted not more than thirty (30) feet on center interspersed with large shrubs and ground cover. Where used to separate parking from streets, plantings must create a visual barrier of at least forty-two (42) inches in height at time of planting and form a solid screen two (2) years after planting. (See also A, B, and C below) Additional requirements for Types II, and III are as follows:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 159
(A) Evergreen trees shall be an average height of six (6) feet at planting. Deciduous trees shall be the following sizes based on their spacing: (1) One (1) inch caliper: Ten (10) feet on center. (2) Two (2) inch caliper: Twenty (20) feet on center. (3) Three (3) inch caliper: Thirty (30) feet on center. (4) Three and one-half (3 1/2) to five (5) inch caliper: Forty (40) feet on center. (B) Ground cover shall be of sufficient size and spacing to form a solid cover within two (2) years from the time of planting. (C) The plantings and fence must not violate the sight area safety requirements at street intersections.
19.07.060 Submittal requirements.
A landscape plan shall be prepared by a person experienced in the selection and installation of plants. For multifamily projects with five or more units and nonresidential projects with more than twenty thousand square feet of gross floor area, the landscape plan shall be prepared by one of the following: licensed landscape architect, Washington State Certified Nurseryman, or Washington State Certified Landscaper. A landscape plan shall accompany all development applications and shall contain the following information at a minimum:
A. Name and address or location of project.
B. Date of the plan.
C. North arrow and scale (one inch equals fifty feet or larger).
D. All property lines, rights-of-way, streets, walks, vehicular drives, parking lots, curbing, existing and proposed structures, building entrances, overhead and underground utilities, freestanding lights, service or loading areas, signs, open spaces, plazas, and recreation amenities, with materials noted.
E. Proposed location of all trees, shrubs, ground cover, and any proposed or existing physical elements, such as fencing, walls, curbing, or benches, that may affect the overall landscape.
F. A plant schedule which indicates the common names, quantities, spacing, and sizes at planting and maturity for all plants in the landscape plan.
G. Areas with existing vegetation that will be retained should be marked and described.
H. A legend which shows symbols and types of plant.
I. Location and details of irrigation system. The source of water and type of irrigation system shall be noted.
19.07.070 Approval of landscape plan and installation of landscaping.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 160
A. After receipt of a complete landscape plan, all development applications shall be reviewed by the planner for compliance with this chapter concurrently with and as a part of the review process of the principal use or structure and prior to issuance of any grading, building, or land use permit or approval.
B. No certificate of occupancy, or final inspection approval if no certificate of occupancy is required, shall be issued until one of the following occurs:
1. The required landscaping is installed.
2. A bond or some other form of cash surety acceptable to the city is submitted at a value of one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost to complete the landscaping according to the approved landscape plan. Upon completion of the landscape installation, the city shall promptly release the surety. If the required landscaping improvements are not made within six months of occupancy of the building, the city may use the surety to install the landscaping.
19.07.090 Maintenance requirements.
A. Required. Whenever landscaping is or has been required in accordance with the provisions of this title or any addition or amendments to this title, or in accordance with the provisions of any previous code or ordinance of the city, the landscaping shall be permanently maintained in such a manner as to accomplish the purpose for which it was initially required, to include:
1. Plant Maintenance. The property owner shall maintain all landscape plant material for the life of the project. All unhealthy or dead plant materials shall be replaced within the next planting season, not to exceed one hundred eighty days from the date of loss. Trees and shrubs shall only be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent a safety hazard. Planted areas shall be maintained free of trash and weeds.
2. Irrigation Maintenance. All portions of any irrigation system shall be maintained in order to perform its original function. Uncontrolled emission of water from any pipe, valve, head, emitter or other irrigation device shall be considered evidence of lack of maintenance and a violation of this chapter.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 161
3. Hardscape Maintenance. Maintenance of all landscape areas shall also include the painting, repairing, reconstruction, and restoration of landscape structures such as fences, walls, trellises, etc.
19.07.100 Prohibited plants.
A. The following trees are prohibited within public right-of-way, including planter strips: poplar, willow, cottonwood, sumac, fruit trees other than ornamental, nut trees, Siberian or Chinese elm, or any other tree species that may be declared a nuisance by the city for reasons of disease, exotic characteristics, or impairing or destroying property necessary to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the city.
B. The following trees are prohibited within one hundred feet of a public sewer: poplar, willow, elm, cottonwood, or any other tree species with invasive roots.
C. Any plant listed by the Grant County Weed District as a noxious weed is prohibited.
19.07.110 Alteration of landscape requirements.
The applicant may submit for consideration a landscaping plan that differs from the specific criteria set forth in this chapter. The applicant shall clearly and in detail state what adjustments of requirements are being requested and the reasons that such adjustments are warranted. The application shall be accompanied by supplemental data, such as sketches, surveys, and statistical information, as is deemed necessary to support the adjustment. The planning commission may approve, modify, or deny the requested adjustment. In approving the alteration, the planning commission shall make the following findings:
A. The alteration would be in keeping with and preserve the intent of this chapter; and
B. The alteration would not be contrary to the public interest; and
C. The alteration is justified based on at least one of the following:
1. The requirements of this chapter would result in more than fifteen percent of the site area being landscaped. In such cases the planning commission may modify those requirements so that not more than
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 162
fifteen percent of the site must be landscaped; provided, that the landscaping and corresponding setbacks required are those most beneficial to the public. More intensive landscaping may be required if the reduction in area would reduce the effectiveness of landscaping to a point where the intent of the landscaping type cannot be satisfied.
2. The inclusion of significant existing vegetation located on the site would result in as good as or better satisfaction of the purposes of this chapter.
3. Three-foot berms or six-foot architectural barriers are incorporated into the landscape design. Adjacent to the berm or barrier, the width of the perimeter landscaping strip may be reduced up to twenty-five percent if the landscaping materials are incorporated elsewhere on site.
4. Existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures, or utilities would render application of this chapter ineffective.
5. An existing or proposed structure precludes installation of the total amount of required perimeter landscaping. In such cases, the landscaping material shall be incorporated on another portion of the site.
6. The proposed landscaping represents a superior result or is more effective than that which would be achieved by strictly following requirements of this section.
19.07.120 Deviations.
A deviation from the regulations of this chapter may be obtained through the hearing examiner in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 19.12 entitled “Hearing Examiner.”
19.07.130 Enforcement.
All violations of this chapter shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforced by the Community Development Director or his/her designee in the same manner as violations of Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 6.30.
(Ord. 15-07, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 163
Chapter 19.08
GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Sections:
19.08.010 Applicability.
19.08.030 General conditional uses.
19.08.035 Wireless telecommunications facilities.
19.08.040 Home occupations.
19.08.050 Performance standards.
19.08.070 Animals in residential districts.
19.08.090 Residential Vehicle Storage.
19.08.095 Storage of Certain Vehicles and Components.
19.08.097 Vehicle and Equipment Repair on Residential Premises.
19.08.100 Nonconforming development.
19.08.110 Reduction of lot area.
19.08.120 Irregular-shaped lots.
19.08.130 Visibility at intersections in residential districts.
19.08.160 Accessory buildings.
19.08.170 Projections into required yards.
19.08.180 Structures to have access.
19.08.190 Exceptions to height regulations.
19.08.205 Temporary use regulations.
19.08.270 Adult uses.
19.08.280 Group homes class II and III.
19.08.350 Accessory dwelling unit regulations.
19.08.359 Accessory living quarters.
19.08.510 Utility Installations.
19.08.730 Electric vehicle infrastructure.
19.08.740 Building on multiple lots.
19.08.010 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are of general application to several or all zoning districts unless otherwise noted.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 164
19.08.030 General conditional uses.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to identify certain types of land uses that usually require relatively greater freedom of location than other uses restricted to certain districts by this title. General conditional uses may be allowed in the various zoning districts following the procedures in this section. General conditional uses may have one (1) or all of the following characteristics:
1. Public necessity requires such use in all or several districts.
2. Their technical, operating, or service characteristics are such as to make it impractical to restrict their location only to certain districts.
3. Although they fit the description in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, their impact or effect on the immediate neighborhood or vicinity in which they are located may be detrimental in the absence of adequate performance standards, development controls, or good site planning.
It is, therefore, the purpose of this section to reconcile potential conflicts between public necessity of certain uses and their possible detrimental effects on other uses.
B. Types of uses identified. The uses identified for the purpose of this section will generally fall into several broad categories, as follows:
1. Utility, transportation, and communication facilities. Includes electrical substations, pumping or regulating devices for the transmission of water, (including public water treatment facilities), gas, steam, petroleum, etc., bus stops, transit stations, etc.
2. Public facilities. Includes firehouses, police stations, libraries, and administrative offices of governmental agencies.
3. Open space uses. Includes cemeteries, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other recreation facilities, including buildings or structures associated therewith.
4. Welfare facilities. Retirement homes, convalescent homes, and other welfare facilities (excluding group homes class I, II, and III as defined in EMC 19.02.172), whether privately or publicly operated, facilities for rehabilitation or correction, private clubs, fraternal lodges, etc.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 165
5. Schools. Primary and secondary schools, vocational schools, and colleges, whether privately or publicly operated. (Ord. 15-08, 2015)
19.08.035 Wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. Purpose and goals. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities (WTCFs), specifically including, without limitation, towers and antennas, in light of the following goals:
1. Protecting residential areas from potential adverse impacts;
2. Enhancing the ability of the providers of wireless telecommunications services to provide those services quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
3. Encouraging location in nonresidential areas;
4. Minimizing the total height of towers within the community;
5. Encouraging the joint use of new and existing sites;
6. Encouraging service providers to locate and configure facilities to minimize adverse impacts through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; and
7. Considering potential adverse impacts to the public health and safety from these facilities except where preempted by other laws, rules, and regulations.
In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city’s comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of WTCFs, including towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section only, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
Abandon or abandonment means:
1. To cease operation for a period of one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive calendar days; or
2. To reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by seventy-five (75) percent for one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive calendar days unless new technology or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 166
the construction of additional cells in the same locality allows reduction of effective radiated power by more than seventy-five (75) percent, so long as the operator still serves essentially the same customer base.
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves.
Backhaul network means the lines that connect a provider’s WTCFs/towers/cell sites to one (1) or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
Camouflage means to disguise, hide, or integrate with an existing or proposed structure or with the natural environment so as to be significantly screened from view.
Co-locate means use of a WTCF by more than one (1) service provider.
COW means cell on wheels or Cellular on Wheels.
EIA means Electronic Industries Association.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Guyed tower means a wireless communication support structure which is typically over one hundred (100) feet tall and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern around the tower.
Height means, when referring to a tower or other WTCF, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel at the base of the WTCF to the highest point on the tower or other WTCF, including the base pad and any antennas.
Lattice tower means a support structure which consists of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section.
Monopole tower means a support structure which consists of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
Non-whip antenna means an antenna that is not a whip antenna, such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 167
Preexisting WTCF means any WTCF for which a building permit has been properly issued including permitted WTCFs that have not yet been constructed, so long as that permit or approval has not expired.
Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for telecommunications, telephone, radio, and similar communication purposes. The term includes the structure, all structural supports, and all related buildings and appurtenances.
Whip antenna means an omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape that is no more than six (6) inches in average diameter.
Wireless telecommunications facility or WTCF includes “personal wireless service,” “personal wireless service facilities,” and “facilities” as defined in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), including all future amendments, and also includes facilities for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for communication, telecommunication, cellular phone personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile radio, and any other services licensed by the FCC, and also includes any other unlicensed wireless services.
C. Applicability.
1. New uses. All WTCF proposals made in the city, whether for new construction or for modification of existing facilities, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this code, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
D. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section and are allowed in all zoning districts.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 168
1. Existing uses. WTCFs that currently exist, or for which a valid building permit has been obtained, except this exemption does not apply to modifications of existing facilities.
2. Industrial/scientific equipment. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC.
3. Amateur radio station operators or receive-only antennas. Any tower or antenna that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
4. Home satellite services. Satellite dish antennas less than 7 feet in diameter, including direct-to-home satellite services, when used as a secondary use of the property.
5. COW. A COW or other temporary WTCF, but its use anywhere in the city cannot exceed thirty (30) days, unless extended by permit issued by the Community development director or unless the city has declared an area-wide emergency.
6. Public safety WTCFs and equipment. Public safety WTCFs and equipment, including, but not limited to, the regional 911 system.
E. General.
1. Principal or accessory use. WTCFs may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of WTCFs on that lot.
2. Not essential services. WTCFs shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential public services.
F. General requirements.
1. Siting. Anyone who applies to construct a WTCF or to modify or add to an existing WTCF shall demonstrate to the city’s satisfaction that the proposed facility is located at the least obtrusive and the most appropriate available site to function in the applicant’s grid system.
2. FCC licensing. The city will only process WTCF permit applications upon a satisfactory showing of proof that the applicant is an FCC licensed telecommunications provider or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 169
that the applicant has agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the facility.
3. Compliance with other laws. Applicants must show, to the satisfaction of the Community development director, compliance with current FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of WTCFs complies with district development regulations including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the WTCFs may be located on leased parcels within that lot.
5. Height. Unless further restricted or expanded elsewhere in this section, no WTCFs may exceed the following height and usage criteria:
a. For a single user, up to ninety (90) feet in height; and
b. For two (2) or more users, up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in height.
6. Security fencing. WTCFs shall be enclosed, where appropriate, by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height; provided however, that the Community development director or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may waive these requirements, as appropriate.
7. Landscaping. WTCFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the WTCF compound; provided, however, that the Community development director or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may waive these requirements if the goals of this section would be better served.
8. WTCFs mounted on structures or rooftops. WTCFs mounted on existing structures or rooftops shall be designed and located so as to minimize visual and aesthetic impacts to the adjoining land uses and structures and shall, to the greatest extent practical, blend into the existing environment.
9. Aesthetics. WTCFs shall meet the following requirements:
a. WTCFs shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 170
b. At a WTCF site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend into the existing natural and constructed environment.
10. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required for any WTCF, the lighting must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area.
11. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, WTCF setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
12. Franchises, licenses, and permits. Owners and/or operators of WTCFs shall certify that they have obtained all franchises, licenses, or permits required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless telecommunication system in the city and shall file a copy of all required franchises, licenses, and permits with the Community development director.
13. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
14. Backhaul providers. Backhaul providers shall be identified and they shall have and maintain all necessary approvals to operate as such, including holding necessary franchises, permits, and certificates. The method of providing backhaul, wired or wireless, shall be identified.
G. Tower requirements.
1. Tower setbacks. All towers, support structures, and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum setback requirements for that zoning district.
2. Support systems setbacks. All guy wires, anchors, and other support structures must be located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks and no closer than five (5) feet to any property line.
3. Monopole construction required. All towers will be of a tapering monopole construction; however, the Community development director or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may allow another type tower upon a showing that it would cause less impact to the surrounding property than a similar monopole structure or would further the purposes and goals in this section.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 171
4. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a tower shall provide an inventory of its existing WTCF sites that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one (1) mile of its borders, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility.
5. EIA standards. Towers shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA standards. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the building official shall be provided with an engineer’s certification that the tower’s design meets or exceeds those standards.
6. Site selection and height. Towers shall be located to minimize their number and height and to minimize their visual impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the following policies:
a. Ensure that the height of towers has the least visual impact and that the height is no greater than necessary to achieve service area requirements and to provide for potential co-location; and
b. Demonstrate that the owner or operator has, to the greatest extent practical, selected a new tower site that provides the least visual impact on residential areas. This shall include an analysis of the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site and design provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility; and
c. Site so as to minimize being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from surrounding areas, especially residential areas. The facility should be camouflaged to the maximum extent feasible.
7. Co-location priority. Co-location of antennas by more than one (1) carrier on existing towers is preferred to construction of new towers; provided, that the co-location is consistent with the following:
a. Redesign restrictions. A tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, or of a less obtrusive design (such as a monopole), if practical.
b. Height. Except as may be modified in subsection (I)(1)(a) of this section, an existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty (30) feet over the tower’s existing height or one hundred twenty (120) feet, whichever is
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 172
lower, to accommodate the co-location by another provider or operator of an additional antenna system in any district except C-1 or C-3 districts. This additional height shall not require an additional distance separation.
c. Onsite relocation. A tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be relocated on its existing site within fifty (50) feet of its existing location. If consistent with the purposes and goals in subsection (A) of this section, the Community development director or, where applicable, the hearing examiner, may permit the onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands.
8. Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between towers shall be measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. Measurement shall be from base of tower to base of tower, excluding pad, footing, or foundation. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the nearest point on the base of the existing tower and the proposed tower base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 1, unless the distance is reduced by the Community development director when administratively approving a WTCF or by the hearing examiner through issuance of a conditional use permit.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 173
Table 1 Lattice Guyed Mono-pole 75 feet in height or greater Mono-pole less than 75 feet in height Lattice 5,000 ln. ft. 5,000 ln. ft. 1,500 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft. Guyed 5,000 ln. ft. 5,000 ln. ft. 1,500 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft. Monopole 75 feet in height or greater 1,500 ln. ft. 1,500 ln. ft. 1,500 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft. Monopole less than 75 feet in height 750 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft. 750 ln. ft.
H. Administratively approved WTCFs. The Community development director may administratively approve the uses listed in this subsection, once each applicant has applied for and provided all necessary information required in this code and in the city’s application form. This administrative approval is classified as a Process I application and is subject to the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
1. Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the Community development director after conducting an administrative review:
a. Industrial/commercial zones. Locating WTCFs, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with WTCFs, that do not exceed ninety (90) feet in height for a single user and one hundred twenty (120) feet in height for two (2) or more users in the following districts: I-1, I-2, C-2 and OSR.
b. Antennas on existing structures. Locating a WTCF other than a tower as an accessory use by attachment to any building or structure other than a single-family dwelling or multifamily structure of fewer than eight (8) dwelling units in any zoning district provided:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 174
i. The antenna does not extend more than twenty (20) feet above the highest point of the structure if a whip antenna, or ten (10) feet above the highest point of the structure if a non-whip antenna; and
ii. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes; and
iii. All associated equipment is placed either within the same building or in a separate structure that matches the existing building or structure in character and materials.
c. WTCFs on existing towers. Locating a WTCF through co-location by attaching the antenna to an existing tower.
d. WTCFs within allowable building height. Locating WTCFs, including placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the WTCF in OSR, C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts, so long as the WTCF does not exceed the allowable building height for that district.
e. COWS for greater than thirty (30) day periods. Upon a proper showing of extreme necessity (for example, if repair or modification of an existing WTCF clearly and legitimately cannot be completed within thirty (30) days), locating a COW at a single location for more than thirty (30) calendar days; however, purely economic convenience shall not be considered a viable factor in making this determination.
2. Authority to waive certain requirements. In connection with this administrative approval, the Community development director may, in order to encourage camouflaging and co-location of WTCFs, administratively waive separation distance requirements between WTCFs by up to fifty (50) percent in nonresidential zones. Additionally, the Community development director may, in order to encourage the use of the least obtrusive type of WTCF, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing WTCF to that less obstructive use.
I. Conditional use permits. Applications for conditional use permits under this subsection shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of EMC 19.09.030 and Ch. 17.01 EMC, except as modified by this subsection. If the WTCF is not subject to administrative approval pursuant to subsection (H) of this section, then a conditional use permit shall be required.
1. Conditional WTCF uses. Specifically, conditional use permits shall be required for the following WTCFs:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 175
a. Industrial/commercial zones. Locating WTCFs that exceed ninety (90) feet in height for a single user or one hundred twenty (120) feet for two (2) or more users or locating antennas on existing structures that exceed the height limitations in subsection (H)(2)(b) of this section in the following districts: C-2, I-1, I-2 and OSR.
b. Government property. Locating WTCFs (1) separate from existing structures on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city or other governmental entity or (2) attached to existing structures on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city or other governmental entity exceeding the height limitations in subsection (H)(2)(b) of this section, but only on the condition that the total height of the attached WTCF, including the structure, does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet, unless permitted under subsection (I)(1)(a) of this section.
c. WTCFs exceeding allowable building height. Locating WTCFs that exceed the allowable building height in the following districts: C-1, C-3 and A-E.
d. Tower construction under allowed separation distances. Locating towers that do not meet the separation distance requirements in subsection (G)(8) of this section or that do not meet administratively approved separation distance limits.
2. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers. In addition to EMC 19.09.030(D), the hearing examiner shall also consider the following factors when considering a CUP application for WTCF towers:
a. Height of the proposed tower;
b. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
d. Surrounding topography;
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
f. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
g. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 176
h. Obstruction of or interference with views;
i. Consistency with purpose and goals set forth in subsection (A) of this section.
3. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the hearing examiner that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTCF. An applicant shall submit information requested by the hearing examiner related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTCF may consist of any of the following:
a. No existing WTCF is located within the geographic area that meets applicant’s engineering requirements.
b. Existing WTCFs are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.
c. Existing WTCFs cannot practically be reconstructed to provide sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. Electromagnetic interference would occur between two (2) or more WTCF systems.
e. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing WTCF or to adapt an existing WTCF for co-location are unreasonable. Fees or costs that exceed new WTCF development shall not be presumed to render sharing facilities unsuitable.
f. Other limiting factors render existing WTCFs unsuitable.
g. An alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures would be unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new WTCF development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
4. Separation requirements. The hearing examiner may reduce tower separation distance requirements, including administratively approved separation distance reductions, if the purposes and goals of this section would be better served; however,
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 177
development of multiple tower locations on a single site (often referred to as “antenna farms”) are specifically discouraged wherever possible.
J. Removal of abandoned towers.
1. Abandonment and removal. The owner or operator of any abandoned tower shall notify the city’s Community development director, in writing, of that abandonment and shall remove the same within ninety (90) calendar days. Failure to remove an abandoned tower within ninety (90) calendar days shall be grounds to remove the tower at the owner’s expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then the city’s right to remove the tower shall not become effective until all users abandon the tower.
2. Partial abandonment and removal. If the antennas on any tower are removed or relocated to a point where the top twenty (20) percent or more of the height of the tower is no longer in use, the tower shall be deemed partially abandoned. The owner or operator of any partially abandoned tower shall notify the city’s Community development director, in writing, of that partial abandonment and shall remove the partially abandoned portion within ninety (90) calendar days. Failure to remove a partially abandoned tower within ninety (90) calendar days shall be grounds to remove the abandoned portion of the tower at the owner’s expense.
3. Security and lien. Each applicant, prior to commencement of construction, shall post sufficient security in the form of a bond, assignment of funds, cashier’s check, or cash, in a form acceptable to the city, to cover the estimated cost of demolition or removal of the tower and support structures, including complete site restoration. If for any reason the posted funds are not adequate to cover the cost of removal, then the city may charge the facility owner or operator with the city’s total cost incurred in removing the abandoned structures. If the owner or operator fails to make full payment within thirty (30) calendar days, then the amount remaining unpaid shall become a lien on the facility property.
K. Nonconforming uses.
1. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted. Any construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this section.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 178
2. Damage or destruction not the fault of owner/occupant. Bona fide nonconforming WTCFs that are damaged or destroyed without fault attributable to the owner or entity in control may be rebuilt without first having to obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having to meet separation requirements. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with applicable building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if the permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in subsection (J) of this section.
19.08.040 Home occupations.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to outline general conditions in which home occupations may be permitted in all zoning districts. These conditions have been designed to help preserve the residential character of the city’s neighborhoods from commercial encroachment while recognizing that certain selected business activities are compatible with residential uses.
B. Home occupations permitted. Home occupations which meet the requirements of this section are permitted in every zone where a dwelling unit was lawfully established. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following home occupations:
1. Home child care.
2. The sale of agricultural products produced on the premises.
C. Development standards. All dwelling units in which a home occupation is located must meet the following minimum development standards:
1. The residential character of the exterior of the building shall be maintained and shall be located within either the primary dwelling or a permitted attached or detached accessory structure.
2. The outdoor storage or display of materials, goods, products, or equipment is prohibited.
3. A home occupation shall not occupy more than three hundred (300) square feet.
4. The sign regulations of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 179
5. Home occupations that have state licensing requirements shall provide the community development department proof of state license in good standing prior to issuance of city business license.
D. Performance standards. All home occupations must meet the following minimum performance standards:
1. Employees. A home occupation may not employ on the premises more than one (1) person who is not a resident of the dwelling unit.
2. Traffic. The traffic generated by a home occupation shall be limited to four (4) two (2) way client-related trips per day and shall not create a need for additional onsite or offsite parking spaces.
3. Sale of goods and services. The sale of goods and services from a home occupation shall be to one (1) customer at a time, by appointment only, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday only.
4. Electrical or mechanical equipment usage. The use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or create visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers or electronic equipment or cause fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit is prohibited.
5. Utility demand. Utility demand for sewer, water, electricity, garbage, or lpg gas shall not exceed normal residential levels.
6. Other criteria. There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or other conditions produced as a result of the home occupation which would exceed that normally produced by a single residence, or which would create a disturbing or objectionable condition in the neighborhood.
E. Permit required. A zoning permit is required as provided in EMC 19.09.020.
F. Home occupations prohibited.
1. The following uses, by the nature of their operation or investment, have a pronounced tendency, once started, to increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and impair the use and value of zoning districts where dwelling units are lawfully
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 180
established. Therefore, the uses listed below shall not be permitted as home occupations:
a. Repair, body repair, building, or servicing of vehicles.
b. Kennel
c. Stables
d. Animal Hospitals
e. Pet Grooming
f. Real Estate Offices
g. Restaurants
h. Medical and Dental Clinics
i. Welding and Metal Work
j. Cabinet, Carpentry and Paint Shops
k. Mortuaries
l. Private or Nursery Schools
m. Private Clubs
19.08.050 Performance standards.
A. Performance standards defined. Performance standards deal with the operational aspects of land uses. While performance standards shall apply to all land uses within the city, they are primarily concerned with the impact of industrial development upon the environment. Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all uses, except as otherwise provided for in this title. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition. The following elements, if created, may become dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable under the circumstances, and are then referred to as dangerous or objectionable elements:
1. Noise, vibration or glare.
2. Smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution.
3. Heat, cold or dampness.
4. Hazardous substances and wastes.
B. Where other relevant provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations conflict with this chapter those laws and regulations shall apply, and compliance shall be certified by applicants for permits under this title.
C. Nonconforming uses. Uses established before the effective date of this title and nonconforming as to performance standards shall be given three (3) years in which to conform therewith.
D. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of performance standards. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the dangerous or objectionable elements and at any points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent (referred to
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 181
in the section as “at any point”); provided, however, that the measurement of performance standards for noise, vibration, odors, glare or hazardous substances or wastes shall be taken at the following points of measurement:
1. In all districts: At the property lines or lot lines; or
2. In all districts: At the buffer zone setback line for any hazardous substance land use facility, which must be at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
E. Restrictions on dangerous and objectionable elements.
1. Noise. At the points of measurement specified in subsection (C) of this section, the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility, other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work, shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table I after applying the corrections shown in Table II. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.3-1944, American Standard Specification for an Octave Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, or the latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., shall be used.)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 182
TABLE I. SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS IN DECIBELS Octave Band (cycles per second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level (decibels) 20 – 75 75 75 – 150 70 150 – 300 64 300 – 600 59 600 – 1,200 53 1,200 – 2,400 47 2,400 – 4,800 40 4,800 – 10KC 34
TABLE II. CORRECTION IN MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL IN DECIBELS TO BE APPLIED TO TABLE I Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels Noise source operates less than twenty (20) percent of any one (1) hour period Plus 5* Noise source operates less than five (5) percent of any one (1) hour period Plus 10* Noise source operates less than one (1) percent of any one (1) hour period Plus 15* Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) Minus 5 Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) Minus 5 *Apply one (1) of these corrections only.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 183
2. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement specified in this section.
3. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities so as to exceed the odor threshold at the following points of measurement. The odor threshold shall be defined as the concentration in the air of a gas or vapor which will just evoke a response in the human olfactory system.
a. Industrial park district, I-1. Odorous matter released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold beyond lot lines.
b. General industrial district, I-2. Odorous matter released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold beyond the district boundary or five hundred (500) feet from the lot line, whichever distance is shortest.
4. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement specified in subsection (C) of this section shall be permitted. This restriction shall not apply to signs or floodlighting of buildings for advertising or protection otherwise permitted by the provisions of this title.
5. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. The regulations of the federal occupational safety and health standards shall apply for all radioactivity and electrical disturbance unless local codes and ordinances supersede this federal regulation.
6. Fire and explosion hazards. The relevant provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations shall apply.
7. Smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution. The standards of the Washington State Department of Ecology, or those regulations as may be subsequently amended, shall apply.
8. Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Ecology or other appropriate state agencies.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 184
9. Hazardous substances or wastes. No release of hazardous substances or wastes as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, watercourse or water body, or the ground, except in accordance with standards approved by the State Department of Ecology or other appropriate state or federal agency. The following site development standards shall apply:
a. Hazardous waste facilities shall meet the location standards for siting dangerous waste management facilities adopted pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW;
b. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall be located at least:
(1) Five Hundred (500) feet from public parks, public recreation areas, or natural preserves, or state or federal wildlife refuges; provided, that for purposes of this section public recreation areas do not include public trails;
(2) Fifty (50) feet from any property line to serve as an on-site hazardous substance land use facility buffer zone;
(3) Five hundred (500) feet and one hundred (100) feet from a residential zone and a legal conforming residential use respectively; and
(4) Five hundred (500) feet from a public gathering place or agricultural land or zone, in the case of a nonagricultural hazardous substance land use facility;
c. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall not be located in a one hundred (100) year floodplain;
d. Hazardous substance land use facilities which are not entirely enclosed within a building shall provide a type I solid screen landscaping of a width of at least ten (10) feet in the hazardous substance facility buffer zone required by subsection (9)(b)(4) of this section;
e. Aboveground hazardous substance land use facilities shall be constructed with containment controls which will prevent the escape of hazardous substances or wastes in the event of an accidental release from the facility, and shall meet federal, state and local design and construction requirements;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 185
f. Underground hazardous substance land use facilities shall meet federal, state, and local design and construction requirements;
g. Hazardous substance land uses shall comply with adopted fire codes;
h. Hazardous substance land uses shall provide for review and approval by the city fire department of a hazardous substance spill contingency plan for immediate implementation in the event of a release of hazardous substances or wastes at the facility;
i. Hazardous substance land uses should use traffic routes which do not go through residential zones;
j. Hazardous substance land uses in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 zones shall be entirely enclosed within a building; and
k. Without limiting the application of the adopted fire codes to diesel fuel tanks, above and below ground diesel fuel storage tanks exclusively intended for use on stationary, on-site, oil burning equipment (such as electrical power generator systems) in all nonresidential zoning districts shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section, and above and below ground diesel fuel tanks of up to six thousand (6,000) gallons intended exclusively for use on stationary, on-site, oil burning equipment (such as electrical power generator systems) in residential zones shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section for essential governmental facilities only. The hazardous substance zoning code regulations, including the existing five hundred (500) gallon limit for hazardous substances for residential uses, shall otherwise remain in force and effect. Additionally, all aboveground diesel fuel tanks over five hundred (500) gallons exempted by this subsection are required to have a five (5) foot minimum landscape buffer surrounding the tank to buffer the visual impacts of these tanks. Moreover, the Community development director shall have the discretion to increase or modify this landscape buffer requirement depending upon the specific circumstances posed by any particular tank location.
In case of conflict between any of these site development standards and the development standards of specific zoning districts or other requirements of this title, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 186
19.08.070 Keeping of animals.
A. Purpose and Intent - The keeping or raising of sheep, goats, swine, horses, cattle, fowl, rabbits, birds, bees, reptiles or any animal, except domestic household pets, or except when kept in a bona fide veterinary clinic, or except as provided in the S-R Suburban Residential zone, or except those that are exempt from the provisions of this section, is prohibited within the city limits of Ephrata. The purpose of this section is to define the conditions under which the keeping of livestock shall be permitted within the City of Ephrata. The intent is to ensure that negative impacts, including but not limited to, noise, odor, destruction of property, unsightliness or damage to natural resources, are minimized while still permitting Ephrata residents to keep, raise or breed a modest number of livestock on appropriately sized and located parcels of land.
B. Computation of Animal Units - An animal unit is equivalent to any one of the following: steer, cow, milk cow, horse, mule/donkey, llama, ox, exotic animal, primate, three goats, three sheep, ten chickens, ten fowl or ten rabbits. For the purpose of this definition, any newborn animal listed above shall be excluded until such time as it is weaned, not to exceed one year. In the case of a particular species of livestock not mentioned above, the City Community Development Director shall determine its value in terms of animal units based on the animal’s nature or size.
C. Standards for the Keeping of Livestock - Livestock may be kept on residential parcels of land providing the following standards are met:
1. Lots within an area of between one-half acre and one acre may keep from zero to one animal unit. Any lot of one-half acre or less may not keep an animal unit or fraction thereof.
2. Lots of one acre or more in size may increase the number of animal units at the rate of one additional animal unit per half-acre in excess of one acre.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 187
Lot Size
Number of Permitted Animal Units
Less than ½ acres
0
½ acres – less than 1 acre
1
1 acre – less than 1½ acre
2
1½ acre – less than 2 acres
3
2 acres – less than 2½ acres
4
2½ acres – less than 3 acres
5
Note: Permitted animal units increase at the rate of one per each one-half acre increase in lot size.
3. The keeping of bulls and stallions over six months of age, the keeping of mink, foxes, or other non-domestic fur-bearing animals, the keeping of bees or beehives, the keeping of pigeons other than registered homing pigeons, the keeping or roosters and the keeping of inherently dangerous animals shall be prohibited.
4. The keeping of endangered, exotic or threatened species, as defined by the Department of Fish and Wildlife, shall be prohibited.
5. All livestock shall be kept on private property.
6. No shelter, barn or other structure associated with the keeping of livestock shall be located within any required front, side or rear building setback.
7. Any enclosure for the livestock shall be surrounded by an adequate and sufficient containment system to confine the animals therein.
8. All stables and other animal-related buildings and enclosures upon property where livestock is kept shall be maintained in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition.
9. The keeping of swine shall be prohibited.
The keeping of bees, small domesticated animals, large domesticated animals, and domesticated fowl, is permitted in all zones as an accessory use to any principal use permitted or to a permitted conditional use, subject to the standards and restrictions of this section.
D. Small domesticated animals. Up to three (3) small domesticated animals may be kept accessory to each business establishment or dwelling unit on a lot, except as follows:
1. In no case is more than one (1) miniature potbelly pig allowed per business establishment or dwelling unit. Said miniature potbelly pig being defined as the swine commonly known as the Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbelly pig (Sus scrofa bittatus). This small domesticated animal may be kept in accordance with section provided, the swine is neither greater than twenty-two (22) inches in height at the shoulder nor more
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 188
than one hundred fifty (150) pounds in weight. In the event the swine exceeds either of these limitations, it must be relocated outside city limits.
2. More than three (3) small domesticated animals are permitted on lots of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.05 EMC.
3. In no case shall a structure that restrains or houses small domesticated animals, such as a kennel or other accessory structure, be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other residential lot.
E. Domesticated fowl. Up to three (3) domesticated fowl may be kept on any lot that is at least five thousand (5,000) square feet, subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.05 EMC. These domesticated fowl are in addition to the small domesticated animals that may be permitted on a lot in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. One (1) additional domesticated fowl is permitted for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of land in excess of the minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot threshold. In no case shall a coop or other accessory structure that restrains or houses domesticated fowl be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other residential lot.
F. Large domesticated animals. Large domesticated animals are permitted only on lots of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.05 EMC. The keeping of swine is prohibited, except for a single miniature potbelly pig maintained in accordance with subsection (B) of this section.
1. One (1) large domesticated animal for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area is permitted.
2. Large domesticated animals and structures housing them must be kept at least fifty (50) feet from any other lot in a residential zone.
19.08.090 Residential Vehicle Storage.
Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the following meainings:
A. “Designated Driveway” means the clearly defined roadway leading from the street that is surfaced by asphalt, concrete, gravel, bricks, pavers, or similar material not to exceed thirty feet (30’) in width, or otherwise as shown on approved site plans. Where there is curb and gutter at the street, the driveway must have an approved curb cut.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 189
B. “Improved Parking Surface” means a parking surface such as concrete, asphalt, pavers, brick or other similar surface. Gravel or crushed rock may be used in the side or rear yards, and the front yard as it extends from the side yard. The parking surface shall be continuous from a designated driveway. Gravel or crushed rock shall be contained and shall not be allowed to migrate and shall be vegetation free. Material used for the improved parking surface shall be a minimum or two inches (2”) in thickness and shall be at least the same area as the drip edge of the vehicle.
19.08.095 Storage of Certain Vehicles and Components: Storage of vehicles on residential properties (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5) shall be allowed as follows:
A. Vehicles may be kept or located in or under any lawfully permitted building such as a garage, carport, or an enclosed and properly licensed utility or cargo type trailer so long as the utility or cargo type trailer is parked properly under the requirements of this chapter.
B. Vehicles may be parked or stored on a designated driveway, or an abutting improved parking surface no wider than the permitted designated driveway, in a front yard provided they are stored in the following manner:
1. The following types of vehicles shall be permitted to be parked in the front yard:
a. Passenger cars and pick-up trucks
b. Motorcycles
c. Recreational vehicles
d. Trailered vehicles
e. Trailered boats
f. One enclosed utility or cargo type trailer with dimensions of no more than six feet (6’) wide by twelve feet (12’) long
g. Alternative vehicles as defined in Chapter 10.80 EMC
2. All vehicles parked in the front yard shall be currently licensed for use on public roads.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 190
3. A trailer other than an enclosed utility or cargo type trailer attached to a car or pickup truck may be temporarily parked for a period of twenty-four (24) hours in a front yard as set forth in the ordinance so long as it remains attached to the car or pickup truck.
C. Vehicles parked in a side yard or in a rear yard shall be parked on an improved parking surface. Any and all trailers, loaded or unloaded, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter, or vehicles that are not licensed for use on public roads, may be stored only in a side yard or rear yard of the property on an improved parking surface.
D. Inoperable vehicles outside a structure that are entirely intact, not considered a junk vehicle nor a public nuisance, shall not be stored on property for a period exceeding thirty (30) days. Any maintenance or equipment repair shall comply with Section 19.08.097.
E. Commercial vehicles over one ton or semi-tractors and/or semi-tractor trailer combinations shall not be parked, deliveries excepted, or stored on any residential property unless otherwise allowed by law.
F. No vehicles or recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored on vacant property unless allowed by law.
G. Vehicles used in a demolition derby may be stored or parked only in totally enclosed, permitted structures.
19.08.097 Vehicle and Equipment Repair on Residential Premises: All servicing, repairing, assembling, wrecking, modifying, restoring, or otherwise working on any vehicle on any residential premises shall be subject to the following terms:
A. Work shall be limited to the repair and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or other conveyance currently registered as specified in the Washington Vehicle Code to the occupant or a member of the occupant’s family. This limitation precludes auto repair on residential premises by any commercial entity.
B. Work on inoperable vehicles shall be limited to no more than one (1) vehicle at any one time when located outside an enclosed structure.
C. Work shall only take place within an enclosed structure or in an area screened from public view, except that minor servicing (oil change, filter change, battery replacement or similar levels of servicing), repairing, or otherwise working on a vehicle may be performed outside an enclosed structure or in an area screened
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 191
from public view so long as the vehicle is parked on a designated driveway or improved parking surface.
D. Work shall take place only after the hour of seven (7) a.m. and before the hour of ten (10) p.m. when done on vehicles or equipment located outside a fully enclosed structure.
E. Major repair work shall not take place in a public right-of-way.
F. Parts, equipment, or other supplies shall be kept within an enclosed structure or in an area that is screened from public view and shall be kept in a manner that is not a violation of EMC Chapter 6.30.
G. No work or condition shall create a nuisance as defined in EMC Chapter 6.30.
H. Upon completion of all work allowed by this section, the owner shall clean the property of all debris, oil, grease, gasoline, cloths, rags, equipment, and material used in the work and shall leave the property in such a condition that no hazard to persons or property remain.
I. The owner shall dispose of all waste products in accordance with Chapter 19.114 RCW.
19.08.100 Nonconforming development.
A. Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to:
1. Ensure reasonable opportunity for use of legally created lots which do not meet current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.
2. Ensure reasonable opportunity for use, maintenance and improvement of legally constructed buildings, structures and site development features which do not comply with current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.
3. Ensure reasonable opportunity for continuation of legally established uses which do not conform to use regulations for the district in which they are located.
4. Encourage the eventual replacement of nonconforming uses having potentially undesirable impacts on conforming uses.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 192
5. Encourage the eventual upgrading of nonconforming buildings, structures, and site development features which do not comply with current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.
B. Applicability. Nonconforming uses, structures, lots, or signs are not favored by law and this title, and it is to avoid injustice that this title accepts such elements. To benefit from the protection given to nonconforming development, such use, structure, or sign must have been lawfully established pursuant to a county resolution in effect at the time of annexation which rendered it nonconforming, or it must have been lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto, or lawfully established prior to the purchase or condemnation of right-of-way by the city of Ephrata. This section distinguishes between and defines nonconforming uses, major nonconforming buildings and structures, minor nonconforming buildings and structures, nonconforming lots of record and nonconforming signs. Different requirements are made applicable to each of these categories. The degree of restriction made applicable to each separate category is dependent upon the degree to which that category of nonconformance is a nuisance or incompatible with the purpose and requirements of this title.
C. Nonconforming uses.
1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations applicable to nonconforming structures, lots, and signs, and in the event of any conflict the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
2. Expansion of nonconforming uses. No existing building, structure, or land devoted to a nonconforming use shall be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, intensified, or structurally altered unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building, structure, or land is located.
3. Discontinuance of nonconforming use. When a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of all or part of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) months, such use shall not be resumed, notwithstanding any reserved intent not to abandon such use. Normal seasonal cessation of use, or temporary discontinuance for purposes of maintenance or improvements, shall not be included in determination of the six (6) month period of discontinuance.
4. Reversion to nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a permitted use, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 193
5. Residential exception to nonconforming use status. Legally established residential uses located in any residential zoning district shall not be deemed nonconforming in terms of density provisions and shall be a legal use.
D. Nonconforming buildings and structures.
1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming structures are in addition to regulations applicable to nonconforming uses, lots, and signs, and in the event of any conflict the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
2. Nonconforming buildings and structures. No nonconforming structure may be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered or changed, nor may any nonconforming building, structure, or lot be occupied after discontinuance or change in use, unless the structure, use, and associated grounds and development are brought into compliance with use and minimum development standards of the district in which such structure is located, except as follows:
a. Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other natural disaster, may be restored, reconstructed, and used as before; provided, that the work be vested by permit application within twelve (12) months of such happening; any restoration or reconstruction not vested by permit application within twelve (12) months from the date of the fire or other casualty shall be deemed abandoned and not allowed to be restored.
b. Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep the structure in sound condition may be made to a nonconforming structure, provided no such structural alterations shall be made except such as are required by law or ordinance or authorized by the Community development director.
3. Community Development Director’s authority. The Community development director may waive specific development standard requirements or impose additional requirements when all the following criteria are met:
a. When owing to special circumstances a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title or other land use regulatory ordinances of the city will result in unnecessary hardship.
b. When the waiver of development requirements is in harmony with the purpose and intent of city ordinances and the comprehensive plan.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 194
c. When the proposed use, building, and development will function without adverse impact upon adjacent property, development in the area or the city as a whole.
d. When a conditional use permit is not required.
E. Nonconforming lots.
1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming lots are in addition to the regulations applicable to nonconforming uses, structures, and signs, and, in the event of conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
2. Nonconforming lots of record.
a. Residential districts.
(1) In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
(2) In all single-family zoning districts, if two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record and if all or part of the lots do not meet the minimum requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title.
(3) In any district in which duplex dwellings are permitted, a duplex dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record with a minimum area of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 195
the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
b. Other districts. In any other district, permitted building and structures may be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record, provided site coverage, yard, landscaping, and off-street parking requirements are met. Such lots must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership and if all or part of the lots do not meet the minimum requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title.
19.08.110 Reduction of lot area.
No land may be so reduced in area that it would be in violation of minimum lot size, yard provisions, lot coverage, off-street parking or any other requirements of the zoning district or use.
19.08.120 Irregular-shaped lots.
On irregular-shaped lots, the average distance from the building line to the lot line shall be no less than the minimum yard provision; provided, however, that no part of the structure shall be located so that one-half (1/2) the minimum yard provision occurs at any point along such averaged alignment.
19.08.130 Visibility at intersections in residential districts.
On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along the street lines twenty (20) feet from the point of the intersection.
19.08.160 Accessory structures.
A. An accessory structure can be located anywhere on a lot if it conforms with the setbacks as defined in EMC 19.04.170 and 19.04.190
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 196
B. Guesthouse accessory buildings shall be located on the rear half of the building site. There shall be not more than one (1) guesthouse on any one (1) building site, which, together with other accessory buildings, shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the area of the rear yard on which it is built. No kitchen or cooking facilities shall be permitted in any guesthouse.
19.08.170 Projections into required yards.
Certain architectural features may project into required yards or courts as follows: Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may protrude up to a distance of two (2) feet into any required yard.
19.08.180 Structures to have access.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing and required off-street parking.
19.08.190 Exceptions to height regulations.
The height limitations for the various districts shall not apply to spires, flagpoles, belfries, cupolas, noncommercial antennas, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. The height limitations shall not apply to barns and silos provided that they are not located within fifty (50) feet of any lot line. City-owned elevated reservoirs, water tanks, fire or police training towers and standpipes are exempt from height restrictions.
19.08.205 Temporary use regulations.
Provisions authorizing temporary uses are intended to permit occasional temporary uses, activities and structures when consistent with the purpose of this title and when compatible with the general vicinity and adjacent uses.
A. Permitted uses. The following types of temporary uses, activities and associated structures may be authorized, subject to specific limitations in this section and such additional conditions as may be established by the Community development director:
1. Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain.
2. Contractor’s office, storage yard and equipment parking and servicing on the site of an active construction project.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 197
3. Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs or similar transient amusement or recreational activities.
4. Indoor or outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits.
5. Christmas tree sales lots, fireworks and flower stands, limited to location on lots not used for residential purposes in commercial or industrial zoning districts.
6. Mobile home residences used for occupancy by supervisory and security personnel on the site of an active construction project.
7. Mobile home residential units used for occupancy of security personnel when not otherwise allowed as an accessory use.
8. Indoor or outdoor special sales, including swap meets, flea markets, parking lot sales, warehouse sales or similar activities, limited to locations on lots not used for residential purposes in commercial or industrial districts, and when operated not more than ten (10) days in the same month, unless otherwise permitted by the city.
9. Seasonal retail sales of agricultural or horticultural products raised or produced off the premises, to be permitted in commercial or industrial zoning districts only.
10. Garage sales, moving sales and similar activities for the sale of personal belongings when operated not more than three (3) days in the same week or more than three occurrences in the same calendar year. No permit is required.
11. Fund-raising carwashes. No permit is required.
12. Recreational Vehicles, Portable structures and cargo containers during construction:
(a) The Building Official may issue temporary use permits for the following uses:
(1) Temporary structures for the housing of equipment or containing supervisory offices, or temporary construction worker housing in connection with major construction projects may be erected and maintained during the progress of such construction projects; provided, that such temporary structures may not be maintained for period exceeding one year except that the Building Official may extend this period based on the individual needs of a specific construction project:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 198
(A) For any major construction project, a temporary construction worker housing facility may be established within one mile of construction site, with the approval of the Building Official.
(B) Temporary construction worker housing facilities shall not be located in any residential zone.
(C) The developer or contractor responsible for completing the construction shall provide a written statement of need for a temporary construction worker housing facility.
(D) Temporary construction worker housing facilities shall be limited to 39 recreational vehicles.
(E) Temporary construction worker housing facilities shall be limited to recreational vehicles only (refer to EMC 19.02) or other portable worker housing units as approved by the Building Official.
(F) Adequate provisions for water and sewer, as deemed appropriate by the City of Ephrata and the Grant County Health District, shall be made.
(G) Upon completion of the construction project, the temporary construction worker housing facility must be removed and the site restored to a condition that complies with the standards applicable to the zone in which the property is located. The site restoration must be completed within three (3) months of the completion of the construction project as outlined in item (H) below.
(H) The construction project shall be considered complete upon final inspection of the site and issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy by the City of Ephrata Building Official or other approved inspection agency.
(I) Temporary construction worker housing facilities shall conform to all other applicable portions of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
(2) Temporary placement of a trailer, mobile home manufactured home, or recreational vehicle to provide temporary housing while constructing a
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 199
permanent dwelling on the same lot; provided, that the property owner has an active residential building permit. Such temporary use may not be maintained for a period exceeding one year except that the Building Official may extend this period for no more than one additional year. The temporary use shall be terminated within thirty (30) days of occupancy of the permanent dwelling.
(3) Temporary placement of a trailer, mobile home, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle adjacent to an existing residence to provide temporary housing for not more than six (6) months while for the care of a terminally ill relative except that the Building Official may extend this period for additional six month terms. The medical condition must be documented by a physician or osteopath that the relative is in hospice care and prognosis is terminal.
(4) All temporary structures, except for construction pads and foundations intended to support subsequent seasonal temporary structures, shall be removed upon termination of a temporary permit, and the site shall be restored to existing conditions prior to occupancy of the temporary use.
(5) The Community Development Director may authorize additional temporary uses not listed in this subsection when it is found that the proposed uses are in compliance with the requirements and findings of subsection (C) of this section.
B. Conditions of temporary use.
1. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.
2. A temporary use conducted in a parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces required for the permanent use, except in the Commercial-1 (C-1) zoning district or as approved by the city council.
3. Each site occupied by a temporary use must provide or have available sufficient off-street parking and vehicular maneuvering area for customers. Such parking need not comply with the development requirements of Ch. 19.05 EMC, but must provide safe and efficient interior circulation and ingress and egress from the public right-of-way.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 200
4. No temporary use shall occupy or use public rights-of-way, parks or other public lands in any manner unless specifically approved by the city council.
5. No temporary use shall occupy a site or operate within the city for more than ninety (90) days within any calendar year, except as follows:
a. When authorized by the Community development director, a temporary use may operate an additional ninety (90) days if it is found that such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of subsection (C) of this section.
b. When authorized by the hearing examiner, a temporary use may operate an additional one (1) year if it is found that such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of subsection (C) of this section.
6. All signs shall comply with the requirements of Ch. 19.06 EMC, pertaining to sign regulations, except as otherwise specified in this section.
7. All temporary uses shall obtain, prior to occupancy of the site or culmination of activities, all required city permits, licenses or other approvals, e.g., business license, building permit, zoning permit, etc.
8. The Community development director may establish such additional conditions as may be deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential impacts on nearby uses. These include but are not limited to time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following temporary use.
C. Determinations. The Community development director may authorize the temporary uses described in subsection (A) of this section after consultation and coordination with all other applicable city departments and other agencies and only when the following determinations can be made:
1. The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site.
2. The temporary use will be compatible with uses in the general vicinity and on adjacent properties.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 201
3. The temporary use will not impact public health, safety or convenience, or create traffic hazards or congestion, or otherwise interrupt or interfere with the normal conduct of uses and activities in the vicinity.
4. The use and associated structures and living quarters will be conducted and used in a manner compatible with the surrounding area.
5. The temporary use shall comply with all applicable standards of the Grant County health department.
D. Application and authorization.
1. Application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the planning department, and shall include such information as the Community development director may require to evaluate the use and to make the determinations required by this section.
2. Application shall be made prior to the requested date for commencement of the temporary use, and the Community development director shall make a determination whether to approve, approve conditionally or deny the temporary use within ten (10) days after the date of application.
3. Authorization of a temporary use shall be by issuance of a zoning permit.
4. A temporary use authorized pursuant to this section shall not be exempted or relieved from compliance with any other ordinance, law, permit or license applicable to such use, except where specifically noted.
19.08.270 Adult uses.
A. Adult uses, as defined in EMC 19.02.008, are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the following specified uses or zones:
1. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any residential zone (S-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5).
2. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any public or private school or playground.
3. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any church or other religious facility or institution.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 202
4. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any public park, recreation center or recreation facility.
5. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any public library.
6. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any child care center.
7. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any public transit center.
8. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the grounds of any game arcade admission to which is not restricted to persons aged twenty-one years or older.
B. The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed land is to be separated.
C. Violation of the use provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the city attorney under state law, including procedures set forth in EMC 19.09.090.
D. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or statute of the state regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.
19.08.280 Group homes class II and III.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to outline general conditions with which class II and III group homes, as defined in EMC 19.02.172, must comply when applying for a conditional use permit to locate in the city.
B. Dispersion requirements. A class II and III group home must locate a minimum of six hundred (600) feet from any other class II or III group home. This distance will be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel or property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 203
C. Separation requirements. A one thousand (1,000) foot separation requirement will apply to class II and III group homes to separate such facilities from sensitive land uses such as public or private schools, churches, or other religious facilities or institutions, parks and playgrounds, and other such uses that are deemed to be sensitive. In addition to the sensitive uses listed in this subsection, class III group homes must be separated at least one thousand (1,000) feet from all residential areas. This distance would be measured by the same method as that used for the dispersion requirements described in subsection (B) of this section.
D. Registration and licensing. Group homes must obtain all licenses necessary for operation by state and federal agencies. Class II and III group homes must also register with the city by supplying information pertinent to the validity, update, and renewal status of the home’s state and federal license. Accuracy of all information contained in any state or federal license shall be verified to the extent possible by the city, and any applicant for a group home conditional use permit shall have the responsibility to ensure that any changes made to the license prior to its renewal are immediately provided to the city.
19.08.350 Accessory dwelling unit regulations.
A. Intent. The city provides these accessory dwelling unit (ADU) regulations for the following purposes:
1. To increase the supply of affordable rental units through better use of the existing housing stock, much of which is under-utilized because the baby boom has been followed by an empty nester boom, because there are fewer children per family, because there are more single parent households, and because there are more one (1) and two (2) person elderly households.
2. To make homeownership more affordable because it will be easier to buy both new and existing homes with the help of an accessory apartment.
3. To make it more comfortable for older people to retain their homes because an accessory apartment can provide them with added income, security, companionship, and the opportunity to trade rent reductions for needed services.
4. To make it easier for single parents to meet mortgage payments and hold onto their homes in the wake of a divorce and, as a result, keep their children in the same neighborhood.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 204
5. To increase the opportunity for disabled persons to live independently because accessory units can provide them with both privacy and the proximity to needed support.
6. To reduce the isolation of households that is a result of increased affluence in housing, and/or longer lifespans and periods of frailty, and/or suburban land use patterns that isolate people who cannot drive.
7. To make better use of existing public investment in streets, transit, water, sewer, and other utilities.
B. Standards and criteria.
1. One (1) ADU per dwelling unit is allowed out-right within all single-family residential zones, and single-family dwellings within the city.
2. An ADU may be established in a new or existing single-family dwelling by creating the unit within or in addition to the dwelling, or as a detached unit from the principal dwelling.
3. The ADU, as well as the main dwelling unit, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.
4. The design and size of an ADU shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases pursuant to the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, and as subsequently amended or recodified.
5. One (1) of the dwelling units shall be owner occupied as the owner(s) principal residence for at least six (6) months a year. No permit for an ADU will be issued until the owner files a covenant evidencing this use limitation against the property; this covenant must also be recorded in the records of the Grant County Auditor. This covenant shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
6. If both the ADU or the principal unit ceases to be owner occupied for more than six (6) months, the ADU permit shall be deemed revoked and use of the unit as an ADU must cease immediately.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 205
7. The size of an ADU contained within or attached to an existing single-family structure shall be limited by the existing structure’s applicable zoning requirements. An ADU incorporated in the construction of a new single-family house shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the principal unit. The size of a detached ADU, for either new construction or an existing home, shall be up to eight hundred (800) square feet or thirty-three (33) percent of the size of the principal unit, whichever is smaller.
8. The owner or developer shall take every effort to avoid additional entrances or other visible changes on the street facade of the house which indicates the presence of an ADU.
9. A permit application must be completed and approved for all ADUs. The planning department shall determine the application form for an ADU permit.
10. Adjacent neighbors of an ADU applicant shall be notified by the city of the ADU zoning permit application. This notification is informational only. The decision by the planning department to grant an ADU zoning permit is nonappealable by the neighbors of the permit holder.
19.08.359 Accessory living quarters.
A. Intent. The city provides these accessory living quarter (ALQ) regulations for the following purposes:
1. To meet the need for onsite dwelling of an owner or employee to provide for security of the business.
2. To reduce the need for commute trips.
B. Standards and criteria.
1. One (1) ALQ per commercial or manufacturing establishment, for security or maintenance personnel and their families, when located on the premises where they are employed in such capacity. No other residential use shall be permitted.
2. An ALQ may be established in a new or existing commercial or industrial/manufacturing building by creating the living quarters within or as an addition to the building, or as a detached structure from the principal structure.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 206
3. The ALQ, as well as the main structure, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.
4. The design and size of an ALQ shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases pursuant to the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, and as subsequently amended or recodified.
5. The size of an ALQ contained within or attached to a commercial or manufacturing establishment shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the commercial or industrial/manufacturing structure in which the ALQ is located. The size of a detached ALQ shall be limited to no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet.
6. A permit application must be completed and approved for all ALQs. The planning department shall determine the applicable form for an ALQ permit.
19.08.510 Utility Installations
In order to maintain a safe and efficient public or quasi-public utility or municipal service system which benefits the public good, it is necessary at times to install utilities. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the installation of such needed facilities to improve compatibility with surrounding uses.
1) When a lot on which a utility use is located in or adjoins a residential district, it shall be suitably landscaped so as to screen it from view from properties in the vicinity. Such landscaping shall be continually maintained by the utility provider.
2) Safety fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be erected and maintained around utility installations and structures in which there is any safety hazard whatsoever for children. All structures shall be located such that the safety fence does not encroach on any yard requirements in the district in which the use is located.
3) The utility station shall not be used for offices, servicing of trucks, storage of equipment, or such similar uses unless it is a use permitted outright in the district.
4) Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties, streets, and sidewalks to eliminate glare to surrounding properties, pedestrians, and drivers.
5) No objectionable odor is permitted.
6) Noise levels shall conform to the requirements of Washington Administrative Code, Chapter 173-60, (Maximum Environmental Noise Levels) as now enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord 10-09, 2010; Ord 18-09, 2018)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 207
19.08.730 Electric vehicle infrastructure
The purpose of this section is to facilitate adequate and convenient electric vehicle infrastructure to serve the needs of the traveling public, provide opportunities for city of Ephrata residents to have safe and efficient access to electric charging stations located at their place of residence and to provide the opportunity for mixed-use, commercial, and industrial developments to supply electrical vehicle infrastructure services to their tenants, customers, and employees. All electric vehicle charging stations and battery exchange stations, permitted in commercial and industrial and multifamily residential zoning districts pursuant to the Use Chart, Chapter 19.04, shall meet the following standards unless otherwise regulated within this code.
1) Parking spaces designated for electric vehicle charging may be included in the calculation of the number of off-street parking spaces provided pursuant to Chapter 19.05 EMC.
2) Each electric vehicle charging station space should be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. Signage should include identifying voltage and amperage levels, time of use, fees, safety or other information. See examples below of typical signage:
3) Installation of wayfinding signs should be conveniently located to effectively guide motorists to the charging station space(s). Such signs shall comply with Chapter 19.06 EMC.
4) Where charging station equipment is provided adjacent to a pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or accessible route to the building entrance, charging equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of WAC 51-50-005, as amended.
5) Battery exchange stations shall store all batteries in an enclosed building. No outdoor storage is permitted. All batteries that are beyond their useful life shall be recycled or disposed of in accordance with requirements established by the State Department of Ecology, State Department of Transportation, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 208
19.08.740 Building on Multiple Lots
Whenever a structure is built across one or more adjacent platted lot lines the construction of such building shall act to eliminate the lot line covered by the structure and cause the lots to become a single lot for purposes of the application of this title and titles 16 and 18 of this code. In no instance shall a structure be built upon a lot line easement for public utility or access purposes.
(Ord. 15-08, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 209
Chapter 19.09 ADMINISTRATION
Sections:
19.09.010 Development plan review.
19.09.020 Zoning permit.
19.09.030 Conditional use permit.
19.09.040 Variances.
19.09.042 Administrative variances.
19.09.045 Administrative design review.
19.09.046 Downtown design review.
19.09.050 Amendments.
19.09.060 Administrative interpretation generally.
19.09.065 Interpretation of uses.
19.09.070 Appeal of administrative interpretations.
19.09.080 Revocation of permits or variances.
19.09.090 Performance standards procedures.
19.09.300 Responsibility for establishment of lot lines and setback lines.
19.09.010 Development plan review.
A. Review of development plans shall be carried out by the planning and community development and building department for all buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, structurally altered, repaired, or moved within or into any district requiring development plan review and whenever a city permit is required, and for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of the use of land or buildings, within any district requiring development plan approval.
B. The development plan review is an administrative review, the primary purpose of which is to define and describe the needs of the particular site covered by a development plan in reference to the requirements of this title. The community development director shall make the final decision on development plan review. Development plan review is categorized as a Process I application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC. Any appeal from the final decision of the community development director shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements of Ch.19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC. In addition to the other requirements of this title, the planning and community development department shall approve a development plan only after the following standards, as a minimum, when applicable, have been incorporated into the development plan:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 210
1. Storm drainage must be handled by each proposed development in conformance with existing storm drainage plans and in conformance with city policies for storm drainage.
2. A planned street system is a primary element of any development plan proposed within the city and must be compatible with the city’s circulation plans. Development which is proposed in areas of the city which have a planned street system which is a part of the comprehensive plan or the city’s six (6) year plan, and any other street plan, shall make provisions for such streets and must not cause implementation of such street plans to become unattainable because the street plan is considered secondary to the development plan.
3. A pedestrian circulation system must become a part of any development plan when the proposed development will generate or attract pedestrians. The planning and community development department shall conduct site plan review to ensure that adequate parking is provided within close proximity to each unit entrance.
4. The proposed development shall be compatible with existing development adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of the proposed development. Compatibility shall not refer to architectural design features, but to siting of building and location of off-street parking.
5. Efforts shall be made to preserve trees, natural vegetation or other environmental amenities.
19.09.020 Zoning permit.
A. Zoning permits shall be required for all grading permits, buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved within or into any district established by this title, and for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of use of land or buildings within any district established by this title.
B. The zoning permit shall certify that the proposed use is in accordance with the requirements and standards of this title. A zoning permit shall not be issued until the development plan has been approved.
C. Zoning permits are categorized as Process I applications and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC. Any appeal of the final decision of the community development director shall be to the hearing examiner pursuant to the applicable requirements of Ch. 19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 211
19.09.030 Conditional use permit.
A. Purpose.
1. Conditional use permits, revocable, conditional or valid for a time period may be issued by the hearing examiner for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. The purpose of the conditional use permit is to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which may be suitable only on certain conditions in specific locations in a zoning district, or if the site is regulated in a particular manner. A conditional use permit is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Ch. 19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC.
2. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses permitted by a conditional use permit in the district in which the property is situated shall be deemed a conforming use without necessity of a conditional use permit.
3. Any expansion of an existing conditional use may be required to apply for a new conditional use permit if the community development director finds that there is a change in the nature of the use by such expansion.
B. Application.
1. The owner or his agent may make application for a conditional use permit, which shall be on a form prescribed by the planning and community development department and filed with the planning and community development department. Applications for conditional use permits shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
2. Development plans shall be submitted, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location on the lot of the proposed building or alteration. The plans shall show proposed landscaping, off-street parking, signs, ingress and egress and adjacent land uses. The plan shall include other information as may be required by the planning and community development department.
C. Public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed conditional use, and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to Ch. 19.12 EMC and EMC 17.01.130 and 17.01.140.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 212
D. Standards and criteria for granting. A conditional use permit shall only be granted after the hearing examiner has reviewed the proposed use to determine if it complies with the standards and criteria set forth below and in accordance with the requirements for Process III applications under Ch. 17.01 EMC. A conditional use permit shall only be granted if such finding is made.
1. The proposed use in the proposed location will not be detrimental to other uses legally existing or permitted outright in the zoning district.
2. The size of the site is adequate for the proposed use.
3. The traffic generated by the proposed use will not unduly burden the traffic circulation system in the vicinity.
4. The other performance characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with those of other uses in the neighborhood or vicinity.
5. Adequate buffering devices such as fencing, landscaping or topographic characteristics protect adjacent properties from adverse effects of the proposed use, including adverse visual or auditory effects.
6. The other uses in the vicinity of the proposed site are such as to permit the proposed use to function effectively.
7. The proposed use complies with the performance standards, parking requirements and other applicable provisions of this title.
8. Any other similar considerations may be applied that may be appropriate to a particular case.
E. Action of hearing examiner. Special conditions may be imposed on the proposed development to ensure that the proposed use will meet the standards and criteria of subsection (D) of this section in granting a conditional use permit. Guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being complied with may be required.
F. Appeals. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
G. Period of validity. Any conditional use permit granted by the hearing examiner shall remain effective only for three (3) years unless the use is begun within that time or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 213
construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within three (3) years, the conditional use permit shall become invalid.
19.09.040 Variances.
The hearing examiner shall have the authority to grant a variance where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title might result from the strict application of certain provisions. A variance may not be granted to allow a use that is not in conformity with the uses specified by this title for the district in which the land is located. (Note: Sign variances are heard by the city hearing examiner.)
A. Application. The owner or his agent may make application for a variance, which shall be on a form prescribed by the planning and community development department and filed with the planning and community development department. An application for a variance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
1. A variance is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
B. Public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed variance in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC.
C. Conditions for granting. Before any variance may be granted, it shall be shown and the hearing examiner shall find that:
1. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property on behalf of which the application was filed is located.
2. Such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings of the subject property, to provide it with use rights and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located.
3. The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 214
D. Appeals. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
E. Period of validity. Any variance authorized by the hearing examiner shall remain effective only for three (3) years, unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within three (3) years, the variance shall become invalid.
19.09.042 Administrative variances.
A. Scope. The community development director shall have the authority to grant an administrative variance for up to twenty-five (25) percent of the numerical zoning code standard for setbacks, lot coverage, and building height as provided in this title.
B. Application. The owner or his/her agent may make application for an administrative variance, which shall be on a form prescribed by the community development director and filed with the planning and community development department. An administrative variance is classified as a Process I application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC. The community development director shall review applications for completeness, and a notice of completeness will be issued within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after submittal. Those applications deemed incomplete shall be returned to the applicant for further action in accordance with the provisions of EMC 17.01.100.
C. Conditions for granting an administrative variance. The community development director may grant an administrative variance if it is shown that:
1. The administrative variance does not detract from the desired character and nature of the vicinity in which it is proposed;
2. The administrative variance enhances or protects the character of the neighborhood or vicinity by protecting natural features, historic sites, open space, or other resources;
3. The administrative variance does not interfere with or negatively impact the operations of existing land uses and all legally permitted uses within the zoning district it occupies; and
4. Granting the administrative variance does not constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare within the city.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 215
D. Appeals. Appeals of the community development director shall be in accordance with the requirements of EMC 17.01.190.
E. Fee. The fee for an administrative variance shall be as provided in the City of Ephrata fee schedule.
19.09.045 Administrative design review.
A. Purpose and scope. Administrative design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the comprehensive plan, its policies or parts thereof through the adoption of design criteria for development relative to site layout, landscape architecture, and exterior structure design. It is the intent of the city that this process will serve to aid applicants in understanding the principal expectations of the city concerning design, and encourage a diversity of imaginative solutions to development through the planning review and application of certain criteria. These criteria have been formulated to improve the design, siting, and construction of development projects so as to be compatible, both visually and otherwise, with the topographic, open space, urban, or suburban characteristics of the land or adjacent properties, while still maintaining allowable densities to be applied in a manner consistent with established land use policies, the comprehensive plan, this title, and community development goals of the city.
The adoption of design criteria is an element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized. Application of the multifamily design process to the design criteria adopted in this section is established as an administrative function delegated to the planning and community development department pursuant to RCW Title 35A; therefore, in implementing the administrative design review process, the community development director may adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary to provide for expeditious review of proposed projects. Further rules may be promulgated for additional administrative review.
B. Application and review process. Administrative design review process is classified as a Process I application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC. The applicant must make application for the design review process on forms provided by the planning and community development department. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the community development director shall circulate the application to the public works director, building official, and the city administrator for review. Prior to making a final decision, the community development director shall review any comments submitted for consideration. In the administration of this process, the community development director may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which shall pictorially
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 216
illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the criteria set forth in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, as well as a detailed explanation of the design review process.
C. Residential design review. In order to diminish the perception of bulk, and provide visual interest along residential home facades that face public areas, architectural design considerations shall be applied. Homes located within subdivisions and short subdivisions shall be subject to residential design review. This design review shall be applied administratively as part of the building permit review process for each new home.
1. Orientation of homes. The entry facade of each dwelling unit shall be generally oriented toward the highest classification street from which access to the lot is allowed.
2. Attached units. A building that contains a grouping of attached units shall not exceed a two hundred (200) foot maximum length and shall be separated from other groups of attached units by a minimum fifteen (15) feet.
D. Multifamily design review. The planning and community development department shall use the following criteria in the evaluation and/or conditioning of applications under the multifamily design review process:
1. Site design.
a. The site plan for the development should be integrated with the surrounding neighborhood.
b. The site plan should take into consideration significant environmental considerations and the lay of the land.
c. The site plan should provide an open space network which will accommodate a wide variety of activities, both semipublic and private.
d. The site plan should accommodate vehicular access and parking in a manner which is convenient, yet does not allow the automobile to dominate the site.
e. The site plan should provide safe and convenient pedestrian circulation.
2. Landscape design.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 217
a. The landscape plan should integrate with and enhance the surrounding neighborhood landscape.
b. The landscape plan should incorporate existing natural features of significance.
c. The landscape plan should enhance the planned open space network.
d. The landscape plan should enhance the parking and utility areas on the site.
e. The landscape plan should enhance building forms and orientation.
3. Building design.
a. The buildings in the development should, where appropriate, maintain neighborhood scale and density.
b. The buildings in the development should be oriented to provide for privacy of residents.
c. The exterior design of all buildings in the development should provide for individual unit identity.
E. Appeals. The decision of the Community development director to condition or reject any application under the administrative design review process is final unless an appeal is made by the applicant or any party of record to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days of either the issuance of the director’s conditional approval under this section of any application, or the director’s written decision rejecting any application under this section. The appeal shall be conducted by the hearing examiner as an open record appeal hearing in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless an appeal is made to the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the hearing examiner’s notice of decision.
19.09.046 Downtown design review.
A. Purpose and scope.
1. Downtown design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the downtown plan, its policies or parts thereof, through the adoption of downtown design guidelines, as set forth in subsection (D) of this section, for development within the downtown planning area, which is bounded by C St.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 218
SW to the west, 3rd Avenue NW to the north, Alder St. to the east, and 3rd Avenue SW to the south.
It is the intent of the city that this process will serve to aid applicants in understanding the principal expectations of the city concerning development in the downtown planning area and encourage a diversity of imaginative solutions to development through the review and application of the downtown design guidelines. These guidelines have been formulated to ensure that the design, siting and construction of development will provide a quality pedestrian-oriented urban environment in a manner consistent with established land use policies, the comprehensive plan, and zoning code of the city.
2. The adoption of the downtown design guidelines is an element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized. The downtown design review process adopted herein is established as an administrative function delegated to the city’s planning and community development department pursuant to RCW Title 35A. Therefore, in implementing the downtown design review process, the Community development director may adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary to provide for review of proposed projects.
3. All development within the downtown planning area shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Application and review process. The downtown design review process is administrative and is conducted as part of the permit review process. The applicant must make application for the design review process on forms provided by the planning and community development department. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the Community development director shall circulate the application to the appropriate city departments and offices for review. Prior to issuing a final decision, the Community development director shall review any comments submitted for consideration. In the administration of this process, the planning and community development department may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which shall pictorially illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the criteria set forth in the downtown design guidelines.
C. Design review committee. There is hereby established the downtown design review committee, which shall make all final decisions on applications for downtown design review. The committee shall be comprised of three (3) members, who shall be appointed by the Community development director under the authority delegated to him under RCW Title 35A. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the Community development director.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 219
The planning and community development director shall, by administrative rule, establish the rules of procedure for the committee, which shall be made available to the public upon publication.
D. Downtown design guidelines – Adoption. The downtown design review committee shall use the downtown design guidelines in the evaluation and/or conditioning of applications under the downtown design review process. The downtown design guidelines, entitled “Ephrata Downtown Design Guidelines,” when accepted and adopted and as authorized pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140, shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk and planning and community development department.
E. Appeals. The decision of the downtown administrative design review committee to approve, condition or reject any application under the downtown design review process is final unless an appeal is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days of either the issuance of the committee’s conditional approval or rejection of any application under this section. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be conducted as set forth in Ch. 19.06 EMC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, unless an appeal is made to the Grant County superior court, within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the date of the decision.
19.09.050 Amendments.
This title may be amended by the city council by changing the boundaries of zoning districts (rezones which change the official zoning map) or by changing any other provisions thereof (text amendments which add, delete or otherwise modify the text of this title) whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such amendment, by following the procedures of this section.
A. Initiation. An amendment may be initiated as follows:
1. Amendments to the text of this title and official zoning map amendments may be initiated by resolution of intention by the city council. Text amendments and zoning map amendments are heard by the planning commission and city council. In the case of area-wide zoning or rezoning, both text amendments and zoning map amendments may be heard by the planning commission and city council in accordance with Ch. 17.01 EMC.
2. Amendments to the text of this title may be initiated by resolution of intention by the planning commission.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 220
3. Official zoning map amendments (rezones), including the application of the “C” (conditional use) suffix, may be initiated by application of one (1) or more owners, or their agents, of the property affected by the proposed amendment, which shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning department and filed with the planning department. The application shall be submitted in the manner required for Process VI applications. The planning commission shall consider the application in an open record public hearing in accordance with 17.01 EMC.
B. Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed amendment, and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
C. Standards and criteria for granting a request for rezone. The following standards and criteria shall be used by the planning commission and city council to evaluate a request for rezone. Such an amendment shall only be granted if the city council determines that the request is consistent with these standards and criteria and subject to the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
1. The proposed rezone is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
2. The proposed rezone and subsequent development of the site would be compatible with development in the vicinity.
3. The proposed rezone will not unduly burden the transportation system in the vicinity of the property with significant adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated.
4. Circumstances have changed substantially since the establishment of the current zoning district to warrant the proposed rezone.
5. The proposed rezone will not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
D. Recommendation of planning commission. Following the public hearing provided for in this section, the planning commission shall make a report of findings and recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment and shall forward such to the city council, which shall have the final authority to act on the amendment.
E. City council action/appeal.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 221
1. The city council shall, at a regular public meeting, consider the recommendation and issue a final decision. The decision of the city council is appealable to the Grant County superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the issuance of a notice of decision and in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC and Chapter 36.70C RCW.
2. If the application for an amendment is denied by the city council, the application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one (1) year from date of the denial, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new application affecting the same property may be submitted if, in the opinion of the planning commission, circumstances affecting the application have changed substantially.
19.09.060 Administrative interpretation generally.
The Community development director may make interpretations of the provisions of this title. Such administrative interpretations shall include determinations of uses permitted in the various districts, and approval or disapproval of development plans and zoning permits. Other interpretations may be made as specific circumstances arise which require such interpretations. The purpose of such administrative interpretations is to provide a degree of flexibility in the administration of this title while following the intent of the city council. Administrative interpretations are subject to applicable requirements of Process I applications per Ch. 17.01 EMC.
19.09.065 Interpretation of uses.
A. Land uses which are listed as principally permitted uses in the Land Use Tables shall be permitted subject to the review processes, standards, and regulations specified in Title 19. If a use is not listed in the Land Use Tables, it shall be considered to be a prohibited use unless the Community development director determines it to be a permitted use following the process outlined below. If a proposed use is not specifically listed in the Land Use Tables, an applicant may request from the Community development director an interpretation as to whether or not such use is a permitted use. In determining whether a proposed use closely resembles a use expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district(s), the Community development director shall utilize the following criteria:
1. The use resembles or is of the same basic nature as a use expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district or districts in terms of the following:
a. The activities involved in or equipment or materials employed in the use;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 222
b. The effects of the use on the surrounding area, such as traffic impacts, noise, dust, odors, vibrations, lighting and glare, and aesthetic appearance.
2. The use is consistent with the stated purpose of the applicable district or districts.
3. The use is compatible with the applicable goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. A record shall be kept of all interpretations and rulings made by the Community development director. Such decisions shall be used for future administration. The Community development director shall report decisions to the planning commission when it appears desirable and necessary to amend this code. The Community development director’s determination is classified as a Process I application and shall be processed and subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC and may be appealed as provided in Ch. 17.01 EMC.
C. Appeals. Any appeal from the Community development director’s determination shall be an open record appeal hearing and shall be filed in accordance with the procedures established for Process I applications under Ch. 17.01 EMC.
19.09.070 Appeal of administrative interpretations.
A. Any appeal of administrative decisions relating to the enforcement or interpretation of this title, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the planning and community development department within fourteen (14) calendar days after such decision, and in the manner set forth in Ch. 17.01 EMC.
B. The appeal shall be heard by the hearing examiner, and the hearing examiner shall render his or her decision in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 19.12 EMC and Ch. 17.01 EMC.
19.09.080 Revocation of permits or variances.
Any zoning permit, planned unit development permit, conditional use permit or variance granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such permit or variance are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 223
19.09.090 Performance standards procedures.
The Community development director shall have the power to authorize the following procedures prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for industrial uses as provided for in the industrial districts:
A. Application for zoning permit. An application for a zoning permit for a use subject to performance standard procedures shall be submitted by the owner or his agent in duplicate on a form prescribed by the planning and community development department. The applicant shall also submit in duplicate a plan of the proposed machinery, processes and products, and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the creation or emission of dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in EMC 19.08.050(D). The applicant shall also provide such supporting scientific, technical or other data or information as is necessary to establish that the use will comply with the performance standards set forth in EMC 19.08.050.
B. Review by expert consultants. The Community development director, upon obtaining approval of the costs by the city council, may refer the application for review and report to one (1) or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards specified in EMC 17.08.050 in a manner set forth in the application. A copy of such report shall be filed with the planning and community development department for inspection by interested persons.
C. Review by Community development director. Within thirty (30) days after the planning and community development department has received the application provided for in this section, or within such period as agreed to by the applicant, the Community development director shall decide whether the proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards, and on such basis shall authorize or refuse to authorize issuance of a zoning permit, or require a modification of the proposed equipment or operation. Any zoning permit so authorized and issued shall be conditioned upon, among other things, the applicant’s completed buildings and installations conforming in operation to the applicable performance standards.
D. Continued enforcement.
1. The planning and community development department shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards. For the purpose of investigating such violations, the Community development director may employ qualified experts.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 224
2. After investigation, on due notice to the alleged violator, the Community development director may order the violations corrected within a prescribed period of time, and if such violations are not so corrected may order the violator to cease and desist from carrying on that portion of the operation or process causing a violation.
E. Violations. If violation has occurred, the Community development director shall report to the city attorney if the violation was willful or likely to occur again, and the city attorney may order the violator to take such steps as are necessary to ensure future compliance with this chapter. The procedure provided in this subsection shall not be exclusive, and, if the violation has been willful or without reasonable justification the violator may be prosecuted as for a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 15-09, 2013)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 225
Chapter 19.10 ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
19.10.010 Violations.
19.10.020 Duty to enforce.
19.10.030 Investigation and notice of violation.
19.10.040 Stop work order.
19.10.050 Emergency order.
19.10.060 Extension of compliance date.
19.10.070 Violation – Penalty.
19.10.080 Additional relief.
19.10.010 Violations.
A. It is a violation of this title for any person to initiate or maintain or cause to be initiated or maintained the use of any structure, land or property within the city without first obtaining the permits or authorizations required for the use by this title.
B. It is a violation of this title for any person to use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land or property within the city in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this title; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit or the approved plans.
C. It is a violation of this title to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with this title or Ch. 20.08 EMC.
D. It is a violation of this title to misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any land use authorization.
E. It is a violation of this title for anyone to fail to comply with the requirements of this title.
19.10.020 Duty to enforce.
A. It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce this title. The director may call upon the police, fire or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.
B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director or duly authorized representative of the director may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 226
pursuant to a lawfully issued inspection warrant, enter at reasonable times any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by this title.
C. This title shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.
D. It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner, occupier or other person responsible for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of this title.
E. No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.
19.10.030 Investigation and notice of violation.
A. The director or his representative shall investigate any structure or use which the director reasonably believes does not comply with the standards and requirements of this title.
B. If, after investigation, the director determines that the standards or requirements have been violated, the director may seek compliance and serve a notice of violation on the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the condition and/or otherwise enforce pursuant to this chapter and EMC 19.10.070 below.
19.10.040 Stop work order.
Whenever a continuing violation of this title will materially impair the director’s ability to secure compliance with this title, or when the continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public, the director may issue a stop work order specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. A failure to comply with a stop work order shall constitute a violation of this title.
19.10.050 Emergency order.
A. Whenever any use or activity in violation of this title threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the director may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be corrected. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. A failure to comply with an emergency order shall constitute a violation of this title.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 227
B. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not corrected within the time specified is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the director is authorized to abate such nuisance summarily by such means as may be available. The cost of such abatement shall be recovered from the owner or person responsible, or both, in the manner provided by law.
19.10.060 Extension of compliance date.
A. The director may grant an extension of time for compliance with any notice or order, whether pending or final, upon the director’s finding that substantial progress toward compliance has been made and that the public will not be adversely affected by the extension.
B. An extension of time may be revoked by the director if it is shown that the conditions at the time the extension was granted have changed, if the director determines that a party is not performing corrective actions as agreed, or if the extension creates an adverse effect on the public. The date of revocation shall then be considered as the compliance date.
19.10.070 Violation – Penalty.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in EMC Chapter 1.22.
19.10.080 Additional relief.
The director may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices and restore or abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this title when civil or criminal penalties are inadequate to effect compliance.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 228
Chapter 19.11
Flood Damage Prevention
Sections:
19.11.010 Purpose
19.11.015 Definitions
19.11.020 Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies
19.11.030 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
19.11.040 Methods of Reducing Flood Loss
19.11.050 Development Permit Required
19.11.060 Application for Development Permit
19.11.070 Administrator
19.11.080 Permit Review
19.11.090 Penalties for Non-Compliance
19.11.100 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
19.11.110 Interpretation
19.11.120 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
19.11.130 Use of Other Base Flood Data
19.11.140 Information to be Obtained and Maintained by Building Official
19.11.150 Alteration of Watercourses
19.11.160 Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries
19.11.170 Provisions for Flood Hazard Protection
19.11.180 Appeals
19.11.190 Variances
19.11.200 Severability
19.11.010 Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 229
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of area of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and,
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
19.11.015 Definitions
The definitions contained in this section are in addition to those listed in Section 19.02 and where they are in conflict with those in Section 19.02 are controlling when used in the context of this Chapter 19.11.
LOWEST FLOOR.
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance found at Section 5.2-1(2), (i.e. provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
19.11.020 Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Ephrata.
19.11.030 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
1) The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Grant County, Washington and Incorporated Areas” dated February 18, 2009 and any revisions thereto, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this ordinance.
2) The Flood Insurance Study and the FIRM are on file at Ephrata City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in Section 19.11.130 shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under section 19.11.130.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 230
19.11.040 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3) Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and,
5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
19.11.050 Development Permit Required
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of the special flood hazard established in this ordinance. The permit shall be required for erecting, enlarging, reconstruction, renovation, repair of a structure, and siting manufactured homes that may not otherwise require a building permit. Other activities include but no limited to mining, dredging, filling, grading, or excavation not related to structural development, fence or wall construction, roadway or bridge construction, paving, placement of propane tanks, and any development which causes changes in the flood plain to include storage as set forth in the definitions. (Ord 18-06, 2018)
19.11.060 Application for Development Permit.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Building Official and may include, but not be limited to, plans on duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required
1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures.
2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed.
3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the flood proofing criteria of this ordinance.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 231
4) A description of the extent of which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
19.11.070 Administrator
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this ordinance by granting or denying building or development permits in accordance with its provisions.
19.11.080 Permit Review
The Building Official shall review all development permits to determine:
1) That the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
2) That all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3) Assure that the encroachment provisions of this ordinance are met if the proposed development is located in the floodway.
19.11.090 Penalties for Non-Compliance
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this ordinance and will subject the offender to a civil penalty as provided in Chapter 1.22 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. (Ord 15-26, 2015)
19.11.100 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
19.11.110 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be considered as minimal requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
19.11.120 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 232
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Ephrata, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
19.11.130 Use of Other Base Flood Data
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this ordinance, (Section 19.11.030 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard), the Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state, or other source in order to administer the specific standards and floodways provisions of this ordinance.
19.11.140 Information to be Obtained and Maintained by Building Official
1) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study FIRM, or required as in this ordinance, obtain and record the actual as-built elevation (in relations to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
2) For all new or substantially improved flood proofed non-residential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM or as required in Section 19.11.130, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed and maintain the flood proofing certifications required in this ordinance.
3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to provisions of this ordinance
19.11.150 Alteration of Watercourses
1) The Building Official shall notify adjacent communities and the Washington Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2) Maintenance shall be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
19.11.160 Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 233
The Building Official shall make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary may appeal the interpretations pursuant to Section 19.11.180.
19.11.170 Provisions for Flood Hazard Protection
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. General Standards, in all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of structure.
(b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to; use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).
2. Construction Materials and Methods
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
3. Utilities
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 234
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(b) Proposed municipal and irrigation water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway nor the floodplain/Special Flood Hazard Area (WAC 173-160-171);
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
4. Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such a sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(d) Where base flood elevation data has not yet been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated by the applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
5. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study FIRM or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc. where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2’) above highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
B. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 19.11.030, BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or SECTION 19.11.130, USE OF OTHER BASE FLOOD DATA, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 235
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet (2’) above the base flood elevation.
(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
i. Minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the grade.
iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exist of floodwaters.
2. Non-Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet (2’) above the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Have lowest floor including basement elevated to base flood elevation, and
(b) Be flood proofed so that below two feet above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls impermeable to the passage of water, and
(c) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the effects of buoyancy; and
(d) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 19.11.140, and
(e) Non-residential structures that are elevated, not flood proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in 19.11.170.B.1(a), and
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 236
(f) Applicants flood proofing non-residential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1’) below the flood proofed level (e.g. a building flood proofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below).
3. Manufactured Homes
All manufactured, designated manufactured and mobile homes to be placed or substantially improved within Special Flood Hazard Areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two feet (2’) above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(a) Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured housing community or subdivision that are not subject to the above manufactured home provisions be elevated so that either:
i. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two feet above the base flood elevation, or
ii. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above highest adjacent grade and be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
4. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed in sites within the floodplain/Special Flood Hazard Area shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
(c) Meet the requirements of 19.11.170.B.3 above and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 237
5. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 19.11.030 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion increase potential, the following provisions apply:
(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for:
i. Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and
ii. Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either;
a. Before the repair, or reconstruction is started, or
b. If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before damage occurred.
iii. Any project or improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local building code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
iv. To structures identified as historic places shall not be included in the 50 percent.
(c) All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
6. Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development, where combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 238
7. Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones). Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRM’s as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from 1 to 3 feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, two feet or more above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the structure if no depth number is specified).
(b) New construction and substantial improvements of non residential structures within AO zones shall either:
i. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, two feet or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
ii. Have the lowest floor including basement elevated to the depth number specified on the FIRM together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood proofed to a height that is two feet or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the building if no number is specified) level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in Section 19.11.170.
(c) Require adequate draining paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(d) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO Zones on the City’s FIRM will either:
i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 239
iii. Meet the requirements of 19.11.170(B)(7)(a) and (B)(7)(c) and the above anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
8. Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of the new critical facilities shall only be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor including basement elevated to three feet above highest adjacent grade, or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the Critical Facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into the floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
19.11.180 Appeals
Any decision by an administrator, officer, board, or commission in carrying out the provisions of this chapter may be appealed as provided for in the Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 17.01 or to the courts of the state as prescribed by law. Any person seeking a review of such a decision shall cause to be prepared the transcript of the record below, if any. It shall be a condition of any appeal of any decision subject to review that the appellant have arranged for and paid the estimated cost of transcript preparation. Failure to make such arrangements and pay such costs shall cause any notice appeal to be deemed to be incomplete and render the appeal moot.
19.11.190 Variances
1) The Hearing Examiner, as established by the City of Ephrata shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2) In passing upon such applications, the Hearing Examiner shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and;
a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
e) The necessity to the facility of a water front location, where applicable.
f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 240
g) The comparability of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area.
i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
k) The costs of providing governmental services during the after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
3) Upon consideration of the factors of the appropriate sections and the purposes of this ordinance, the Hearing Examiner may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
4) The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
5) Conditions for Variances:
a) The only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounding by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items a through k in subsection 2 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
b) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or the restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.
c) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
i. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
ii. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
iii. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 241
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subparagraph 19.11.190, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6) Variances interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
7) Variances may be issued for non-residential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood proofing than watertight or dry-flood proofing where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subparagraph 19.11.190(5)(a), and otherwise complies with the general standards in 19.11.170(A).
8) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
19.11.200 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord 15-26, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 242
Chapter 19.12 HEARING EXAMINER
Sections:
19.12.010 - Purpose
19.12.020 - Creation of Land Use Hearing Examiner
19.12.030 - Appointment and Term
19.12.040 - Qualifications
19.12.050 - Compensation
19.12.060 - Hearing Examiner Pro-Tem and/or Deputy Examiner
19.12.070 - Freedom from Improper Influence
19.12.080 - Conflict of Interest
19.12.090 - Powers
19.12.100 - Applications
19.12.110 - Report by Community Development Director
19.12.120 - Rules
19.12.130 - Public Hearings
19.12.140 - Official Case Record
19.12.150 – Examiner’s Decision - Findings Required
19.12.160 - Notice of Examiner’s Decision
19.12.170 - Appeal of Examiner’s Decision
19.12.180 - Council Action
19.12.190 - Computation of Time
19.12.010 - Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system of applying land use regulatory controls which will best satisfy the following basic needs;
(1) To separate the land use regulatory function from the land use planning process;
(2) to ensure procedural due process and appearance of fairness in land use regulatory hearings; and
(3) To provide an efficient and effective land use regulatory system which integrates the public hearing and decision making processes for land use matters.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 243
19.12.020 - Creation of Land Use Hearing Examiner
Pursuant to RCW 35A.63.170, the Office of the City of Ephrata Land Use Hearing Examiner, hereinafter referred to as "Examiner", is hereby created. The Examiner shall interpret, review and implement land use regulations as provided in this chapter or by other ordinance. Unless the context requires otherwise, the term Examiner as used herein shall include Deputy Examiners and Examiners Pro Tem.
19.12.030 - Appointment and Term
The Examiner shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
19.12.040 - Qualifications
Examiners shall be appointed solely with regard to their qualifications for the duties of their office and will have such training and experience as will qualify them to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge the other functions conferred upon them. Examiners shall hold no other elective or appointed office or position in city government.
19.12.050 - Compensation
The Examiner may be classified as regular, part time employees or the city may contract with the Examiner for the performance of the duties described in this ordinance. The compensation to be paid the Examiner shall be that established in the annual city budget.
19.12.060 - Hearing Examiner Pro-Tem and/or Deputy Examiner
The Examiner Pro-Tem and/or Deputy Examiner shall, in the event of the absence or the inability of the Examiner to act, have all the duties and powers of the Examiner.
19.12.070 - Freedom from Improper Influence
No person, including city officials, elective or appointive, or any other person shall attempt to influence an Examiner in any matter pending before him or her, except at a public hearing duly called for such purpose, or to interfere with an Examiner in the performance of his or her duties in any other way; PROVIDED, that this section shall not prohibit the city attorney from rendering legal services to the Examiner upon request.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 244
19.12.080 - Conflict of Interest
No Examiner shall conduct or participate in any hearing, decision or recommendation in which the Examiner has a direct or indirect substantial financial or familiar interest, or in which the Examiner has a direct or indirect personal interest that might interfere with his or her decision-making process, or concerning which the Examiner has had substantial pre-hearing contacts with proponents or opponents. Any such actual or potential conflict shall be disclosed to the parties immediately upon discovery of such conflict and any hearing shall be conducted by a Deputy or Pro-Tem Examiner.
19.12.090 - Powers
(1) The Examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings and prepare a record thereof, and enter written findings of fact and conclusions of law as provided for herein. The decision of the Examiner on the following matters shall be final and conclusive unless such decision is appealed pursuant to EMC 17.01.195.
(2) The Examiner shall be empowered to hear and decide any and all requests for variance of the city zoning ordinances, pursuant to the limitations of RCW 35A.63.110(2).
(3) The Examiner shall be empowered to hear and decide any and all requests for conditional use permits pursuant to the city zoning ordinances.
(4) The Examiner shall be empowered to hear and decide any and all requests related to an environmental determination pursuant to the city ordinances.
(5) The Examiner shall be empowered to hear and decide any and all appeals of actions of the zoning code enforcement officials of the city pursuant to the city zoning ordinances.
19.12.100 - Applications
(1) Applications for all matters to be heard by the Examiner shall be presented to the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall accept such applications only if all applicable filing requirements are met, including payment of the filing fee. The Community Development Director shall be responsible for assigning a date for a public hearing for each application and for ensuring due notice of public hearing for each application. The public hearing date shall be in conformance with time requirements as defined in Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 17.01 after the filing of a completed application and furnishing all necessary data to the Community Development Director.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 245
(2) The application fee shall be as defined in the city’s fee schedule. (Ord. 06-07, 2006; Ord 15-26, 2015)
19.12.110 - Report by Community Development Director
When such application has been set for public hearing, the Community Development Director shall coordinate and assemble the comments and recommendations of other city departments and governmental agencies having an interest in the subject application and shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved and the Community Development Director’s findings and recommendations. At least seven (7) days before the scheduled hearing the report shall be filed with the Examiner and copies thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and made available for public inspection or for use by any interested party for the cost of reproduction.
19.12.120 - Rules
The Examiner shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings under this chapter. Such rules may provide for the cross-examination of witnesses, the administration of oaths, and the preservation of order.
19.12.130 - Public Hearings
Before rendering a decision or recommendation on any application, the Examiner shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in EMC, Chapter 17.01. At the commencement of the hearing, the Examiner shall give oral notice regarding the register provided for in section 19.12.160.
19.12.140 - Official Case Record
The record of the public hearing conducted by the Examiner shall include, but need not be limited to, the following materials:
(a) The application or petition;
(b) The departmental staff reports;
(c) All evidence received or considered, which shall include all exhibits and other materials filed;
(d) A statement of all matters officially noticed;
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 246
(e) A decision or a recommendation containing the findings and conclusions of the Examiner; and
(f) Any environmental determination made pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) and the city ordinances in furtherance of that act.
19.12.150 - Examiner's Decision - Findings Required
Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to in writing between the applicant and the Examiner, or unless the Examiner announces at the conclusion of the receipt of all the evidence, including any view of the property, the Examiner’s decision shall be issued. The Examiner shall render a written decision which shall include at least the following:
(1) Findings of fact based upon the record and conclusions of law there from which support the Examiner's decision. Such findings and conclusions shall also set forth the manner by which the decision would carry out and conform to the city's comprehensive plan, other official policies and objectives, and land use regulatory enactments.
(2) A decision on the application which may be to grant, deny, or grant with conditions, modifications and restrictions which the Examiner finds necessary to make the application compatible with its environment, the comprehensive plan, other official policies and objectives, and land use regulatory enactments.
(3) A statement that the decision will become final in fourteen (14) days unless appealed to the council together with a description of the appeal procedure prescribed in EMC Section 17.01.195.
19.12.160 - Notice of Examiner's Decision
Not later than three (3) working days following the rendering of a written decision, copies thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and to other interested parties of record in the case. All copies so mailed shall be transmitted by the U.S. postal service to the last address provided to the Community Development Director’s office by the addressee. "Parties of record" shall include the applicant and all other persons who specifically request notice of decision by signing a register provided for such purpose at the public hearing and provide a current mailing address.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 247
19.12.170 - Appeal of Examiner's Decision
Appeals of Examiner’s decision shall conform to those standards as set in Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 17.01.195.
19.12.180 - Council Action
A. When taking any action on an appeal, the Council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and conclusions there from produced by the Examiner which support its action. The decision of the Council is limited to a review of the record produced by the Examiner and arguments as to errors alleged to have been produced by the Examiner. Those errors shall be succinctly identified in the appeal and argument to the Council. The Council may adopt all or portions of the Examiner's findings and conclusions. If the Council finds the Examiner’s decision should be modified, the decision of the Examiner shall be remanded to the Examiner to review the concerns of the Council and prepare and submit for further examination by the Council revised findings and conclusions if appropriate.
B. Any action of the Council to overturn a decision of the Examiner shall require a vote of a simple majority plus one of the members present at the council meeting. The action of the Council approving, modifying, or rejecting a decision of the Examiner shall be final and conclusive, unless a person with standing files an appeal with the Superior Court within the time limits provided for by law.
19.12.190 - Computation of Time
Computation of any period of time prescribed or allowed by these rules shall begin with the first day following that on which the act or event initiating such period of time shall have occurred. When the last day of the period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday or national or state holiday, the period shall run until the end of the next following business day.
(Ord 15-27, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 248
Chapter 19.13
Fences and Walls
Sections:
19.13.005 Definitions
19.13.007 Fence Height
19.13.010 Installation restrictions generally
19.13.020 Barbed/Razor wire prohibited – Exception
19.13.030 Electrical fence permitted where – Restrictions
19.13.040 Permit and application requirements
19.13.050 Appeals
19.13.060 Penalties
19.13.005 Definitions
Corner Lot “Corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets or roads, by which the interior angle does not exceed 135 degrees.
Hairpin Lot “Hairpin lot” means a lot having frontage on a single street comprising more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter of the lot.
Key Lot “Key lot” means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether separated by an alley or not.
Reversed Corner Lot “Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side lot line of another corner lot
Front Lot Line “Front lot line” means that boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street, or where no public street exists, along a private road, easement or access way. On an interior lot, it is the lot line abutting a street; or, on a pipe stem (flag) lot, it is the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be determined to be the yard which best conforms to the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 249
pattern of the adjacent block faces. On a ‘through lot”, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Through Lot A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two public streets, more or less parallel, but which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both streets shall be deemed as front lot lines.
Figure 1. Lot Type Diagram
* NOTE: All front and street side yard setbacks are measured from the ultimate width of the Right-of-Way.
19.13.007-Fence Height
Height of a fence is measured from finished grade along the exterior side of the fence to the top of the fence. If a fence is built on top of a berm or wall, the combined height of the fence and berm or wall must not exceed the allowable fence height. On sloping ground the fence must follow the slope or step with the slope so as not to exceed the allowable height at any point along the fence (see Figure 2).
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 250
Figure 2
19.13.010 Installation restrictions generally
Fences and walls can be installed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
A. In all residential zoned areas on corner, interior, hairpin, key, through and reversed corner lots, fences and walls may be installed up to four feet in height around the entire required front yard setback area. Fences and walls up to seven feet in height may be installed around the remainder of the property with the following exceptions:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 251
1. Fences on corner, hairpin and reversed corner lots may be constructed up to a height of seven feet along the secondary or additional street frontages provided the following conditions are met:
a. The fence is set back 15 feet from the exterior right-of-way line and does not extend beyond the required or existing setback of the dwelling located on the property.
2. Fences along through lots adjacent to other through lots or corner and reversed corner lots may be constructed up to a height of seven feet along the secondary or additional street frontages provided the following conditions are met:
a. The fence is set back 15 feet from the exterior right-of-way line.
3. Fences located on the additional street frontage of through lots adjacent to interior lots shall maintain the front yard setback of the interior lots. Fences and walls may be installed on exterior right-of-way lines in residentially zoned lots. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to determine the location of all exterior right-of-way lines.
B. In all other zones, fences and walls may be installed up to a height of eight feet; provided, that the following requirements are met:
1. Where commercially or industrially zoned property has street frontage across from residential property, there shall be a setback of one foot for each foot in height of the fence or wall.
2. A landscaped setback area shall not be required for fences or walls if the commercial or industrially zoned property adjoins or abuts similarly zoned property.
C. General regulations for all zones are as follows:
1. No fencing or other sight obstruction which constitutes a hazard to the traveling public within the area designated as the “Clear View Triangle” shall be allowed on a corner lot at the street or alley. The Clear View Triangle is determined by measuring ten (10') feet from the point of two intersecting streets along the exterior right-of-way lines and then connecting the two end
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 252
points with a straight line forming the hypotenuse of the Clear View Triangle. Branches on trees within the Triangle shall be removed at the trunk up to a minimum level of seven (7) feet above street surface level. Shrubs shall be maintained no higher than four (4) feet above street surface level within the Triangle. (See figure 3 and 4)
2. Any fence constructed on a city right-of-way or easement may be removed for any municipal purpose. The cost of removing the fence will be borne by the property owner.
3. No fence or wall may be constructed if it creates a hazard to users of the street or to nearby property.
4. All fences and walls shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
5. All fences bordering on streets shall be located no less than five (5) feet behind the curb/gutter line.
6. Property owners are responsible for the maintenance of the sidewalk and/or five (5) foot setback behind the curb/gutter line.
7. Public and Private Elementary Schools shall be allowed to construct non-site obscuring fences to a maximum height of six (6) feet on side yard flanking a residential street and on a limited basis in the front yard setback after review by the Public Works Director if it can be shown no safety hazard is created due to the placement of the fence.
19.13.020 Barbed/Razor wire prohibited – Exception
No fences incorporating barbed/razor wire are permitted except that barbed/razor wire may be used on top of a six-foot or higher solid or chain link fence surrounding a public utility, public use, or on-site storage area approved as part of a development or master plan, an industrial plant site or a whole property; or barbed/razor wire may be used when the fence is not a property boundary line fence. In all cases, the fence shall be set back five feet from any public street, alley, or right-of-way. Barbed/razor wire may be used in the S-R district but not along an exterior right-of-way line abutting a residentially zoned area.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 253
19.13.030 Electrical fence permitted where – Restrictions
Electrical fences are permitted in the S-R district provided they comply with the following requirements:
A. An electrical fence using an interrupted flow of current of intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamp current.
B. An electrical fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamp current.
C. All electrical fences shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at intervals of 150 feet, stating that the fence is electrified.
D. Electrical fences manufactured by an established and reputable company and sold as a complete assembled unit carrying a written guarantee that complies with the requirements of this paragraph can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation carry a “U.L. Approved” seal.
E. Electrical fences are not allowed in the front yard setback.
19.13.040 Permit and application requirements
Fence permits are required for all new fences and walls constructed within the city. All permit applications shall include the required fee, a site plan; indicating the design, location, material, and height of the fence or wall, a landscaping plan if applicable, and distance to existing buildings on the property.
19.13.050 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by an action of the City in enforcement of this chapter may appeal to the Hearings Examiner and City Council pursuant to the provisions of EMC Title 17.
19.13.060 Penalties
Any person firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this ordinance and will subject the offender to a civil penalty as provided for in EMC 1.22.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 254
Figure 3
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 255
Figure 4. Clearview Triangle Perspective
(Ord. 15-10, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 256
Chapter 19.14
Planned Unit Development.
Sections:
19.14.005 Definitions.
19.14.010 Intent.
19.14.020 Zoning districts where permitted.
19.14.030 Permitted uses.
19.14.040 Development standards.
19.14.050 Density bonus standards.
19.14.060 Master plan approvals.
19.14.070 Application process.
19.14.080 Review criteria for planned unit developments.
19.14.090 Time Limits.
19.14.100 Modification of plans.
19.14.005 Definitions.
Dwelling Unit, Attached Two or more dwelling units within a structure.
Dwelling Unit, Detached No more than one dwelling unit within a structure.
19.14.010 Intent.
The intent of the PUD is to create a process to promote diversity and creativity in site design, and protect and enhance natural and community features. The process is provided to encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of residential, commercial, and industrial uses. The PUD process permits departures from the conventional siting, setback, and density requirements of a particular zoning district in the interest of achieving superior site development, creating open space, and encouraging imaginative design by permitting design flexibility. By using flexibility in the application of development standards, this process will promote developments that will benefit citizens that live and work within the city.
19.14.020 Zoning districts where permitted.
PUDs are permitted in all zoning districts with the exception of the A-E, airport enterprise zone, OSR, open space recreational zone, PF, Public Facility and UR, Urban Reserve; provided, however, that PUDs in S-R zone are only allowed if the site is at least fifty (50) acres in size, except as provided in subsection 19.14.030(4) of this section.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 257
19.14.030 Permitted uses.
1. Principally permitted uses. The principally permitted uses in PUDs shall be the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning classifications, except as provided in subsection 19.14.030(4) of this section.
2. Conditional uses. The conditional uses in PUDs shall be the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning classification. The conditional use permit review process may be consolidated with that of the PUD pursuant to procedures specified in subsection 19.14.070(6) of this section.
3. Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings which are customarily incidental and subordinate to a principally permitted use are also permitted.
4. Exceptions. In residential PUDs of fifty (50) acres or more located in S-R zone, and in residential PUDs of ten (10) acres or more located in other residential zoning districts, commercial uses may be permitted. Commercial uses shall be limited to those uses permitted in the office and service commercial district (C-3). In PUDs of fifty (50) acres or more in size located in S-R zone, attached dwelling units are permitted only if they are condominiums created in accordance with the Washington Condominium Act, Chapter 64.34 RCW; provided, that if a proposed PUD in a single-family zoning district includes such attached condominiums, the density bonus provisions outlined in subsection (D) of this section shall not apply; and further provided, that no condominium building may exceed two (2) stories.
19.14.040 Development standards.
The following development standards are minimum requirements for a planned unit development:
1. Minimum lot size exclusion. The minimum lot size requirements of the districts outlined in this title shall not apply to PUDs.
2. Minimum site acreage. Minimum site acreage for a PUD is established according to the zoning district in which the PUD is located, as follows:
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 258
Zones Minimum Site Acreage Multifamily (R-2, R-4, R-5) Two (2) Commercial, office and manufacturing zones None R zones (R-1, R-3) consisting entirely of detached single-family dwellings 5 acres R zones (R-1, R-3) not comprised entirely of detached single-family dwellings 50 acres
3. Minimum perimeter building setback. The minimum perimeter building setback of the underlying zone shall apply. The planning commission may reduce building separation requirements to the minimum required by the building and fire departments according to the criteria set forth in subsection 19.14.070(1) of this section. If an adjacent property is undevelopable under this title, the planning commission may also reduce the perimeter building setback requirement to the minimum standards in the city building and fire codes.
4. Maximum height of structures. The maximum height of structures of the underlying zone shall apply. The planning commission may authorize additional height in C-1, C-2, C-3, zones where proposed development in the PUD is compatible with the scale and character of adjacent existing developments.
5. Open space.
a. The standard set forth in this subsection shall apply to PUD residential developments only. Each PUD shall provide a minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of the total site area for common open space. In mixed use PUDs containing residential uses, thirty-five (35) percent of the area used for residential use shall be reserved as open space.
b. For the purpose of this section, open space shall be defined as land which is not used for buildings, dedicated public rights-of-way, traffic circulation and roads, parking areas, or any kind of storage. Open space includes, but is not limited to privately owned woodlands, open fields, streams, wetlands, severe hazard areas, landscaped areas, trails through parks and sensitive areas (not including required
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 259
sidewalks), gardens, courtyards, or lawns. Common open space may provide for either active or passive recreation.
c. Open space within a PUD shall be available for common use by the residents, tenants, or the general public, depending on the type of project.
6. Streets. If streets within the development are required to be dedicated to the city for public use, such streets shall be designed in accordance with the standards outlined in the city’s “Community Street and Construction Standards” code and other appropriate city standards. If streets within the development are to remain in private ownership and remain as private streets, the following standards shall apply:
a. Minimum private street pavement widths for parallel parking in residential planned unit developments. Minimum private street pavement widths with and without parallel parking in residential planned unit developments are as follows:
The minimum widths set out in this subsection may be modified upon review and approval by the city fire chief and the city public works director, providing they are sufficient to maintain emergency access and traffic safety. A maintenance agreement for private streets within a PUD shall be required by the city council as a condition of PUD approval.
b. Vehicle parking areas. Adequate vehicular parking areas shall be provided. Vehicular parking areas may be provided by on-street parking or off-street parking lots. The design of such parking areas shall be in accordance with the standards outlined in Ch. 19.05 EMC. In single-family PUDs, parking shall be provided at a ratio of 1.8 parking stalls per dwelling unit; garages are excluded from the parking circulation. The Community Development Director may recommend for planning commission approval, additional parking based upon site design and project land uses; the recommendation may include a requirement for on-street parking.
c. One-way streets. One-way loop streets shall be no more than two thousand (2,000) feet long. No Parking (feet) Parking One Side (feet) Parking Both Sides (feet) One-way streets 20 29 38 Two-way streets 22 31 40
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 260
d. On-street parking. On-street parking shall be permitted. Privately owned and maintained “no parking” and “fire lane” signs may be required as determined by the city Public Works Director and city Fire Chief.
7. Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect residences to public walkways and streets and shall be constructed of material deemed to be an all-weather surface by the Public Works Director and Community Development Director.
8. Landscaping.
a. Minimum perimeter landscaping of the underlying zone shall apply. Additional landscaping shall be required as provided in Ch. 19.07 EMC.
b. All PUD developments shall ensure that parking areas are integrated with the landscaping system and provide screening of vehicles from view from public streets. Parking areas shall be conveniently located to buildings and streets while providing for landscaping adjacent to buildings and pedestrian access.
c. Solid waste collection areas and waste reduction or recycling collection areas shall be conveniently and safely located for onsite use and collection, and attractively site screened.
9. Signs. The sign regulations of Ch. 19.06 EMC shall apply.
10. Platting. If portions of the PUD are to be subdivided for sale or lease, the procedures of the city subdivision code, as amended, shall apply. Specific development standards such as lot size, street design, etc., shall be provided as outlined in subsection 19.14.060 of this section.
12. Design review. PUDs shall be subject to administrative design review in EMC 19.09.045. PUDs of only single-family detached residences shall be evaluated using the review criteria of EMC 19.09.045(D), multifamily design review.
19.14.050 Density bonus standards.
The density of residential development for PUDs will be based on the gross density of the underlying zoning district with density bonuses allowed as described below. PUDs under twenty (20) acres in size located in Residential zones shall not be allowed density bonuses except as provided by subsection 19.14.050(8) of this section. For all other PUDs, the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 261
planning commission may recommend a dwelling unit density not more than twenty (20) percent greater than that permitted by the underlying zone upon findings and conclusions that the amenities or design features which promote the purposes of this subsection, as follows, are provided:
1. Open space. A four (4) percent density bonus may be authorized if at least ten (10) percent of the open space is in concentrated areas for passive use. Open space shall include significant natural features of the site, including but not limited to fields, woodlands, watercourses, and permanent and seasonal wetlands. Excluded from the open space definition are the areas within the building footprints, land used for parking, vehicular circulation or rights-of-way, and areas used for any kind of storage.
2. Active recreation areas. A four (4) percent density bonus may be authorized if at least ten (10) percent of the site is utilized for active recreational purposes, including but not limited to jogging or walking trails, pools, children’s play areas, etc. Only that percentage of space contained within accessory structures that is directly used for active recreation purposes can be included in the ten (10) percent active recreation requirement.
3. Stormwater drainage. A two (2) percent density bonus may be authorized if stormwater drainage control is accomplished using natural onsite drainage features. Natural drainage features may include streams, creeks, ponds, etc.
4. Native vegetation. A four (4) percent density bonus may be authorized if at least fifteen (15) percent of the native vegetation on the site is left undisturbed in large open areas.
5. Parking lot size. A two (2) percent density bonus may be authorized if off-street parking is grouped in areas of sixteen (16) stalls or less. Parking areas must be separated from other parking areas or buildings by significant landscaping in excess of Type V standards as provided in EMC 19.07.050. At least fifty (50) percent of these parking areas must be designed as outlined in this subsection to receive the density bonus.
6. Mixed housing types. A two (2) percent density bonus may be authorized if a development features a mix of residential housing types. Single-family residences, attached single units, condominiums, apartments, and townhomes are examples of housing types. The mix need not include some of every type.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 262
7. Project planning and management. A two (2) percent density bonus may be granted if a design/development team is used. Such a team would include a mixture of architects, engineers, landscape architects, and designers. A design/ development team is likely to produce a professional development concept that would be consistent with the purpose of the zoning regulations.
8. Increased wetland buffer widths. A ten (10) percent density bonus may be granted for a wetland buffer that is increased by twenty-five (25) feet. A twenty (20) percent density bonus may be granted for a wetland buffer that is increased by fifty (50) feet. All other requirements of the PUD standards shall apply.
These standards are thresholds, and partial credit is not given for partial attainment. The site plan must at least meet the threshold level of each bonus standard in order for density bonuses to be given for that standard. In no case shall any of the density bonus provisions be combined to create a total bonus greater than twenty (20) percent.
19.14.060 Master plan approvals.
The master plan process is intended to allow approval of a generalized, conceptual development plan on a site which would then be constructed in phases over a longer period of time than a typical planned unit development. The master plan approval process is typically appropriate for development which might occur on a site over a period of several years, and in phases which are not entirely predictable.
1. Submittal requirements. The distinguishing characteristic between a master plan development application and a planned unit development application is that a master plan development proposal is conceptual in nature. However, the master plan application shall provide sufficient detail of the scope of the development, the uses, the amount of land to be developed and preserved, and how services will be provided. The specific submittal requirements are noted below:
a. A written description of the scope of the project, including total anticipated build-out (number of units of residential, gross floor area for commercial), and the types of uses proposed;
b. A clear vicinity map, showing adjacent roads;
c. A fully dimensional site plan, which would show the areas upon which development would occur, the proposed number of units or buildings in each phase of
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 263
the development, the areas would be preserved for open space or protection of environmentally sensitive features, and a generalized circulation plan, which would include proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation;
d. A generalized drainage and stormwater runoff plan;
e. A site map showing contours at not greater than five (5) foot intervals and showing any wetlands, streams, or other natural features;
f. A description of the proposed phasing plan;
g. Documentation of coordination with the Ephrata school district;
h. Certificates of water and sewer availability;
i. Generalized building elevations showing the types of uses being proposed.
2. Density. The gross density of a residential master plan project shall be the same as the density allowable in the underlying zoning district.
3. Open space. The criteria in subsection 19.14.050(5) of this section shall apply.
4. Application process. The application process for a master plan application shall be as outlined in subsection 19.14.070 of this section.
5. Review criteria. The review criteria for a master plan application shall be the same as those outlined in subsection 19.14.080 of this section.
6. Administrative approval of individual phases. Once a master site plan PUD has been approved pursuant to subsection 19.14.070 of this section, any individual phase of the development shall be reviewed and approved administratively, as outlined in Ch. 19.09 EMC; provided, that for each phase of development that includes a residential condominium, the applicant shall submit a copy of the condominium declaration recorded against the property, and as outlined in RCW 64.34.200.
7. Time limits. The master plan approved by the city council, as provided in subsection 19.14.070 of this section, shall be valid for a period of up to seven (7) years. At the end of this seven (7) year period, development permits must be issued for all phases of the master plan development. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 264
A single extension may be granted by the Community Development Director for a period of not more than two (2) more additional years.
8. Modifications. Once approved, requests for modifications to the master plan project shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall make a determination as to whether the requested modification is major or minor as outlined in subsection 19.14.100 of this section.
19.14.070 Application process.
The application process includes the following steps: informal review process, compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act, community information meeting, development plan review, and public hearing before the planning commission.
1. Informal review process. An applicant shall meet informally with the planning department at the earliest possible date to discuss the proposed PUD. The purpose of this meeting is to develop a project that will meet the needs of the applicant and the objectives of the city as defined in this title.
2. SEPA compliance. Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act and regulations and city SEPA requirements shall be completed prior to development plan review.
3. Development plan review. After informal review and completion of the SEPA process, a proposal shall next be reviewed by city staff through the development plan review process. Comments received by the project developer under the development review process shall be used to formalize the proposed development prior to the development being presented at a public hearing before the planning commission.
4. Community information meeting.
a. A community information meeting shall be required for any proposed PUD located in a residential zone or within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zone. At this meeting, the applicant shall present the development proposed to interested residents. Issues raised at the meeting may be used to refine the PUD plan. Notice shall be given in at least one (1) publication in the local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the public meeting. Written notice shall be mailed first class to all property owners within a radius of not less than three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application. Any alleged failure of
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 265
any property owner to actually receive the notice of meeting shall not invalidate the proceedings.
b. Nonresidential PUDs not located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zone shall not require a community information meeting.
5. Public notice and planning commission public hearing. The planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed PUD and shall give notice thereof in at least one (1) publication in the local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. Written notice shall be mailed first class to all property owners within a radius of not less than three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application. Any alleged failure of any property owner to actually receive the notice of hearing shall not invalidate the proceedings.
6. Consolidation of land use permit processes. The PUD approval process may be used to consolidate other land use permit processes, which are required by other sections of this title. The public hearing required for the PUD may serve as the public hearing for the conditional use permit, subdivision, and rezoning if such land use permits are a part of the overall PUD application. When another land use permit is involved which requires city council approval, the PUD shall not be deemed to be approved until the city council has approved the related land use permit. If a public hearing is required for any of the categories of actions listed in this subsection, the planning commission shall employ the public hearing notice requirements for all actions considered which ensure the maximum notice to the public.
7. City Council decision. The city council shall issue a written decision within ten (10) working days from the date of the closed record public meeting. Parties of record will be notified in writing of the decision. For a proposed residential PUD that includes condominiums as outlined in subsection 19.14.030(4) of this section, a condition of approval by the city council shall be that for each development phase the applicant shall submit a recorded copy of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions recorded against the property. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall, at a regular meeting, consider the application. Any appeal from the final decision of the city council shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Ch. 17.01 EMC.
8. Effective date. In approving a PUD, the city council shall specify that the approved PUD shall not take effect unless or until the developer files a completed development
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 266
permit application within the time periods required by this title as set forth in subsection 19.14.080 of this section. No official map or zoning text designations shall be amended to reflect the approved PUD designation until such time as the PUD becomes effective.
19.14.080 Review criteria for planned unit developments.
Upon receipt of a complete application for a residential PUD, the planning department shall review the application and make its recommendation to the planning commission. The planning commission shall determine whether to grant, deny, or condition an application based upon the following review criteria:
1. Residential planned unit development criteria.
a. The proposed PUD project shall have a beneficial effect upon the community and users of the development which would not normally be achieved by traditional lot-by-lot development and shall not be detrimental to existing or potential surrounding land uses as defined by the comprehensive plan.
b. The proposed PUD project shall be compatible with the existing land use or property that abuts or is directly across the street from the subject property. The term compatibility includes but is not limited to apparent size, scale, mass, and architectural design.
c. Unusual and sensitive environmental features of the site shall be preserved, maintained, and incorporated into the design to benefit the development and the community.
d. The proposed PUD project shall provide areas of openness by using techniques such as clustering, separation of building groups, and use of well-designed open space and landscaping. Open space shall be integrated within the PUD rather than be an isolated element of the project.
e. The proposed PUD project shall promote variety and innovation in site and building design, and shall include architectural and site features that promote community interaction, such as porches, de-emphasized garages, sidewalks/walkways and adjacent common areas. Buildings in groups shall be related by common
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 267
materials and roof styles, but contrast shall be provided throughout the site by the use of varied materials, architectural detailing, building scale, and orientation.
f. Building design shall be based on a unified design concept, particularly when construction will be in phases.
2. Nonresidential planned unit development criteria.
a. The proposed project shall have a beneficial effect which would not normally be achieved by traditional lot-by-lot development and not be detrimental to present or potential surrounding land uses as defined by the comprehensive plan.
b. Unusual and sensitive environmental features of the site shall be preserved, maintained, and incorporated into the design to benefit the development and the community.
c. The proposed project shall provide areas of openness by the clustering of buildings, and by the use of well-designed landscaping and open spaces. Landscaping shall promote a coordinated appearance and break up continuous expanses of building and pavement.
d. The proposed project shall promote variety and innovation in site and building design. It shall encourage the incorporation of special design features such as visitor entrances, plazas, outdoor employee lunch and recreation areas, architectural focal points, and accent lighting.
e. Building design shall be based on a unified design concept, particularly when construction will be in phases.
19.14.090 Time limits.
1. Application for development permit. The applicant shall apply for a development permit no later than one (1) year following final approval of the PUD. The application for development permit shall contain all conditions of the PUD approval.
2. Extensions. An extension of time for development permit application may be requested in writing by the applicant. Such an extension may be granted by the Community Development Director for a period not to exceed one (1) year. If a
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 268
development permit is not issued within two (2) years, the PUD approval shall become null and void and the PUD shall not take effect.
19.14.100 Modifications of plan.
Requests for modifications of final approved plans shall be made in writing and shall be submitted to the planning department in the manner and form prescribed by the Community Development Director. In commercial and industrial/manufacturing zoning districts, where a master plan is consistent with a development agreement, the determination of whether a proposed modification is minor or major shall be made at the sole discretion of the Community Development Director; provided, however, that the Community Development Director’s determination must be consistent with criteria established in the development agreement. If the development agreement does not establish such criteria, the Community Development Director’s determination shall be consistent with the criteria stated in subsections 19.14.100(1) and 19.14.100(2) of this section. The criteria for determining minor and major modifications in all other cases shall be as stated in subsections 19.14.100(1) and 19.14.100(2) of this section. The criteria for approval of a request for a major modification shall be those criteria covering original approval of the permit which is the subject of the proposed modification.
1. Minor modifications. Modifications are deemed minor if all the following criteria are satisfied:
a. No new land use is proposed;
b. No increase in density, number of dwelling units, or lots is proposed;
c. No change in the general location or number of access points is proposed;
d. No reduction in the amount of open space is proposed;
e. No reduction in the amount of parking is proposed;
f. No increase in the total square footage of structures to be developed is proposed; and
g. No increase in general height of structures is proposed.
Examples of minor modifications include but are not limited to lot line adjustments, minor relocations of buildings or landscaped areas, minor changes in phasing and timing, and minor changes in elevations of buildings.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 269
3. Major modifications. Major adjustments are those which, as determined by the Community Development Director, substantially change the basic design, density, open space, or other similar requirements or provisions. Major adjustments to the development plans shall be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission may review such adjustments at a regular public hearing and forward a recommendation to the city council for final decision. If a public hearing is held, the process outlined in subsection 19.14.070 of this section shall apply. The city council shall issue a written decision to approve, deny, or modify the request. Such a decision shall be final. Any appeals of this decision shall be in accordance with EMC 17.01.040. (Ord 15-28, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 270
Chapter 19.15
Recreational Vehicle Parks
19.15.010 Purpose and Intent
19.15.020 General
19.15.030 Permitted Uses
19.15.040 Development Standards
19.15.045 Accessory uses
19.15.050 Permits
19.15.060 RV Park Administration
19.15.070 Binding Site Plan
19.15.010 Purpose and Intent
In order to provide a suitable recreational housing environment, standards and regulations have been established for the health, safety, general welfare and convenience of recreational vehicle park inhabitants.
19.15.020 General
The ownership of the land must be under one entity (i.e. one person, partnership, firm or corporation). All streets and systems within the boundaries of the park, although served by the municipal system, are owned and maintained by the ownership entity. Application shall be submitted to the Community Development Director. In addition to the requirements specified, the application/development plan shall include design specifics of the park, as set forth and required in this section, including, but not limited to, the location and dimensions of each RV lot; the location of each RV stand (so that setbacks, yards and other open spaces and utility connections may be determined); the location of street lighting; the method for drainage and the location of all catch basins and storm sewers; and the park landscaping plan.
19.15.030 Permitted Uses:
1) Recreational Vehicles used for transient dwelling purposes (no more than 90 days within any calendar year) with their customary accessory uses.
2) Buildings or structures necessary for the operation and maintenance of the park, or providing customary accessory uses of parks, including laundry facilities, office and equipment storage buildings.
3) Community recreation facilities, for residents of the park and their guests, including swimming pools.
4) Residences for the use of the manager and/or caretaker responsible for maintaining and operating the park, which may be either a conventional single family dwelling or a manufactured home.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 271
5) Vending machines and similar products and services may be approved by the Hearing Examiner.
19.15.040 Development Standards
1) Minimum park size. The minimum area for an RV park shall be one (1) acre.
2) Public access. Public access (not less than twenty-two (22) feet in width shall be required) from the recreational vehicle park to a primary, secondary or collector street. The Hearing Examiner shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether a secondary access shall be required. Secondary access, if provided, shall enter the public street system at least one hundred fifty feet from the primary access.
3) Minimum lot requirements:
a) Lot area-minimum of 1800 square feet.
b) Lot width-minimum of 30 feet.
c) Lot length-minimum of 60 feet.
4) Minimum RV or building setback requirements.
a) Twenty-five (25) feet from a public right of way
b) Ten (10) feet from the edge of the traveled way of an interior access street
c) Fifteen (15) feet from any park boundary (excluding public right of way).
5) Separation requirements. No RV shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any other RV unit or permanent park building.
6) Occupied area. Additional lot structures shall be limited to storage sheds, patios, and decks; as long as the square footage, including the RV, does not exceed 30% of the lot. The owner or occupant shall secure a permit of construction from the Ephrata Building Department.
7) Interior park access ways. Streets, driveways and other access ways within an RV park shall be constructed and maintained by the owner and/or developer of the park in accordance with City standards. Interior park access ways shall not be dedicated as a public right-of-way unless otherwise approved or required by the City Council. Interior park streets shall observe the following minimums:
a) No on-street parking: one way roads: 15 feet; two way roads 22 feet
b) One side on street parking: One - way roads: 20 feet; two way roads: 30 feet.
c) Parking lanes shall be eight and one-half feet wide where provided.
d) Cul-de-sac streets and streets designated to have one end permanently closed (“Y” or “T”) should have a minimum turning radius of fifty feet, or an adequate right-of-way to permit ease of turning or as directed by the fire chief.
8) Parking requirements. A minimum of one (1) off street parking space shall be provided adjacent to, or conveniently near, each RV lot. Parking may be in tandem.
9) Street lighting. Adequate street lighting shall be provided to illuminate streets, driveways, walkways and buildings for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles and for the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 272
safe night time use of such facilities. Installation of all street lighting shall be in accordance with standards provided by the Public Works Department.
10) Landscaping, buffering and screening shall conform to Section 19.07 and the following:
a) RV parks shall be enclosed on all sides with permanently maintained natural or artificial barrier, such as a sight-obscuring wall or continuous buffer of trees or shrubs, not less than six feet in height, except for those sides abutting public rights-of-way. Sides which abut public-rights-of-way shall be buffered with a perimeter landscape strip not less than ten feet wide within the required setback. Such landscape strip shall be planted or installed with a permanently maintained natural or artificial barrier not less than four feet in height. If an artificial barrier is installed, the remainder of the landscape strip shall be landscaped with ground cover or other approved landscape treatment, excluding pavement. The Hearing Examiner may waive all or part of the perimeter landscaping requirements if, due to the nature of the existing topography or other existing conditions, it is unreasonable to require a wall, fence, or screen not resulting in adverse effects for neighboring property owners.
b) All open areas of the RV Park shall be landscaped. A permanent irrigation system shall be installed and all landscaped areas shall be continually maintained. A specific landscaping plan for the RV Park shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application. Landscaping material shall conform to, and be installed in accordance with the approved development plan prior to the occupancy of any lot.
11) Utilities and other services:
a) The construction and maintenance of all water, sewer, electrical, communication and miscellaneous (television, cable, etc.) service lines shall be under the supervision of the department or utility agency having jurisdiction in accordance with all applicable state and local codes, policies and regulations.
b) The location of all underground utility and service lines shall be indicated by an above ground sign (or signs) identifying the proximity of the lines to the RV stand to facilitate service connection and to avoid damage to such underground services by the use of ground anchors, installation of skirting, etc. Fire protection, hydrant location and fire equipment access shall be approved by the fire chief.
c) Water supply and distribution system. Each RV Park shall be connected to the Ephrata Municipal system, with the appropriate backflow preventative device installed, and its supply shall be used exclusively. Individual water service connection shall be provided for each lot.
d) Sewage disposal. Connection shall be made to the public sewer system.
e) Electrical distribution system. Each RV park shall be provided with an electrical distribution system in accordance with the policies and specifications for installation and maintenance of the electrical utility having jurisdiction.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 273
f) Solid waste disposal. Solid waste collection stands shall be provided for all waste containers in accordance with specifications for design and location as provided by the Public Works Department. Solid waste collection stands, whether individual or grouped, shall be screened from view with appropriate landscaping and/or screening as indicated on the approved landscaping plan.
12) Signs. Signs identifying the RV park shall be in conformance with Section 19.06. RV parks are subject to all applicable building and construction provisions of this code, which include issuance of building permits and authorized inspections of all phases of construction and development.
13) If an entry control station is placed at or near the main access to the park, the control station is to be placed 200 feet past intersection of entry road with access to city street for staging of RV’s during check-in.
14) Interior all-weather pathways are to be provided to accessory areas.
15) Campsites are to be well marked and numbered.
16) No storage of units allowed beyond the 90-day occupancy limit unless placed in a designated storage compound.
17) No external structures are to be attached to RVs.
18) A sanitary waste station shall be provided, unless all campsites are connected to an approved sewer system. Unless other approved means are used, the sanitary station shall be designed and constructed to include the following:
1. Easy ingress and egress from a service road for camping vehicles and located not less than 50 feet from a campsite;
2. Connection to the sewer system by a trapped four-inch sewer riser pipe and vented not more than 10 feet downstream from the trap by a four-inch vent, adequately supported and extending at least eight feet above the ground surface;
3. The sewage inlet surrounded by a curbed concrete apron or trough of at least three feet by three feet, sloped to the inlet, and provided with a suitable hinged cover milled to fit tight;
4. A means for flushing the immediate area and a camping vehicle holding tank shall be provided at each sanitary waste station. It shall consist of a properly supported water riser pipe, terminating two feet above the ground with a three-fourths-inch valved outlet and attached hose. The water outlet shall be protected against back-siphonage and backflow by an approved vacuum breaker installation located downstream from the shutoff valve.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 274
19.15.045 Accessory uses.
A. Accessory uses are allowed whose primary usage and enjoyment are for park tenants.
B. Accessory uses shall be placed no closer than 75 feet from any exterior park boundary.
C. A service building and park office shall be provided in all RV parks and campgrounds.
D. Restroom requirements:
Number of Campsites Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers M F M M F M F 1 – 40 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 41 – 80 2 4 2 2 2 2 2 81 – 120 3 6 3 3 3 3 3 121 – 160 5 8 3 4 4 4 4 161 – 200 6 10 4 4 4 4 4
19.15.050 Permits
1) No building permits shall be issued and no construction of any kind to create, alter, or extend any RV park may be initiated until a conditional use permit has been granted by the Hearing Examiner in accordance with the procedure specified and subject to the applicable regulations and standards set forth in this section.
2) Construction or development of all of the improvements indicated on the approved development plan shall also be required prior to issuance of a business license; provided however, that the building official may waive this requirement if sufficient need can be shown. A performance bond or other acceptable security shall be required by the building official in order to ensure development as per the conditional use permit, for any improvements that are not completed prior to issuance of the business license. Such improvements shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed six months.
3) Prior to renewal of the business license, the building official shall inspect the RV park to check continued compliance with all conditions of the conditional use permit and shall submit to the park owner a written report stating whether or not the park is in compliance. The owner must take action to affect compliance with
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 275
any conditions that are in violation before the business license shall be renewed. A violation of any of the licensing provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in EMC Chapter 19.10.
19.15.060 RV Park Administration
1) It shall be the responsibility of the park owner and/or manager to assure that the provisions of this section, including installation of RV’s and construction of accessory structures on individual lots, and additional conditions of the conditional use permit are observed and maintained within the RV park.
2) The park shall be kept free of any brush, leaves and weeds and all landscaped areas shall be continually maintained.
3) Failure to comply with any of the requirements for administering a trailer park shall be a violation subject to penalties set forth in EMC Chapter 19.10.
19.15.070 Binding Site Plan
Recreational vehicle parks shall be established pursuant to the provisions of a Conditional Use Permit and a Binding Site Plan as described in the Ephrata Municipal Code.
(Ord 15-29, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 276
Section 19.16
Manufactured Housing Communities
Sections:
19.16.010 Purpose.
19.16.020 Site Development Standards.
19.16.030 Access and Circulation Standards.
19.16.040 Housing Unit Design Standards.
19.16.050 Single Ownership Standards.
19.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that manufactured housing communities are designed, developed and maintained to provide safety for their residents, to provide affordable, single-family style housing, and to be compatible with the character and scale of surrounding residential neighborhoods.
19.16.020 Site Development Standards.
A. Minimum Community Size: Two (2) acres with a minimum dimension of 240 lineal feet of frontage on a public street.
B. Permitted Uses: Single-family residential with accessory uses in conjunction
with common activity areas and open spaces.
Public and service commercial at a scale consistent with the needs of the surrounding residential community.
C. Buffering: 20’ landscaped perimeter setback from all property lines
improved with a fence and plantings to screen the
manufactured housing units from view in a manner
consistent with Section 19.07.
D. Open Space: 15% minimum of the net developable area with each
common open space area no less than 5,000 square feet in
size.
E. Building Separation: 15’
F. Building Setback: 15’ from nearest edge of interior street or improved
walkway.
G. Maximum Lot Coverage for Entire Site: 30%
H. Parking: See Section 19.05.
I. Landscaping and Maintenance: The manufactured home community shall be landscaped,
and the landscaping and property shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly condition throughout the community’s
occupancy.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 277
19.16.030 Access and Circulation Standards.
1) Manufactured housing communities shall be directly accessed by primary, secondary or collector streets. No individual lot or residence shall have access directly to a public right of way outside the project boundaries.
2) Project access shall be provided as shown in the table below:
Number of Units
Public Access Points
Emergency Access Points
Fewer than 50
1
1
51 – 200
2
1
201 – 300
2
2
301 or more
2
3
3) Streets, drives and parking areas shall provide safe and convenient access to dwellings, shall encourage slower speeds and shall be laid out to discourage outside traffic from traversing the project.
4) Manufactured housing communities shall provide for pedestrian and bicycle circulation with improved walkways and/or trails as part of the project’s design.
5) Interior streets shall provide for no less than 36’ wide travel ways for two-way traffic and 22’ wide for one-way traffic.
19.16.040 Housing Unit Design Standards.
Housing units shall conform to the following design criteria:
1) The structure shall be placed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations with its lowest finished floor no higher than 16” above grade unless designed by a professional.
a. Have permanent steps or inclined planes affixed to all entrances.
b. Maintain a minimum 18 inch crawl space for the entire unit.
c. Have permanent skirting, sidewalls, or decks installed to enclose all areas between the lower edge of the outside walls and the ground and to obscure chassis prior to occupancy.
d. Be placed and anchored in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions or the design of a professional engineer or architect licensed in the State of Washington.
e. Have towing tongue and all axles removed.
f. Manufactured home parks, and the like, placed within flood hazard zones (special flood hazard areas as defined in Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Rate Maps) shall comply with the requirements of EMC 19.11.
2) The structure shall have perimeter skirting of masonry or of a material with a masonry appearance.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 278
3) Roof pitch shall not be less than a three (3) foot rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run.
4) The structure shall have exterior siding and roofing which, in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used in residential dwellings.
5) If a garage or carport is proposed, the garage or carport shall be constructed of like materials.
6) The manufactured home shall meet the most recent requirements of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, as it exists now or hereafter amended.
19.16.050 Single Ownership Standards.
1) Lots in a single ownership manufactured housing community shall be available only for lease to community residents.
2) Single ownership manufactured housing communities, regardless of size or unit count, shall be subject to the City of Ephrata binding site plan and conditional use permit approval processes.
(Ord 15-30, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 279
Chapter 19.17
Marijuana Regulations
Sections:
19.17.010 Intent.
19.17.020 Applicability.
19.17.030 Definitions.
19.17.040 Environmental performance standards.
19.17.050 Medical Marijuana Collective Gardens.
19.17.060 Medical Marijuana Cooperatives.
19.17.070 Recreational Marijuana Buffers.
19.17.080 Recreational Marijuana Development requirements.
19.17.090 Measurement of Distances.
19.17.100 Nuisance Declared.
19.17.110 Violations – Penalty.
19.17.010 Intent.
Pursuant to RCW Title 69 and the requirements of Chapter 314-55 WAC, the State has adopted rules establishing a state-wide regulatory and licensing program for medical and recreational marijuana uses. It is the intent of these regulations to ensure that such state-licensed uses are located and developed in a manner that is consistent with the desired character and standards of this community and its neighborhoods, minimizes potential incompatibilities and impacts, and protects the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Ephrata. Recognizing the voter approved right to establish certain types of medical marijuana operations and recreational marijuana businesses, it is also the intent of these regulations to provide reasonable access to mitigate the illicit marijuana market and the legal and personal risks and community impacts associated with it.
19.17.020 Applicability.
The specific development standards provided in this Section shall be in addition to the zoning and development standards generally applicable to the proposed use and the relevant zoning district.
A. No use that purports to be a recreational marijuana producer, processor, or retailer, as defined and regulated herein and in WAC 314-55, that was engaged in that activity prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall be deemed to have been a legally established use or entitled to claim legal non-conforming status.
B. For purposes of this Section and the standards applicable to state-licensed recreational marijuana uses, the terms and definitions provided in RCW Title 69 and WAC 314-55 shall generally apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 280
19.17.030 Definitions.
All definitions used in this chapter apply to this chapter only and, except as otherwise revised below, shall have the meaning established pursuant to RCW Title 69 and WAC 314-55, as the same exist now or as they may later be amended. Selected definitions have been included below for ease of reference.
A. Marijuana or marihuana: Marijuana or marihuana as defined in RCW 69.50.101 means all parts of the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
B. Marijuana Processor: Marijuana Processor as defined in RCW 69.50.101, means a person licensed by the state liquor and cannabis board to process marijuana into useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for the sale in retail outlets, and sell useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers.
C. Marijuana Producer: Marijuana Producer as defined in RCW 69.50.101, means a person licensed by the state liquor and cannabis board to produce and sell marijuana at whole sale to marijuana processors and other licensed marijuana producers.
D. Marijuana-Infused Products: Marijuana-infused Products as defined in RCW 69.50.101, means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts, are intended for human use, and have a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent and no greater than sixty percent. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include either useable marijuana or marijuana concentrates.
E. Marijuana Retailer: Marijuana Retailer as defined in RCW 69.50.101, means a person licensed by the state liquor and cannabis board to sell useable marijuana and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet.
F. Marijuana Production, Processing and Retail Sales: As used in this ordinance, any reference to marijuana production, processing and retail sales shall refer ONLY to RECREATIONAL marijuana production, processing and retail sales.
G. Cultivation: Cultivation means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 281
H. Indoors: Indoors means within a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies with the International Building Code, as adopted by the City of Ephrata, that has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, and a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is securely attached. The structure must be secure against unauthorized entry, accessible only through two or more lockable doors, and constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement.
I. Outdoors: Outdoors means any location that is not “indoors” within a fully enclosed and secure structure as defined herein.
J. Useable Marijuana: Useable Marijuana means dried marijuana flowers. The term “useable marijuana” does not include marijuana-infused products.
K. Designated Provider: See RCW 69.51A.010(1).
L. Qualifying Patient: See RCW 69.51A.010(4).
M. Recognition Card: Recognition card means a card issued to qualifying patients and designated providers by a marijuana retailer with a medical marijuana endorsement that has entered them into the medical marijuana authorization database.
19.17.040 Environmental performance standards.
A. Failure of the enforcing officer to require such information shall not be construed as relieving the operator and/or the proprietor from compliance with the environmental performance standards of this title.
B. Marijuana producers, processors, and retail sales shall incorporate odor control technology and provisions to ensure that emissions do not exceed Washington Clean Air Act regulations as contained in Chapter 70.94 RCW.
19.17.050 Medical Marijuana Collective Gardens.
No collective gardens as established under RCW 69.51A.085 shall be permitted in any zoning district in the City of Ephrata.
19.17.060 Medical Marijuana Cooperatives.
A. No more than four qualifying patients or designated providers may become members of a cooperative under this section and all members must hold valid recognition cards. All members of the cooperative must be at least twenty-one years old. The designated
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 282
provider of a qualifying patient who is under twenty-one years old may be a member of a cooperative on the qualifying patient’s behalf.
B. No person shall engage in a medical marijuana cooperative without first having obtained from the City a valid and current registration authorizing such person to engage in operation. This registration shall be in addition to any other registrations or permits required by State or Federal laws. Such registration is non-transferable.
C. Cooperatives shall not be located within one mile of a marijuana retailer.
D. No cooperative shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other medical marijuana cooperative.
E. Only one (1) cooperative is permitted on any one site.
F. No cooperative shall be permitted within one thousand (l,000) feet of any public parks, playgrounds, recreation/community centers, libraries, child care centers, schools, game arcades and public transit centers.
G. The location of the cooperative shall be the domicile of one of the participants.
H. The qualifying patients or designated providers of any cooperative shall not grow more than the maximum of sixty plants or possess more than seventy-two ounces of useable marijuana.
I. The cultivation and processing of medical marijuana shall not be readily seen by normal unaided vision or readily smelled from a public place or the private property of another housing unit.
19.17.070 Recreational Marijuana Buffers.
A. As provided in RCW 69.50.331 and WAC 314-55-050, marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers, shall not be allowed to locate within 1,000 feet of playgrounds, elementary schools, secondary schools, public parks, recreation or community centers, libraries, child care centers, game arcades, or public transit centers.
B. For purposes of these standards, these uses are defined in WAC 314-55. The methodology for measuring the buffers shall be as provided in WAC 314-55. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the proposed state-licensed marijuana use to demonstrate and ensure that a proposed location is not within one of the buffers.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 283
19.17.080 Recreational Marijuana Development requirements.
A. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers shall only be permitted as allowed under RCW 69.50 and WAC 314-55 and shall only be operated by persons or entities holding a valid marijuana license from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board issued under Chapter 314-55 WAC and any other applicable state laws and regulations.
B. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers shall only be allowed with in the City of Ephrata municipal boundaries if appropriately licensed by the State of Washington and in possession of a current business license issued by the City of Ephrata, and operated consistent with the requirements of the State and all applicable City ordinances, rules, requirements, and standards.
C. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, marijuana retailers shall be the primary use at a location, and shall only be allowed within the City of Ephrata in those zoning districts where it is specifically identified as an allowed use.
1. Marijuana retailers shall only be allowed in the General Commercial Zone (C-2) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
2. Marijuana producers and processors shall only be allowed in the Industrial Zones (I-1) and (I-2) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
D. The production, processing, selling, or delivery of recreational marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or useable marijuana may not be conducted alone or in association with any business establishments, dwelling unit, or home occupation located in any of the following zoning districts in the City of Ephrata:
1. All Residential Zones (R-1), (R-2), (R-3), (R-4), and (R-5) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
2. Suburban Residential Zone (S-R) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
3. Central Business and Office and Service Commercial Zones (C-1) and (C-3) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
4. Open Space Recreational Zone (OSR) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
5. Open Space Urban Reserve Zone (UR) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
6. Public Facilities Zone (PF) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 284
7. Airport Enterprise Zone (AE) defined and identified in EMC Chapter 19.03.
E. Recreational marijuana production and marijuana processing facilities shall be designed to include controls and features to prevent odors from traveling off-site and being detected from a public place, the public right of way, or properties owned or leased by another person or entity.
F. Marijuana retailers shall not include drive-thru, exterior, or off-site sales. Marijuana retailers shall not be located in a mobile or temporary structure.
G. In accordance with WAC 314-55-147, marijuana retail sales shall not be open to the public between the hours of 12 a.m. and 8 a.m.
H. Signage for marijuana processing and retail businesses shall be subject to the requirements of WAC 314-55-155 and EMC Chapter 19.06, whichever is more restrictive. No off-premises signage is permitted.
I. Displays against or adjacent to exterior windows shall not include marijuana or marijuana paraphernalia.
J. An existing non-conforming use located within a zoning district that would otherwise not permit marijuana uses, such as an old convenience store in a residential district, shall not be allowed to convert to a marijuana use.
K. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers shall connect to all City of Ephrata utilities.
L. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retail sales are not permitted as a home occupation under EMC Chapter 19.08.040.
M. Retail marijuana sales may not be located within any other businesses and may only be located in buildings with other uses if the marijuana business is separated by full walls and with a separate entrance. No more than one marijuana retail business shall be located on a single parcel.
N. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retail sales are subject to all applicable requirements of Title 69 RCW and Chapter 314-55 WAC and other state statutes, as they now exist or may be amended.
O. Marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and retail sales must take place within fully enclosed secure indoor facilities.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 285
P. No marijuana producers, marijuana processors, or delivery of marijuana shall be visible to the public nor may it be visible through windows. A screened and secured loading dock, approved by the Community Development Director shall be required. The objective of this requirement is to provide a secure, visual screen from the public right of way and adjoining properties, and prevent the escape of product when delivering or transferring marijuana, useable marijuana, and marijuana-infused products.
Q. All marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and retailers shall allow inspection of the site and facilities by City personnel including law enforcement for compliance with all applicable state and local permits and licenses at any time during regular business hours.
R. An application for a recreational marijuana business shall include the following information in addition to any application requirements required by the underlying zone:
1. The application shall be made by:
a. A marijuana State Liquor and Cannabis Board licensee; or
b. An applicant for a State Liquor and Cannabis Board marijuana license.
2. The application shall include a copy of the State issued license or a copy of the license application on file with the State Liquor and Cannabis Board. A City business license shall not be issued for a recreational marijuana business unless the applicant is a State Liquor and Cannabis Board marijuana licensee;
3. A map drawn to scale showing that the proposed recreational marijuana business is in compliance with the applicable buffers under RCW 69.50.331, WAC 314-55-050, and EMC 19.17.070. A survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state of Washington may be required by the Community Development Director; and
S. A recreational marijuana business shall meet all security requirements as required by WAC 314-55-083 and shall provide proof of such operational security system prior to issuance of a City business license. In addition to the security requirements in Chapter 314-55 WAC, during non-business hours, all recreational marijuana producers, processors, and retailers shall store all useable marijuana, marijuana-infused product, and cash in a safe or in a substantially constructed and locked cabinet. The safe or cabinet shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For useable marijuana products that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, these products may be stored in a locked refrigerator or freezer container in a manner
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 286
approved by the Community Development Director, provided the container is affixed to the building structure.
T. All fertilizers, chemicals, gases, and hazardous materials shall be handled in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. No fertilizers, chemicals, gases, or hazardous materials shall be allowed to enter a sanitary sewer or storm sewer system, nor be released into atmosphere outside of the structure where the business is located.
19.17.090. Measurement of Distances.
Any distance described in this chapter shall be computed by direct measurement as stated in WAC 314-55-050(10) as follows: the distance shall be measured as the shortest straight line distance between the property lines of the mentioned uses.
19.17.100 Nuisance Declared.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and shall be abated by the city attorney under applicable provisions of this code or state law, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 6.30 EMC.
19.17.110 Violations – Penalty.
In addition to other remedies provided for in this Chapter, any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a civil infraction.
(Ord. 16-15, 2016)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 287
Chapter 19.22
Sidewalk Construction and Improvement Standards
19.22.010 Intent and policy.
19.22.020 Construction of this chapter, statement of purpose, fundamental principle.
19.22.030 Simultaneous construction of sidewalk and curbs required.
19.22.040 Sidewalks constructed during building improvement.
19.22.050 Development sites fronting unpaved street surface – Formal Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans.
19.22.060 Development sites fronting paved street surface – Formal Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans.
19.22.070 Special provisions.
19.22.080 Location of improvements.
19.22.090 Incompatible improvements.
19.22.100 Deferment - Criteria.
19.22.110 Deferments - Concomitant agreements.
19.22.120 Waiver of provisions.
19.22.130 Variances.
19.22.140 General Specifications
19.22.150 Sign removal.
19.22.160 Frontage improvements required.
19.22.170 Right-of-way dedication – Required.
19.22.180 Penalties for violation.
19.22.010 Intent and policy.
It is the intent and policy of this chapter that all persons constructing, reconstructing, widening, or repairing real property improvements on lots abutting public rights-of-way are responsible for the costs of all street system improvements, constructed in accordance with the “City of Ephrata Community Street and Utility Standards,” on public rights-of-way adjacent to such lots, and in limited circumstances, on public rights-of-way which connect to a paved street surface. The City of Ephrata will, to the extent funding is appropriated by the City Council, reimburse the abutting property owner one-quarter (¼) of the actual cost to remove, repair and construct the sidewalk fronting or abutting their property.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 288
19.22.020 Construction of this chapter, statement of purpose, fundamental principle.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effect the statement of purpose and fundamental principle described in this section. The fundamental principle of this chapter is that the owner, developer, and/or building permit applicant for proposed real property improvements is responsible for constructing street system improvements as defined in this chapter, or paying a street system improvement fee in lieu of construction as provided for in this chapter. Persons constructing real property improvements are relieved of one or more of these requirements in strict conformity with the exemptions described in this chapter. Persons constructing real property improvements are responsible for street system improvements to the extent those street system improvements do not exist at the time of building permit application.
19.22.030 Simultaneous construction of sidewalks and curbs required.
No curb shall be constructed or placed on any street right-of-way in the corporate city limits abutting any lot of record or any zoning lot existing as of November 3, 2010, unless sidewalks are constructed or placed simultaneously with curb installations. No street shall be paved within the city unless sidewalks and curbs are simultaneously constructed in those instances where curbs and sidewalks are not in existence at the time of the paving.
19.22.040 Sidewalks constructed during building improvement.
Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed simultaneously with the improvement of real property on the street or streets abutting the property to be improved. “Improvement of the property” shall mean construction of a primary structure, or any remodels in any two-year period representing greater than 50 percent of the value of the existing structure. Market value shall be determined by an appraisal from a qualified and licensed appraiser or by the county tax assessment. New construction shall be determined by the valuation of the structure using the most recent International Code Council valuation and construction tables, or if remodeling that adds 20 percent or more of gross floor area. The width of the sidewalk shall be determined by the public works director after taking into consideration the width of existing sidewalks adjacent or contiguous to the property to be improved, the width of available right-of-way for the construction of sidewalks, and the zone in which the property is to be located; provided, however, that the minimum width of any sidewalk constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be four and one-half feet. In lieu of the above requirements, upon approval of the city public works director, the applicant shall dedicate right-of-way to
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 289
the city of Ephrata if adequate right-of-way is not available for required sidewalks. The amount of dedication required will be determined by the city public works director.
19.22.050 Development sites fronting unpaved street surface – Formal Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans.
If a development site fronts an unpaved street surface, the developer is required to construct street system improvements in accordance with this section.
1. If the distance of the development site along a connecting right-of-way from a paved street surface is greater than 150 feet, the developer shall construct complete street system improvements which include a half street section of street pavement (including appropriate sub-paving preparation), surface water drainage facilities, sidewalks where required, curbs, gutters, street lighting, right-of-way landscaping (including street trees where required), and other similar improvements as required by the “City of Ephrata Community Street and Utility Standards along the frontage of the development site and extending off-site to a paved street surface.
2. If the distance of the development site along a connecting right-of-way from a paved street surface is 150 feet or less, the developer shall construct street pavement, surface water drainage facilities, and curb and gutter along the right-of-way frontage of the development site and shall construct street pavement off-site to connect with a paved street surface.
19.22.060 Development sites fronting paved street surface – Formal Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans.
If the development site fronts a paved street surface, the developer shall construct street system improvements along the right-of-way frontage of the development site in accordance with this section.
1. The developer shall construct surface water drainage facilities.
2. The developer shall construct sidewalks.
3. The developer shall construct curb, gutter, and right-of-way landscaping.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 290
4. If the developer is required to construct either curb, gutter, and sidewalk or solely curb and gutter, the developer is required to construct such street pavement as is necessary to provide continuity between the sidewalk, curb, and gutter or curb and gutter and the paved street surface.
19.22.070 Special provisions.
The following special provisions shall apply to additions, alterations, repairs, accessory buildings, and campus additions:
1. In the case of real property improvements consisting of additions, alterations, or repairs to an existing structure where square footage is added to the structure, street system improvements shall be constructed, to be selected by the public works director, the cost of which is not more than 10 percent of the total cost of the improvement. The public works director is authorized to waive construction of street system improvements if the public works director has made a written finding that the street system improvements required to be constructed in accordance with this section will be negligible and not in the public interest.
2. In the case of real property improvements consisting of construction of an additional structure, such street system improvements shall be constructed, to be selected by the public works director, the cost of which is not more than 10 percent of the total cost of the improvement. In the case of real property improvements consisting of construction of an additional structure or structures on a campus owned by a public entity, street system improvements shall be constructed along the full frontage.
3. In the case of corner lots or other development sites fronting more than one right-of-way, should the cost of the real property improvement be such that street system improvements would not be required on all rights-of-way fronting the development site, street system improvements shall be constructed on the right-of-way or rights-of-way selected by the public works director.
19.22.080 Location of improvements.
Sidewalks may be located adjacent to the curb or between the landscape strip and the improved property when previously authorized by the public works director. The utility strip may be combined with the landscape strip. Corner projects shall require the installation of wheelchair access in the sidewalk construction.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 291
19.22.090 Incompatible improvements.
When improvements required by this chapter will connect with existing improvements in the same right-of-way that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the following shall apply:
1. If the new improvements will connect with existing improvements of a greater dimension, the new improvements must be built at the greater dimension unless the city public works director determines that the dimensions of the existing improvements will be decreased in the future.
2. If the new improvements will connect with existing improvements of a lesser dimension, and the city public works director determines that the dimension of the existing improvements will not be increased in the future, the new improvement must be permanently flared or tapered to match the existing improvements.
3. If the new improvements will connect with existing improvements of a lesser dimension, and the city public works director determines that the dimension of the existing improvements will be increased in the future, the new improvements shall be installed the entire length of the abutting property and a temporary tapering shall be installed to connect the new right-of-way improvements to the existing right-of-way.
19.22.100 Deferment - Criteria.
The city may grant a deferment for the implementation of the required improvements at a later time for any of the following reasons:
1. If the installation of the required improvements at the present time would create a serious safety hazard because compatible improvements have not yet been installed in the right-of-way fronting the neighboring property;
2. If the proper vertical or horizontal alignment for the required improvements cannot be determined because the streets from which the alignment must be determined do not have the correct alignments;
3. If constructing the required improvements in the proper vertical and horizontal alignment will cause the new improvements to function improperly or unsafely with existing connecting improvements; provided, that when the proper alignment can be determined but has not been, and the proposed development contains five or more dwelling units or 500 square feet or more of
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 292
non-residential gross floor area, the applicant shall have the necessary engineering completed for the establishment of the alignment; or
4. If the subject property is not a corner lot, and there are no existing permanent right-of-way improvements similar to the standards required by this chapter on the same side of the adjacent right-of-way within 100 feet of the subject property, and the construction of the required improvements would not provide a useful link in the transportation and storm water system.
19.22.110 Deferments - Concomitant agreements.
In the event the city council approves a deferment, the applicant and the city must sign a concomitant agreement. The city will prepare such agreement at the applicant's expense. The agreement shall specify that the applicant will install or reimburse the city for construction of the deferred improvements as directed by the city. The concomitant agreement shall be filed with the Grant County auditor and run with the property. The concomitant agreement shall provide for a review of the subject property at three-year intervals and shall provide general criteria upon which the city may rely to make the necessary improvements at such later dates. Concomitant agreements shall expire 15 years after the date of execution.
19.22.120 Waiver of provisions.
Upon written application to the city council, and upon their making a determination that the elimination of all or any portion of the provisions of EMC 19.22.030 and 19.22.040 will in no way be detrimental to the best interests of the city, and/or if the city council determines that the current level and extent of the improvements in the right-of-way adjacent to the subject property are not likely to be changed in the next 15 years, those provisions as may be authorized by the city council may be waived. The decision of the city council shall be final.
19.22.130 Variances.
1. Variances from the requirements of this chapter may be granted for good cause by the public works director or designee, only if the applicant demonstrates all of the following in writing:
a. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land such as size, shape, topography or location, not applicable to other lands in the same neighborhood, and that literal interpretation of the provisions of the standards
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 293
would deprive the property owner of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties similarly situated in the same neighborhood;
b. Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant, and are not self-imposed hardships;
c. Granting of the variance requested will not confer a special privilege to the subject property that is denied other lands in the same neighborhood;
d. Granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is situated;
e. Granting of the variance requested will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the city standards;
f. The purpose of the variance is not merely to permit the subject property to be utilized more profitably by the owner or to economize on the cost of improving the property;
g. Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to public safety or capacity of roadway network.
2. In granting any variance the city may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards that will ensure that the purpose and intent of the city standards will not be violated.
3. The decision of the public works director or designee concerning a request for a variance shall be made in writing. The variance may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. All decisions shall be accompanied by written findings relating to variance criteria. The decision on the variance request shall be final on the date issued.
4. The decision of the public works director or designee may be appealed to the hearing examiner per the requirements of Chapter 17.01 EMC.
19.22.140 General specifications.
1. All water, sewer, storm and other utility lines installed in existing or new city streets shall have the location designated by the city public works director.
2. No open cut crossing of city streets or alleys shall be made without the approval of the city public works director.
3. Existing drainage ditches, culverts, etc., shall be kept clean and protected from impacts that may jeopardize their function at all times. Temporary diversion of any drainage system will not be permitted without the consent of the city public works director. Any drainage culvert tile, catch basins, manholes, bio-retention facility, pervious pavement, etc., disturbed by excavation or other construction activities shall be replaced with new materials or repaired as directed by the city public works director.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 294
4. If in the opinion of the city public works director the weather is such that by a particular contract renders the traveled roadways unsafe for public passage then, upon his orders, excavation shall cease immediately and restoration and cleanup promptly accomplished.
5. The maximum amount of open trench on city streets shall be 400 lineal feet.
6. All construction material stored along city rights-of-way must meet minimum clear zone distances from the traveled roadway and stored in such a manner as to avoid accidental movement.
7. Final cleanup, including complete restoration of shoulders; cleaning of ditches, culverts and catch basins; and removal of loose material from back slope of ditches, shall not exceed 800 lineal feet behind excavating operation.
8. No excess material or unsuitable material shall be left on city rights-of-way without the express consent of the city public works director.
9. No backfill shall be placed without approval by city public works director.
19.22.150 Sign removal.
All utility installers, contractors or others shall notify the street department of the need for removing any sign on a city right-of-way. The notice shall be given 24 hours in advance of such removal. The street department shall remove the sign, and replace it again at no charge.
If a sign is removed by anyone other than the street department, a charge will be made for the work involved in replacing the sign and for the cost of the sign. In addition, unauthorized removal of signs shall be subject to the penalties provided for in applicable ordinances.
19.22.160 Frontage improvements required.
1. The term “frontage improvements” as used in this section shall refer to the construction, reconstruction or repair of the following facilities along the full abutting public street frontage of property being developed:
a. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks;
b. Underground storm drainage facilities;
c. Patching the street from its pre-existing edge to the new curb line;
d. Overlayment of the existing public street to its centerline;
e. Construction of new streets within dedicated, unopened right-of-way.
All such frontage improvements shall be constructed to city specifications.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 295
2. Property owners shall be required to construct frontage improvements along the full abutting public street frontage of property which is developed as provided in subsection (3) of this section; provided, that overlayment of an existing public street to its centerline shall not be required for single-family or duplex development.
3. Frontage improvements shall be constructed as follows:
a. Formal plats: frontage improvements shall be completed prior to recording the final plat, or may be bonded pursuant to provisions of EMC Title 18;
b. Short plats: frontage improvements shall be completed for frontage abutting all lots prior to the issuance of a building permit for any lot in the short plat;
c. Construction of a dwelling unit, business, commercial or industrial building: frontage improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy of the building;
d. Construction of any additions, alterations or repairs to a residential building that result in an increase in the number of dwelling units, or to a business, commercial or industrial building that result in an increase in pedestrian or vehicular traffic, within any 12-month period: frontage improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy;
e. Development of a mobile home park or other project requiring a binding site plan: frontage improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy;
f. Any change in the occupancy classification of an existing building or structure on the property: frontage improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy.
4. In the case of single-family residential construction on a single lot, a property owner may satisfy the frontage improvement requirements by constructing a maximum of 200 lineal feet of frontage improvements and may be allowed by the director of public works to satisfy said requirements for more than 200 lineal feet of frontage improvements by participating in a cost-sharing program with the city, if the same is approved in the then-current budget of the city council, as determined by the city public works director or designee.
5. The director of public works or designee shall have authority to grant administrative variances from any of the requirements of this section pursuant to EMC 19.22.130. Such variances shall be conditioned upon the property owner signing a contract providing for the construction of the frontage improvements at a future time. Said contract shall include, but not be limited to, the making of a cash deposit with the city in an amount 150% of the estimate of the city public works director of the cost of said improvements, including design cost. No other form of payment or security shall be authorized. In the
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 296
event the frontage improvements are not constructed by the property owner within five years of the grant of a variance, the cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city. If said frontage improvements are constructed by the property owner at the request of the city within five years of the grant of a variance, said cash deposit shall be refunded to the property owner less 15 percent overhead fee. Said contract shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and shall contain such other provisions as are necessary to effectuate the future construction of such frontage improvements. The refusal of a property owner to enter into such agreement or to post a cash amount as specified herein shall be a basis to deny a variance request and shall require the construction of such frontage improvements in accordance with subsections (1) through (4) of this section.
The council authorizes the mayor to review, execute and sign contracts for deferred construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks pursuant to this chapter.
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the director of public works may appeal the decision pursuant to EMC 17.01.
19.22.170 Right-of-way dedication – Required.
No building permit or development permit shall hereafter be granted for the construction or substantial improvement of any industrial, commercial or residential building, or plat unless the plans and specifications therefor contain provisions for the dedication to the city of sufficient street right-of-way for the classification of the street abutting the property according to the street plans and street development needs of the city for that street.
19.22.180 Penalties for violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in the city’s fee schedule in Chapter 3.35 EMC.
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 297
(Ord. 10-13, 2010; Ord 15-31, 2015)
Ephrata Municipal Code, Chapter 19, Zoning Code
Page 298
Chapter 19.30
HIGH INTENSITY COMPUTER OPERATIONS
19.30.010 High Intensity Computer Operations Prohibited
19.30.010 High Intensity Computer Operations Prohibited.
All high intensity computer operations shall be prohibited within the City of Ephrata, including those conducted as a home occupation.
(Ord 18-13, 2018; Ord 18-28, 2018)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 1
Title 20
ENVIRONMENT
Chapters:
20.04 Environmental Policy Act
20.08 Protection and Development Regulation of Critical Areas and Resource Lands
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 2
Chapter 20.04
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT
Sections:
ARTICLE I. ADOPTION
20.04.010 Adoption by reference--State Environmental Policy Act.
20.04.020 Authority.
ARTICLE II. BASIC REQUIREMENTS
20.04.030 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
20.04.040 Additional definitions.
20.04.050 Designation of responsible official.
20.04.055 Lead Agency Determination and Responsibilities
20.04.058 Time Limits Applicable to the SEPA Process
20.04.060 Additional timing consideration.
ARTICLE III. EVALUATION OF EIS REQUIREMENT
20.04.070 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
20.04.080 Flexible thresholds for categorical exemptions.
20.04.085 Mitigated DNS
20.04.090 Use of exemptions.
20.04.100 Environmental checklist.
ARTICLE IV. EIS PREPARATION
20.04.110 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
20.04.120 Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.
ARTICLE V. CONSULTING, COMMENTING AND RESPONDING
20.04.130 Consulting, commenting and responding--WAC provisions adopted by reference.
20.04.140 Public notice.
20.04.150 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.
ARTICLE VI. USING AND SUPPLEMENTING EXISTING
ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS
20.04.160 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 3
ARTICLE VII. SUBSTANTIVE AUTHORITY
20.04.170 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
20.04.180 Substantive authority--City powers and rights.
ARTICLE VIII. DEFINITIONS
20.04.190 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
ARTICLE IX. CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS
20.04.200 Categorical exemptions--WAC provisions adopted by reference.
ARTICLE X. AGENCY COMPLIANCE
20.04.210 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
20.04.220 Fees for city activities.
ARTICLE XI. FORMS
20.04.230 Forms--WAC provisions adopted by reference.
ARTICLE I. ADOPTION
20.04.010 Adoption by reference--State Environmental Policy Act. The city hereby adopts by this reference the policies of the State Environmental Policy Act, as codified in RCW 43.21C.010 and 43.21C.020. (Ord. 1113 §1, 1984)(Ord 16-16, 2016)
20.04.020 Authority.
(a) The city of Ephrata adopts this ordinance under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.020, and the SEPA Rules, WAC 197-11-904.
(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
(b) This ordinance contains this city's SEPA procedures and policies.
(c) The SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, must be used in conjunction with this ordinance. (Ord. 1113 §2, 1984).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 4
ARTICLE II. BASIC REQUIREMENTS
20.04.030 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The city adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:
WAC 197-11-040 Definitions.
050 Lead agency.
055 Timing of the SEPA process.
060 Content of environmental review.
070 Limitations on actions during SEPA process.
080 Incomplete or unavailable information.
090 Supporting documents.
100 Information required of applicants. (Ord. 1113 §3, 1984).
158 SEPA/GMA project review – Reliance on existing plans, laws,
and regulations.
164 Planned actions – Definition and criteria.
168 Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption.
172 Planned actions – Project review.
210 SEPA/GMA integration.
220 SEPA/GMA definitions.
228 Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures.
230 Timing of an integrated GMA/SEPA process.
232 SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping.
235 SEPA/GMA integration documents.
238 SEPA/GMA integration monitoring.
250 SEPA/Model Toxics Control Act integration.
253 SEPA lead agency for MTCA actions.
256 Preliminary evaluation.
259 Determination of nonsignificance for MTCA remedial action.
262 Determination of significance and EIS for MTCA remedial actions.
265 Early scoping for MTCA remedial actions.
268 MTCA interim actions.
(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
20.04.040 Additional definitions. In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through WAC 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
(a) "Department" means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city established by ordinance, rule or order.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 5
(b) "SEPA Rules" means WAC Chapter 197-11 adopted by the department of ecology.
(c) "Ordinance" means the ordinance, resolution or other procedure used by the city to adopt regulatory requirements.
(d) "Early notice" means the city's response to an application, stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant's proposal (mitigated determination of non-significance (DNS) procedures). (Ord. 1113 §4, 1984).
(e) “City” means the municipal corporation of the City of Ephrata, Washington.
20.04.050 Designation of responsible official.
(a) For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the city community development director.
(b) For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the "lead agency" or "responsible official" by those sections of the SEPA Rules that were adopted by reference in EMC 20.04.030.
(c) The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA Rules (WAC Chapter 197-11) and make them available in accordance with RCW Chapter 42.17. (Ord. 1113 §5, 1984).
(d) For those proposals requiring specialized expertise, the Responsible Official may request information necessary to discharge his/her responsibilities under this section from, but not limited to, other Departments, other agencies with jurisdiction, and/or a technical advisory committee designated by the legislative authority of the City. Such information as can be reasonably supplied by those Departments, other agencies and the technical advisory committee, shall be transmitted to the Responsible Official in a timely manner.
20.04.055 Lead Agency Determination and Responsibilities.
(a) The City Department receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the City Department is aware that another agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.
(b) When the City is the lead agency for a proposal, the City Department receiving the application shall notify the Responsible Official who shall
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 6
supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an EIS is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the EIS.
(c) When the City is not the lead agency for a proposal, all City Departments shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No City Department shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the City may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.
(d) If any City Department receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 15 days of receipt of the determination, or the City must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 15-day time period. The Responsible Official may initiate any such petition on behalf of the City.
(e) The Responsible Official is authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944, provided, that the Responsible Official and any City Department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement approve the agreement.
(f) The Responsible Official making a lead agency determination for a private project shall require sufficient information from the Applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal.
(g) When the City is lead agency for a MTCA remedial action, the Department of Ecology shall be provided an opportunity under WAC 197-11-253(5) to review the environmental documents prior to public notice being provided. If the SEPA and MTCA documents are issued together with one public comment period under WAC 197-11-253(6), the County shall decide jointly with Ecology who receives the comment letters and how copies of the comment letters will be distributed to the other agency.
20.04.058 Time Limits Applicable to the SEPA Process.
(a) The following time limits (expressed in calendar days) shall apply when the City processes licenses for all private projects and those governmental proposals submitted to the City by other agencies:
a. Categorical Exemptions: The City shall identify whether an action is categorically exempt within seven days of receiving a completed application.
b. Threshold Determinations:
i. The City should complete threshold determinations that can be based solely upon review of the environmental checklist for the proposal within fifteen days of the date an applicant's adequate
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 7
application and completed checklist are submitted.
ii. When the Responsible Official requires further information from the applicant or consultation with other agencies with jurisdiction:
1. The City should request such further information within fifteen days of receiving an adequate application and completed environmental checklist;
2. The City shall wait no longer than thirty days for a consulted agency to respond;
3. The Responsible Official should complete the threshold determination within fifteen days of receiving the requested information from the applicant or the consulted agency.
iii. When the City must initiate further studies, including field investigations, to obtain the information to make the threshold determination, the City should complete the studies within thirty (30) days of receiving an adequate application and a completed checklist.
iv. The City shall complete threshold determinations on actions where the applicant recommends in writing that an EIS be prepared, because of the probable significant adverse environmental impact(s) described in the application, within fifteen (15) days of receiving an adequate application and completed checklist.
v. The time limits set forth in this subsection shall not apply to withdrawals of affirmative and negative threshold determinations where such withdrawals are made in accordance with WAC 197-11-340 or WAC 197-11-360.
vi. When a threshold determination is expected to require more than fifteen (15) days to complete and private applicant requests notification of the date when a threshold determination will be made, the lead agency shall transmit to the private applicant a written statement as to the expected date of decision. (Ord. 16-16, 2016)
20.04.060 Additional timing consideration.
(a) For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or draft EIS for the proposal shall accompany the city's staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body, such as the planning commission.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 8
(b) If the city's only action on a proposal is a decision on a building permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the city conduct environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and specifications. The point at which environmental review may be initiated for specific permits or other licenses requiring detailed project plans and specifications is upon application. (Ord. 1113 §6, 1984).
ARTICLE III. EVALUATION OF EIS REQUIREMENT
20.04.070 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a "probable significant, adverse environmental impact" requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This article also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this article:
WAC 197-11-300 Purpose of this part.
305 Categorical exemptions.
310 Threshold determination required.
315 Environmental checklist.
330 Threshold determination process.
335 Additional information.
340 Determination of non-significance (DNS).
350 Mitigated DNS.
355 Optional DNS Process.
360 Determination of significance (DS)/initiation scoping.
390 Effect of threshold determination. (Ord. 1113 §7, 1984).
(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
20.04.080 Flexible thresholds for categorical exemptions.
(a) The city establishes the following exempt levels for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1) (b), based on local conditions:
(1) For residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800 (l)(b)(I) (Note: Range four through twenty units) : up to twenty dwelling units;
(2) For agricultural structures in WAC 197-11-800 (l)(b)(ii) (Note: Range ten thousand through thirty thousand square feet): up to thirty thousand square feet;
(3) For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage buildings in WAC 197-11-800(1) (b) (iii) (Note: Range four thousand through twelve thousand square feet and twenty through forty parking spaces): up to twelve thousand square feet and up to forty parking spaces;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 9
(4) For parking lots in WAC 197-11-800(1) (b)(iv) (Note: Range twenty through forty parking spaces): up to forty parking spaces.
(b) Whenever the city establishes new exempt levels under this section, it shall send them to the Department of Ecology, Headquarters Office, Olympia, Washington, 98504 under WAC 197-11-800(1) (c). (Ord. 1113 §8, 1984).
(c) These categorical exemptions from SEPA shall not exempt these projects from review under EMC 20.08 – Protection and Development Regulations of Critical Areas and Resource Lands. (Ord. 16-16, 2016)
20.04.085 Mitigated DNS
(a) As provided in this Section and in WAC 197-11-350, the Responsible Official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the Responsible Official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the Applicant.
(b) An Applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:
a. Follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the City Department is lead agency; and
b. Precede the City's actual threshold determination for the proposal.
(c) The Responsible Official should respond to the request for early notice within 15 working days. The response shall:
a. Be written;
b. State whether the City currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are leading the City to consider a DS; and
c. State that the Applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.
(d) As much as possible, the City should assist the Applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.
(e) When an Applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the City shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within 15 days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 10
a. If the City indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the Applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the City shall issue and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340
b. If the City indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the City shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.
c. The Applicant's proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to "control noise" or "prevent stormwater runoff" are inadequate, whereas proposals to "muffle machinery to X decibel" or "construct 200-foot stormwater retention pond at Y location" are adequate.
d. Mitigation measures that justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.
(f) A mitigated DNS is issued under either WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a 14-day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355(5), which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the notice of application.
(g) Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the City.
(h) If the City's tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the City should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).
(i) The City's written response under subsection (c) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the City to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination.
20.04.090 Use of exemptions.
(a) The city shall determine whether the license and/or proposal is exempt. The city's determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The city shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 11
(b) In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the city shall make certain the proposal is properly defined, and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the city shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the city's consideration is exempt.
(c) If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:
(1) The city shall not give authorization for:
(A) Any nonexempt action;
(B) Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or
(C) Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;
(2) The city may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and
(3) The city may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved. (Ord. 1113 §9, 1984)(Ord 16-16, 2016)
20.04.100 Environmental checklist.
(a) A completed environmental checklist (or a copy), in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and for making the threshold determination.
(b) For private proposals, the city will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist. For city proposals, the city shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal. (Ord. 1113 §10, 1984).
ARTICLE IV. EIS PREPARATION
20.04.110 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by this article:
WAC 197-11-400 Purpose of EIS.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 12
402 General requirements.
405 EIS types.
406 EIS timing.
408 Scoping.
410 Expanding scoping.
420 EIS preparation.
425 Style and size.
430 Format.
435 Cover letter or memo.
440 EIS contents.
442 Contents of EIS on non-project proposals.
443 EIS contents when prior non-project EIS.
444 Elements of the environment.
448 Relationship of EIS to other consideration.
450 Cost-benefit analysis.
455 Issuance of DEIS.
460 Issuance of FEIS.
(Ord. 1113 §11, 1984).
20.04.120 Additional elements to be covered in an EIS. The following additional elements are part of the environment for the purpose of EIS content, but do not add to the criteria for threshold determinations or perform any other function or purpose under this ordinance:
(a) Economy;
(b) Social policy analysis;
(c) Cost-benefit analysis;
(d) Employment;
(e) Tax base;
(f) Cultural factions;
(g) Neighborhood;
(h) Sociological factors.
(Ord. 1113 §12, 1984).
ARTICLE V. CONSULTING, COMMENTING AND RESPONDING
20.04.130 Consulting, commenting and responding--WAC provisions adopted by reference. This article contains rules for consulting, commenting, and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this article:
WAC 197-11-500 Purpose of this part.
502 Inviting comment.
504 Availability and cost of environmental documents.
508 SEPA register.
535 Public hearings and meetings.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 13
545 Effect of no comment.
550 Specificity of comments.
560 FEIS response to comments.
570 Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.
(Ord. 1113 §13, 1984).
20.04.140 Public notice.
(a) Whenever the city of Ephrata issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) for a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the city shall give public notice as follows:
(1) If public notice is required for a nonexempt license, the notice shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and when comments are due.
(2) If no public notice is required for the permit or approval, the city shall give notice of the DNS or DS by:
(A) Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, city, or general area where the proposal is located;
(B) Notifying public or private groups which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;
(C) Notifying the news media.
(3) Whenever the city issues a DS under WAC 197-11- 360(3), the city shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS, as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.
(4) If a SEPA document is issued concurrently with the notice of application, the public notice requirements for the notice of application will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements.
(b) Whenever the city issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5) or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given by:
(1) Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt license;
(2) Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, city, or general area where the proposal is located;
(3) Notifying public or private groups which have expressed interest in a certain proposal or in the type of proposal being considered;
(4) Notifying the news media.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 14
(c) Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the city's nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.
(d) The city may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the applicant's proposal at his or her expense. (Ord. 1113 §14, 1984).
(e) If a DNS is issued using the optional DNS process, the public notice requirements for the notice of application as supplemented by the requirements in WAC 197-11-355 will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements.
(f) If it is found that there are conflicts between the public notice requirements of this section and Ephrata Municipal Code Chapter 17, the more stringent standards will be followed.
(g) If a SEPA document is issued concurrently with a notice of application, the public notice requirements for the notice of application will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements.
20.04.150 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city. (a) The city community development director or his/her designee shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.
(b) The city community development director or his/her designee shall be responsible for the city's compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the city. (Ord. 1113 §15, 1984).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 15
ARTICLE VI. USING AND SUPPLEMENTING EXISTING
ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS
20.04.160 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the city's own environmental compliance. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
WAC 197-11-600 When to use existing environmental documents.
164 Planned actions – Definition and criteria.
168 Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption.
172 Planned actions – Project review.
610 Use of NEPA documents.
620 Supplemental environmental impact statement--Procedures.
625 Addenda--Procedures.
630 Adoption--Procedures.
635 Incorporation by reference--Procedures.
640 Combining documents.
(Ord. 1113 §16, 1984)(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
ARTICLE VII. SUBSTANTIVE AUTHORITY
20.04.170 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains rules and policies for SEPA's substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This article also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
WAC 197-11-650 Purpose of this part.
655 Implementation.
660 Substantive authority and mitigation.
680 Appeals.
(Ord. 1113 §17, 1984).
20.04.180 Substantive authority--City powers and rights.
(a) The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the city.
(b) The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:
(1) Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
(2) Such conditions are in writing; and
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 16
(3) The mitigation measures, included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and
(4) The city has considered whether other local, state or federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and
(5) Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (d) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.
(c) The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:
(1) A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
(2) A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and
(3) The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (d) of this section and identified in writing in the decision document.
(d) The city designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the city's exercise of authority pursuant to this section:
(1) The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:
(A) Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;
(B) Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;
(C) Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;
(D) Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 17
(E) Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;
(F) Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities; and
(G) Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.
(2) The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.
(e) When any proposal or action not requiring a decision of the city council is conditioned or denied on the basis of SEPA, the decision shall be appealable to the hearing examiner as provided in EMC Chapter 17.01. (Ord. 16-16, 2016)
ARTICLE VIII. DEFINITIONS
20.04.190 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-802:
WAC 197-11-700 Definitions.
702 Act.
704 Action.
706 Addendum.
708 Adoption.
710 Affected tribe.
712 Affecting.
714 Agency.
716 Applicant.
718 Built environment.
720 Categorical exemption.
721 Closed Record Appeal.
722 Consolidated appeal.
724 Consulted agency.
726 Cost-benefit analysis.
728 County/city.
730 Decision maker.
732 Department.
734 Determination of non-significance (DNS).
736 Determination of significance (DS).
738 EIS.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 18
740 Environment.
742 Environmental checklist.
744 Environmental document.
746 Environmental review.
750 Expanded scoping.
752 Impacts.
754 Incorporation by reference.
756 Lands covered by water.
758 Lead agency.
760 License.
762 Local agency.
764 Major action.
766 Mitigated DNS.
768 Mitigation.
770 Natural environment.
772 NEPA.
774 Non-project.
775 Open record hearing.
776 Phased review.
778 Preparation.
780 Private project.
782 Probable.
784 Proposal.
786 Reasonable alternative.
788 Responsible official.
790 SEPA.
792 Scope.
793 Scoping.
794 Significant.
796 State agency.
797 Threshold determination.
799 Underlying governmental action.
(Ord. 1113 §19, 1984)(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
ARTICLE IX. CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS
20.04.200 Categorical exemptions--WAC provisions adopted by reference. The city adopts by reference the following rules for categorical exemptions:
WAC 197-11-800 Categorical exemptions.
880 Emergencies.
890 Petitioning Department of Ecology to change exemptions.
(Ord. 1113 §20, 1984).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 19
ARTICLE X. AGENCY COMPLIANCE
20.04.210 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference. This article contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating environmentally sensitive areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
WAC 197-11-900 Purpose of this part.
902 Agency SEPA policies.
904 Agency SEPA procedures.
906 Content and consistency of agency procedures.
908 Critical areas.
910 Designation of responsible official.
912 Procedures of consulted agencies.
914 SEPA fees and costs.
916 Application to ongoing actions.
920 Agencies with environmental expertise.
922 Lead agency rules.
924 Determining the lead agency.
926 Lead agency for governmental proposals.
928 Lead agency for public and private proposals.
930 Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction
932 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a county/city.
934 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/city, and one or more agencies.
936 Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency.
938 Lead agencies for specific proposals.
940 Transfer of lead agency status to state agency.
942 Agreement on lead agency status.
944 Agreements on division of lead agency duties.
946 DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.
948 Assumption of lead agency status.
(Ord. 1113 §21, 1984).
20.04.220 Fees for city activities. The city shall require the following fees for its activities in accordance with the provision of this chapter:
(a) Threshold Determination. For every environmental checklist the city will review when it is lead agency, the city shall collect a fee as defined in the city’s fee schedule in EMC 3.35 from the proponent of the proposal prior to undertaking
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 20
the threshold determination. The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination shall not begin to run until payment of the fee. When the city completes the environmental checklist at the applicant's request, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee.
(b) Environmental Impact Statement.
(1) When the city is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an EIS, and the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be prepared by employees of the city, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee from any applicant to cover costs incurred by the city in preparing the EIS. The responsible official shall advise the applicant(s) of the projected costs for the EIS prior to actual preparation; the applicant shall post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs.
(2) The responsible official may determine that the city will contract directly with a consultant for preparation of an EIS, or a portion of the EIS, for activities initiated by some person(s) or entity other than the city, and may bill such costs and expenses directly to the applicant. The city may require the applicant to post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs. Such consultants shall be selected by mutual agreement of the city and applicant after a call for proposals.
(3) If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under (1) or (2) of this subsection which remain after incurred costs are paid.
(c) The city may collect a reasonable fee from an applicant to cover the cost of meeting the public notice requirements of this chapter relating to the applicant's proposal.
(d) The city shall not collect a fee for performing its duties as a consulted agency.
(Ord. 1113 §22, 1984)(Ord. 16-16, 2016)
ARTICLE XI. FORMS
20.04.230 Forms--WAC provisions adopted by reference. The city adopts the following forms and sections by reference:
WAC 197-11-960 Environmental checklist.
965 Adoption notice.
970 Determination of non-significance (DNS).
980 Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS).
985 Notice of assumption of lead agency status.
990 Notice of action. (Ord. 1113 §23, 1984).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 21
Chapter 20.08
PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION OF
CRITICAL AREAS AND RESOURCE LANDS
Sections:
20.08.010 Statement of Facts
20.08.020 Findings
20.08.030 Purpose
20.08.040 Goals
20.08.045 Critical Area review process and application requirements
20.08.047 Procedural provisions
20.08.050 Definitions
20.08.060 Data Maps
20.08.070 Interpretation of Data Maps
20.08.080 Applicability
20.08.085 Site Analysis
20.08.087 Appeals
20.08.100 Forest Lands
20.08.110 Minerals Lands
20.08.120 Wetlands
20.08.130 Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas
20.08.140 Frequently Flooded Areas
20.08.150 Geologically Hazardous Areas
20.08.160 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas
20.08.170 Existing Structures and Developments
20.08.175 Reasonable Use Exception
20.08.180 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
20.08.190 Severability
20.08.200 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
20.08.210 Penalties for Non-Compliance
20.08.010 Statement of Facts.
1. Regarding Growth Management Act requirements:
a. The state Growth Management Act (“GMA”) requires the adoption of development regulations that protect the functions and values of critical areas, including wetland, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, critical groundwater recharge areas, frequently flooded areas and geologically hazardous areas;
b. RCW 36.70A.172 requires local governments to include the best available science
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 22
(“BAS”) in developing policies and development regulations to protect the functions and values of critical areas, and to give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fisheries;
c. The GMA requires all local governments to designate and protect resource lands, including agriculture lands and mineral resource lands.
2. Regarding the relationship of this critical areas ordinance to other regulations, projects and programs:
a. The City of Ephrata uses a combination of regulatory and non-regulatory approaches to protect the functions and values of critical areas. Regulatory approaches include low-density zoning in significantly environmentally constrained areas, limits on total impervious surface and stormwater control regulations.
20.08.020 Findings.
1. Growth management, resource land conservations, and critical areas protection share problems related to governmental costs and efficiency.
2. Urban sprawl and the unwise development of resource lands or critical areas susceptible to natural hazards may lead to inefficient use of limited public resources, jeopardize environmental resource functions and values, subject person and property to unsafe conditions, and affect the perceived quality of life.
3. The cost to remedy the loss of resource lands or critical areas is greater than conserving and protecting them from loss or degradation.
4. The inherent economic, social and cultural values of resource lands and critical areas should be considered in the development of strategies designed to conserve and protect such lands.
5. The ordinance implements the goals and policies of the Resource Lands and Critical Areas Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
6. RCW 36.70A.172 requires local governments to include the best available science (“BAS”) in developing policies and development regulations to protect the functions and values of critical areas, and to give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fisheries.
20.08.030 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to protect the public, health, safety, and general welfare in areas associated with specific resource lands and critical areas. It is further intended to promote the conservation of resource lands and promote the
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 23
enhancement and preservation of critical areas by avoiding or minimizing adverse environmental impacts from construction and development. This ordinance shall also implement the goals and policies of the State of Washington Growth Management Act(s) of 1990 and 1991 and as amended through the classification and designation of resource lands and critical areas and the development and implementation of interim regulations to conserve resource lands and protect critical areas in the public=s interest and welfare.
It is not the intent of this ordinance to deny a reasonable use of private property, but to assure that development on or near resource lands or critical areas is accomplished in a manner that is sensitive to the environmental and resources of the community.
20.08.040 Goals.
A. Classify and designate critical areas and resource lands.
B. Conserve the inherent economic, social, and cultural values of resource lands.
C. Protect environmentally sensitive critical areas and the functions they perform.
D. Protect aquifer recharge areas.
E. Preserve natural forms of flood and storm water control.
F. Protect human life and health from damage due to geologically hazardous areas.
G. Protect and maintain fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.
H. Develop appropriate regulatory and non-regulatory options and strategies.
20.08.045 Critical Area review process and application requirements.
A. Pre-application conference.
1. For those projects subject to environmental review pursuant to SEPA, the pre-application requirements of Ch. 17.01 EMC shall apply.
2. For projects which are subject to this chapter but are exempt from the SEPA requirements, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the city prior to submitting an application.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 24
3. The purpose of these meetings shall be to discuss the city’s critical area requirements, processes, and procedures; to review any conceptual site plans prepared by the applicant; to identify potential impacts to critical areas and appropriate mitigation measures; and to the extent it can be determined, generally inform the applicant of any known federal or state regulations or approvals applicable to the subject critical area. Such conference shall be for the convenience of the applicant, shall not constitute legal advice or scientific opinion, and any recommendations shall not be binding on the applicant or the city. It shall be the applicant’s sole responsibility to identify and secure all necessary permits from any agencies with jurisdiction notwithstanding that the city of Ephrata may also have the authority to issue a permit.
B. Application requirements.
1. Timing of submittals. Concurrent with submittal of a SEPA checklist, or concurrent with submittal of an application for projects exempt from SEPA, a critical area report must be submitted to the city for review. The purpose of the report is to determine the extent, characteristics, and functions of any critical areas located on or potentially affected by activities on a site where regulated activities are proposed. The report will also be used by the department to determine the appropriate critical area rating or classification, where applicable, and to establish appropriate buffer requirements.
2. Report contents. Reports and studies required to be submitted by this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the information indicated in the attachments to this chapter applicable to each critical area. The department may tailor the information required to reflect the complexity of the proposal and the sensitivity of critical areas that may potentially be present.
C. Critical area consultants – Qualifications and city review. All reports and studies required of the applicant by this section shall be prepared by a qualified consultant as defined in these regulations. The department may, at its discretion, retain a qualified consultant to review and confirm the applicant’s reports, studies, and plans. Such review shall be paid for by the applicant.
D. Review process. This section is not intended to create a separate critical area review permit process for development proposals. To the extent possible, the city shall consolidate and integrate the review and processing of critical area-related aspects of proposals with other land use and environmental considerations, reviews, and approvals. Any permits required by separate codes or regulations, such as shoreline substantial development permits, shall continue to be required.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 25
20.08.047 Procedural provisions.
A. Interpretation and conflicts. The director of the department or his/her designee shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this chapter, to make determinations with regard to the applicability of the regulations, to interpret the intent of unclear provisions, to require additional information, to determine the level of detail and appropriate methodologies for critical area reports and studies, to prepare application and informational materials as required, and to promulgate procedures and rules for unique circumstances not anticipated by the standards and procedures contained within this chapter.
B. Penalties and enforcement. Compliance with these regulations and penalties for their violation shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in Ch. 1.04 EMC.
C. Appeals from critical area review decisions. Appeals from critical area review decisions shall be governed by the procedures set forth in EMC 17.01.
D. Burden of proof. The burden of proving that a proposed activity meets the standards established by this chapter shall be on the applicant.
20.08.050 Definitions.
A. Agricultural Lands - Lands that are not already characterized by urban growth and are of long term significance for commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, vegetable, or animal products, or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, livestock, and Christmas trees not subject to excise tax.
B. Alteration: any human activity that results or is likely to result in an impact upon the existing condition of a sensitive critical area is an alteration which is subject to specific limitations as specified for each sensitive area or its buffer. "Alterations" includes, but are is not limited to, grading, filling, dredging, draining, channelizing, applying herbicides or pesticides or any hazardous substance, discharging pollutants, grazing domestic animals, compaction, excavation, paving, constructing, applying gravel, modifying topography for surface water management purposes, cutting, pruning, topping, trimming, relocating or removing vegetation or any other human activity which that results or is likely to result in an impact to existing vegetation, hydrology, fish or wildlife or their habitats. "Alterations" does not include passive recreation such as walking, fishing or any other passive recreation or other similar activities.
C. Anadromous fish. Fish that are born in freshwater, migrate to the ocean to grow and mature, and return to freshwater as adults to reproduce.
D. Applicant. means any person or entity, including an agency, applying for a license
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 26
from an agency. Application means a request for a license.
E. Aquatic area. Aquatic area: any non-wetland water feature including all shorelines of the state, rivers, streams, marine waters, inland bodies of open water including lakes and ponds, reservoirs and conveyance systems and impoundments of these features if any portion of the feature is formed from a stream or wetland and if any stream or wetland contributing flows is not created solely as a consequence of stormwater pond construction. "Aquatic area" does not include water features that are entirely artificially collected or conveyed storm or wastewater systems or entirely artificial channels, ponds, pools or other similar constructed water features.
F. Basement. Basement: for purposes of development proposals in a flood hazard area, any area of a building where the floor subgrade is below ground level on all sides.
G. Best Available Science
A. Protect Functions and Values of Critical Areas With Special Consideration to Anadromous Fish. Critical area reports and decisions to alter critical areas shall rely on the best available science to protect the functions and values of critical areas and must give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish, such as salmon and bull trout, and their habitat.1
B. Best Available Science to be Consistent With Criteria. The best available science is that scientific information applicable to the critical area prepared by local, state, or federal natural resource agencies, a qualified scientific professional, or team of qualified scientific professionals that is consistent with criteria established in WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925.
H. Best management practice: a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, physical structures, maintenance procedures and other management practices undertaken to reduce pollution, control soil loss, minimize adverse impacts to surface water and ground water flow, protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site construction and use native plant species appropriate to the site for revegetation of disturbed areas, or to provide habitat protection or maintenance.
I. Bioengineering. Bioengineering: the use of vegetation and other natural materials such as soil, wood and rock to stabilize soil, typically against slides and stream flow erosion. When natural materials alone do not possess the needed strength to resist hydraulic and gravitational forces, "bioengineering" may consist of the use of
1 See RCW 36.70A.172(1).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 27
natural materials integrated with human-made fabrics and connecting materials to create a complex matrix that joins with in-place native materials to provide erosion control.
J. Buffer. Buffer: a designated area contiguous to a steep slope or landslide hazard area intended to protect slope stability, attenuation of surface water flows and landslide hazards or a designated area contiguous to ((a stream)) and intended to protect and be an integral part of an aquatic area or wetland
K. City - means the City of Ephrata, Washington.
L. Clearing. Clearing: ((the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping,)) cutting, killing, grubbing or ((removal of)) removing vegetation or other organic plant ((matter)) material by physical, mechanical, chemical or any other similar means. For the purpose of this definition of "clearing," "cutting" means the severing of the main trunk or stem of woody vegetation at any point.
M. Commercial Significance, Long-Term - means the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of the land for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land's proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense use of the land.
N. Contaminant - means any chemical, physical, biological, or radiological material that is not naturally occurring and is introduced into the environment by human action, accident, or negligence.
O. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas - Critical aquifer recharge areas means areas that have been identified as sole-source aquifers,: that area designated in the City of Ephrata Comprehensive Land Use Plan as the current Urban Growth Boundary Area of the City of Ephrata; those areas that have a high susceptibility to ground water contamination, an area that has an area of medium susceptibility to ground water contamination that is located within a sole source aquifer or within an area approved pursuant to WAC in accordance with chapter 246-290 WAC as a wellhead protection area for a municipal or district drinking water systems. Areas with high susceptibility to ground water contamination occurs where aquifers are used for drinking water and there is a combination of permeable soils, permeable subsurface geology and ground water close to the ground surface.
P. Critical Areas - any area that is subject to natural hazards or a land feature that supports unique, fragile or valuable natural resources including fish, wildlife or other organisms or their habitats or such resources that carry, hold or purify water in their natural state. "Critical area" includes the following areas:
A. Critical aquifer recharge area;
B. Erosion hazard areas;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 28
C. Flood hazard areas;
D. Landslide hazard areas;
E. Seismic hazard areas;
F. Steep slope hazard areas;
G. Wetlands; and
H. Fish and Wildlife habitat conservation areas.
Q. Cumulative effects - means the changes to the environment caused by the interaction of natural ecosystem processes with the effects of changes made to that ecosystem whether man-made or natural.
R. Dangerous Wastes - means any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned substances, including but not limited to certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment (RCW 70.105.010).
S. Data Maps - means a series of maps that are maintained by the City of Ephrata for the purpose of graphically depicting likely boundaries of resource lands and critical areas.
T. Emergency an occurrence during which there is imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, or which poses an imminent risk to property .
U. Endangered - means any wildlife species that is 1) native to the state of Washington and is seriously threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range within the state, and 2) is listed in the Federal Register and/or State regulations.
V. Engineer, civil, geotechnical and structural. Engineer, civil, geotechnical and structural:
A. Civil engineer: an engineer who is licensed as a professional engineer in the branch of civil engineering by the state of Washington;
B. Geotechnical engineer: an engineer who is licensed as a professional engineer by the state of Washington and who has at least four years of relevant professional employment; and
C. Structural engineer: an engineer who is licensed as a professional engineer in the branch of structural engineering by the state of Washington.
W. Enhancement. Enhancement: for the purposes of critical area regulation is an action which increases or improves the processes, structure and functions and values of a stream, wetland or other sensitive area or buffer of an ecosystems and habitats associated with critical areas or their buffers.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 29
X. Erosion Hazard Areas - areas defined by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service as having a "high" erosion hazard and a "rapid" surface runoff or areas defined by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service having a "severe" limitation due to slope for building site development.
Y. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - means land areas managed for the maintenance of species in a wild state in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated sub-populations are not created.
Z. Frequently Flooded Areas – Lands in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year and those lands that provide important flood storage, conveyance, and attenuation functions, as determined by the director in accordance with WAC 365-190-080(3).
AA. Functions and Values: The beneficial roles served by critical areas including but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement; fish and wildlife habitat; food chain support; flood storage, conveyance and attenuation; ground water recharge and discharge; erosion control; wave attenuation; protection from hazards; historical, archaeological, and aesthetic value protection; educational opportunities; and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority. Critical area functions can be used to help set targets (species composition, structure, etc) for managed areas, including migration sites.
BB. Geologically Hazardous Areas - Areas designated within the City of Ephrata which are not suited for siting commercial, residential, or industrial development because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events. These areas shall include erosion hazard areas, landslide hazard areas, and seismic hazard areas.
CC. Hazardous substance - means any material that exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous material or waste, inclusive of waste oil and petroleum products, and which further meets the definitions of "hazardous waste" (WAC 173-303) or (RCW 70.150.010).
DD. Landslide Hazard - areas subject to severe risk of landslide based on a combination of geologic, topographic and hydrologic factors. Areas of Landslide hazard include the following:
a. Areas characterized by:
i) slopes greater than 15 percent;
ii) impermeable soils (typically silt and clay) frequently interbedded with permeable granular soils, or impermeable soils overlain with permeable soils; and
iii) springs or groundwater seepage
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 30
b. Any area which has shown movement during the Holocene epoch (from 10,000 years ago to present) or which is underlain by mass wastage debris of that epoch; or
c. Any area potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion or undercutting by wave action; or
d. Any area which shows evidence of, or is at risk from snow avalanches; or
e. Any area located on an alluvial fan, presently subject to or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or deposition of stream-transported sediments; or
f. Any area with a slope of 40 percent or greater and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet except areas composed of consolidated rock.
EE. Maintenance. Maintenance: the usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation from a lawfully established condition without any expansion of or significant change from that originally established condition. Activities within landscaped areas within areas subject to native vegetation retention requirements may be considered "maintenance" only if they maintain or enhance the canopy and understory cover. "Maintenance" includes repair work but does not include replacement work. When maintenance is conducted specifically in accordance with the Regional Road Maintenance Guidelines, the definition of "maintenance" in the glossary of those guidelines supersedes the definition of "maintenance" in this section.
FF. Mineral Lands - lands that are not already characterized by urban growth and are of long-term commercial significance for the extraction of aggregate and mineral resources including: sand, gravel and valuable metallic substances. Other minerals may be classified as appropriate. Both known and potential deposits may be classified. Both known and potential deposits may be classified. The Mineral Resource Areas (MRA) and Scientific Resource Sites (SRS) categories determined by the Washington Department of Natural Resources will be used in classifying lands.
1. MRA-1 - Areas where adequate information indicates that no significant mineral deposits (sand and gravel) are present, or where it is judged that there is little likelihood for their presence. This area shall be applied where well-developed lines of reasoning, based upon economic geologic principles and adequate data, demonstrate that the likelihood for occurrence of significant mineral deposits is nil or slight.
2. MRA-2 - Areas where adequate information indicates that significant mineral (Sand and gravel) deposits are present or where it is
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 31
judged that there is a high likelihood for their presence. This area shall be applied to known mineral deposits or where well-developed lines of reasoning, based upon economic geologic principles and adequate data, demonstrate that the likelihood for occurrence of significant mineral deposits is high.
3. MRA-3 - Areas containing mineral (sand and gravel) deposits the significance of which cannot be evaluated from available data.
4. MRA-4 - Areas where available information is inadequate for assignment to any other MRA.
5. SRS - containing unique or rare occurrences of rocks, minerals, or fossils that are of outstanding scientific significance.
GG. Mitigation. An action taken to avoid, minimize or compensate for adverse impacts to the environment resulting from a development activity or alteration.
HH. PHS - means Priority Habitat and Species, a seasonal range or habitat element of a Priority Fish or Wildlife Species, as identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, which if altered may reduce the likelihood the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. This would include, but not be limited to: areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range and movement/migration corridors; or habitats of limited availability or highly vulnerable to alterations, i.e., cliffs, talus, wetlands, riparian areas, etc.. Priority species include: state and federal listed endangered, threatened, sensitive or candidate species determined to be in danger of failing, declining, or vulnerable due to factors such as limited numbers, disease, predation, exploitation or habitat loss or change. Also included are species for which maintenance of a stable population and surplus for recreation may be affected by habitat loss or change, and/or species uncommon in the State of Washington. These would include, but not be limited to: wolves, grizzly bear, mule deer, bighorn sheep, lynx, bald eagles, spotted owls, sharp-tailed grouse, blue grouse, anadromous and resident fish.
II. Reclamation. The final grading and restoration of a site to reestablish the vegetation cover, soil stability and surface water conditions to accommodate and sustain all permitted uses of the site and to prevent and mitigate future environmental degradation.
JJ. Repair. To fix or restore to sound condition after damage. “Repair” does not include replacement of structures or systems.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 32
KK. Replace. To take or fill the place of a structure, fence, deck or paved surface with an equivalent or substitute structure, fence, deck or paved surface that serves the same purpose. “Replacement” may or may not involve an expansion..
LL. Restoration. For purposes of critical areas regulation, an action that reestablishes the structure and function of a critical area or any associated buffer that has been altered.
MM. Seismic Hazard - Areas subject to severe risk of earthquake damage as a result of seismic induced settlement or soil liquefaction. These conditions occur in areas underlain by cohesion-less soils of low density usually in association with a shallow groundwater table.
NN. Species of Local Importance - means a species of animal which are of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation. This term also includes game species.
OO. Slope - means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio or percentage. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and measured by averaging the inclination over at least ten feet of vertical relief.
PP. Substantial improvement. Substantial improvement:
A. 1. Any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 fifty percent of the market value of the structure either:
a. before the maintenance, improvement or repair, modification or addition is started; or before the damage occurred,
b. if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
2. For purposes of this definition, the cost of any improvement is considered to begin when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building begins, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure; and
B. Does not include either:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 33
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the national Register of Historic Places or a state or local inventory of historic resources.
QQ. Threatened - means any wildlife species that is 1) native to the State of Washington and is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range within the state without cooperative management or removal of threats, and 2) is listed in the Federal Register.
RR. Underground Injection Wells – a subsurface infiltration system is a facility which includes a manmade subsurface fluid distribution system, which means an assemblage of perforated pipes, drain tiles, or other similar mechanisms intended to infiltrate fluids into the ground or a dug hole that is deeper than the largest surface dimension. Buried pipe and/or tile networks that serve to collect water and discharge that water to a conveyance system or to surface water are not infiltration systems. Subsurface infiltration systems include drywells, pipe or french drains, drain fields and other similar devices that are designed to discharge stormwater directly into the ground.
20.08.060 Data Maps
The Data maps maintained by the city of Ephrata shall be utilized as a general guide to determine the location and extent of resource lands and critical areas within the corporate limits. The data maps shall be consulted with the Community Development Director when a development application is received to determine if the site is within any areas shown as resource lands or critical areas. The data maps are for reference only and not regulatory in nature. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the city of any resource lands or critical areas which are on or near the site of the development application. The exact location of resource lands and critical areas shall be determined by a site analysis conducted by a qualified professional supplied by the developer using the requirements found within this chapter.
20.08.070 Interpretation of Data Maps
The Community Development Director is charged with administration of the City of Ephrata Zoning Ordinance for the purpose of interpreting data maps. An
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 34
affected property owner or other party with standing has a right to appeal the Community Development Director's determination to the City Council.
All development applications are required to show the boundary(s) of all resource lands and critical areas on a scaled drawing prior to the development application being considered complete for processing purposes.
20.08.080 Applicability
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land uses in the City of Ephrata, and all persons within the city shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The City of Ephrata shall not approve any permit or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement without first ensuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Approval of a development proposal in accordance with this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with this chapter.
D. When any other chapter of the Ephrata Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the provision that provides more protection to environmentally critical areas apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or unless the provision conflicts with federal or state laws or regulations.
20.08.085 Site Analysis
When application for development, permit, or license is received by the City, the application shall indicate whether any resource land or critical area is located on the site. The Community Development Director or the Director's designee shall inspect the site and evaluate the information provided by the applicant. The Community Development Director or the Director’s designee shall evaluate the proposal and make a determination if a site study analysis is required. If it is determined that a site study analysis is required, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the required study. A site study shall include a comprehensive site inventory and analysis, a discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development and specific measures or alternatives designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the applicant's proposal on and off site. All costs incurred for the site analysis report shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 35
20.08.087 Appeals
Any decision of the Community Development Director in the administration of this chapter may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be submitted to the city within ten (10) days from the date of the Director’s decision, or if a written Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law or Resolution, then ten days from their signature of approval.
20.08.100 Forest Lands
A. General
Forest lands of long-term commercial significance are identified by the Washington State Department of Revenue land grades scheme (WAC 458-40-530).
B. Development Standards
Not applicable. There are no forest lands in the City of Ephrata.
20.08.110 Mineral Lands
A. General
Lands that are not already characterized by urban growth and are of long term commercial significance for the extraction of aggregate and mineral resources including: sand, gravel and valuable metallic substances. Other minerals may be classified as appropriate. Both known and potential deposits may be classified.
B. Development Standards
When an application for a development permit is received by the city, the application shall indicate whether the proposal is within an area with a rating of class MRA-2, MRA-3, MRA-4 or SRS. If it is indicated that the development proposal is within a mineral resource area, a mineral resource lands delineation report must be filed, unless the Public Works Director determines that a mineral resource land is not affected by the development. If the data maps and/or the application do not indicate the presence of a mineral resource land, but there are other indications that a resource land may be present, the Public Works Director or designee shall make a determination whether a mineral resource delineation report shall be required. The report shall be prepared by a geologist or geotechnical engineer licensed as a Civil Engineer with the State of Washington.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 36
If a valid mineral resources delineation report has been prepared within the previous two (2) years for the specific site and the proposed land-use development and site conditions have not changed, the report may be utilized without the requirement for a new report.
C. A Mineral Resource Delineation Report Requirements:
A mineral resource delineation report shall include at a minimum the following:
1. Topographic maps at a scale of suitable use by the Public Works Department.
2. Maps must show the boundaries of each permitting authority in report area.
Mineral Delineation Reports for areas containing Construction Materials, MRA-2 shall include the following additional information for each such mineral commodity.
3. The summary report must determine the location and an estimate of the total quantity of construction material that is geologically available for mining in the location.
4. An estimate of the total quantity of each such construction material that will be needed to supply the requirement of the city and the marketing region in which it occurs for the next 20 years. The marketing region is defined as the area within which such material is usually mined and marketed. The amount of each construction material mineral resource needed for the next 50 years shall be projected using past consumption rates adjusted for anticipated changes in market conditions and mining technology. These estimates shall be periodically reviewed.
D. Mineral Resource Delineation Report Assessment: If it is satisfactorily demonstrated within the Mineral Resources Delineation Report, that mineral resources of long-term commercial significance do not exist on the site, the requirements of this section shall be waived.
E. Regulated Activities: All development proposals requiring a land use permit or license, unless specifically exempted by Section .110 (F) shall be regulated to include, but not limited to:
1. Construction of Public Facilities
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 37
2. Residential development, more than one unit per ten acres
3. Dumping, discharging or filling with any material.
4. Draining, flooding, or disturbing the water level or water table.
5. Alteration of the size of any structure or infrastructure except repair of an existing structure or infrastructure, where the existing square footage or foundation footprint is not altered.
F. Exempt Activities: The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
1. Existing and on-going agricultural activities, including crop production and grazing.
2. Maintenance, operation, normal repair of existing roads, streets, utility lines and associated structures, provided that reconstruction of any such facility does not extend outside the scope of any designated easement or right-of-way.
3. Normal maintenance and reconstruction of structures, provided that reconstruction may not increase the existing ground coverage.
4. Site study work such as surveys, soil logs, and other related activities, necessary for the submittal of land-use application.
5. Activities determined by the Director as having minimal adverse impact, such as passive recreational uses, sport fishing or hunting, scientific or educational programs.
6. Residential development, 1 unit (or less) per 10 acres.
7. Extensive industrial use.
8. Land reserved as open space.
G. Petition for Mineral Lands Classification: Petitions may be brought before the Planning Commission by any individual or organization to classify mineral lands that are claimed to contain significant mineral deposits and which are claimed to be threatened by land uses incompatible with the extraction thereof. Classification is a prerequisite to designation of local, regional or statewide significance. Petitions submitted to the Planning Commission shall include the following information:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 38
1. The petitioner’s name, mailing address, and interest (beneficial, jurisdictional, or other) in the area to be considered for designation.
2. A map of suitable scale showing the boundaries of the MRA or SRS area the petitioner wishes to be designated.
3. The reasons for requesting designation.
4. A completed environmental checklist.
5. The name and mailing address of each recorded land owner and each recorded lessee in and adjoining the area described. The Planning Commission shall then evaluate the data submitted in the petition as to their accuracy and sufficiency. If the Planning Commission finds that the petition contains sufficient information and arguments to require a public hearing, then the Planning Commission shall schedule a hearing to consider the petition.
H. Termination of Designation Status: Petitions may be brought before the Planning Commission to terminate the designated status of mineral lands. Petitions submitted to the Planning Commission shall include at a minimum the following information:
1. The petitioner’s name, mailing address, and interest (beneficial, jurisdictional or other) in the petitioned area.
2. A map of suitable scale and legal description of the petitioned area.
3. Reference to the specific action which designated the area.
4. The reasons and supporting data as to why designation of MRA or SRS is no longer necessary.
I. Environmental compliance: Petitioner’s requesting designation of MRA or SRS, or termination of designation of MRA or SRS must meet requirements of Chapter 20 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
20.08.120 Wetlands
A. General
"Wetland" or "wetlands" means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 39
marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands. (RCW 36.70A.030(21)).
Wetlands will be rated according to the Washington 4-Tier Wetlands Rating System developed by the State of Washington Department of Ecology.
Wetlands are classified into category I, category II, category III and category IV based on the adopted Washington State Wetland Rating System for Eastern Washington, Washington state department of ecology publication number 04-06-015, published August 2004. In order to meet the requirements to use best available science practices in the development of policies and regulations that will protect the functions and values of critical areas the City of Ephrata contracted with Ecological Land Services. Ecological Land Services is a natural resource consulting firm with expertise in wetland delineation. The consultant did not find any areas within Ephrata that met the criteria for protected wetlands. (Resolution 04-859, February 4, 2004) (Ord 07-12, 2007)
B. Development Standards
Not applicable. There are no wetlands in the City of Ephrata.
20.08.130 Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas
A. General
A. Category I critical aquifer recharge areas include those mapped areas that the City of Ephrata has determined are highly susceptible to groundwater contamination and that are located within a sole source aquifer or a wellhead protection area;
B. Category II critical aquifer recharge areas include those mapped areas that the City of Ephrata has determined:
1. Have a medium susceptibility to ground water contamination and are located in a sole source aquifer or a wellhead protection area; or
2. Are highly susceptible to groundwater contamination and are not located in a sole source aquifer or wellhead protection area.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 40
Discharge into the groundwater of the City shall not contribute contaminants nor facilitate degradation of recharge areas. Development approvals shall ensure that all best management practices are employed to avoid contributing pollutants into aquifer recharge areas. The requirement for a site analysis shall be based on detailed information on the following items:
1. Hydro-geologic susceptibility to contamination and contamination loading potential.
2. Depth to groundwater.
3. Hydraulic conductivity and gradient.
4. Soil (texture, permeability, and containment attenuation). (Ord 18-16, 2018)
B. Development Standards
The following development standards apply to development proposals and alterations on sites containing critical aquifer recharge areas:
A. Except as otherwise provided in subsection F. of this section, the following new development proposals and alterations are not allowed on a site located in a category I critical aquifer recharge area:
1. Transmission pipelines carrying petroleum or petroleum products;
2. Sand and gravel, and hard rock mining:
3. Mining of any type below the upper surface of the saturated ground water that could be used for potable water supply;
4. Disposal of radioactive wastes, as defined in chapter 43.200 RCW;
5. Hydrocarbon extraction;
6. Commercial wood treatment facilities on permeable surfaces;
7. Underground storage tanks, including tanks that are exempt from the requirements of chapter 173 WAC, with hazardous substances, as defined in chapter 70.105 RCW, that do not comply with standards of chapter 173-360 WAC;
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 41
8. Above-ground storage tanks for hazardous substances, as defined in chapter 70.105 RCW, unless protected with primary and secondary containment areas and a spill protection plan;
9. Golf courses;
10. Cemeteries;
11. Wrecking yards;
12. Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste or special waste; and
13. On lots smaller than one acre, an on-site septic system; and
14. Injections wells.
B. Except as otherwise provided in subsection F. of this section, the following new development proposals and alterations are not allowed on a site located in a category II critical aquifer recharge area:
1. Mining of any type below the upper surface of the saturated ground water that could be used for potable water supply;
2. Disposal of radioactive wastes, as defined in chapter 43.200 RCW;
3. Hydrocarbon extraction;
4. Commercial wood treatment facilities located on permeable surfaces;
5. Above-ground storage tanks for hazardous substances, as defined in chapter 70.105 RCW, unless protected with primary and secondary containment areas and a spill protection plan;
6. Wrecking yards;
7. Landfills for hazardous waste, municipal solid waste, or special waste; and
8. On lots smaller than one acre with an on-site septic systems; and
9. Underground Injection wells.
C. The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations that are substantial improvements on a site located in a critical aquifer recharge area:
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 42
1. The owner of an underground storage tank, including a tank that is exempt from the requirements of chapter 173 WAC, in a category I area shall either bring the tank into compliance with the standards of chapter 173 WAC or properly decommission or remove the tank; and
2. The owner of an underground storage tank in a category II critical aquifer recharge area shall bring the tank into compliance with the standards of chapter 173-360 WAC or shall properly decommission or remove the tank.
D. In any critical aquifer recharge area, the property owner shall properly decommission an abandoned well.
E. On a site located in a critical aquifer recharge area within the urban growth area, a development proposal for new residential development, including, but not limited to, a subdivision, short subdivision, or dwelling unit, shall incorporate best management practices into the site design in order to infiltrate stormwater runoff to the maximum extent practical.
F. On a site greater than twenty acres, the department may approve a development proposal otherwise prohibited by subsections A., B. and C. of this section if the applicant demonstrates through a critical areas report that the development proposal is located outside the critical aquifer recharge area and that the development proposal will not cause a significant adverse environmental impact to the critical aquifer recharge area.
G. The provisions relating to underground storage tanks in subsections A. through D. of this section apply only when the proposed regulation of underground storage tanks has been submitted to and approved by the Washington state department of ecology, in accordance with 90.76.040 RCW and WAC 173-360-530. (Ord 07-12, 2007)
1. A site analysis shall be utilized to determine the existing water quality for establishing a baseline which shall serve as a minimum standard that shall not be further degraded by proposed development.
2. Development approvals shall ensure that all best management practices are employed to avoid introducing pollutants into the aquifer. This includes the complete collection and disposal of storm water.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 43
C. Hydro-geologic Assessment Required
A hydro-geologic assessment shall be required for the following land uses:
1. Dangerous and hazardous substance processing and handling
2. Dangerous and hazardous waste treatment and storage facility
3. Waste-water treatment plant sludge disposal
4. Solid waste disposal facility
D. Hydro-geologic Assessment Requirements
A hydro-geologic assessment shall be submitted by a professional engineer registered in the State of Washington, trained and qualified to analyze geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems, or a geologist or hydro-geologist who has received a degree from an accredited four-year college or university and who has relevant training and experience in analyzing geologic, hydro-geologic, and ground water flow systems. At a minimum, the following parameters shall be considered:
1. Documentable information sources
2. Geologic data pertinent to well logs or borings used to identify information
3. Ambient groundwater quality
4. Groundwater elevation
5. Recharge potential of facility site
6. Current data on wells and any springs located within one thousand feet (1,000) of the facility
7. Surface water location and potential recharge
8. Water supply source for the facility
9. Analysis and discussion of the affects of the proposed project on the groundwater resource
E. Findings and Consideration of Approval
A hydro-geological assessment must demonstrate that the proposed use does not present a threat of contamination to the aquifer system. Successful demonstration of these findings warrants approval under this section.
20.08.140 Frequently Flooded Areas
A. General
Areas that are subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 44
year as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Administration.
B. Development Standards
All development within flood hazard areas shall be subject to city municipal code 19.04.140 Flood Damage Prevention.
20.08.150 Geologically Hazardous Areas
A. General
Geologically hazardous areas are susceptible to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geologic events which pose a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of citizens when construction or incompatible uses are permitted in areas of significant hazard. These areas include steep slopes, landslide, erosion hazard, and seismic hazard areas. The siting of residential, commercial, or industrial development within these areas is a potential hazard.
B. Development Standards
Development proposals within an area designated as a geological hazard area must develop a geotechnical report as follows:
1. Applications for development activity within designated hillsides of fifteen percent (15%) slope and greater shall be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a geologist or geotechnical engineer licensed as a Civil Engineer with the State of Washington.
2. Applications for development activity within designated landslide or erosion hazard areas shall be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a geologist or geotechnical engineer licensed as a Civil Engineer with the State of Washington.
3. Application for development activity proposed within designated seismic hazard areas shall be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a geologist or geotechnical engineer licensed as a Civil Engineer with the State of Washington.
C. Geotechnical Report Requirements
A geotechnical report required under this section shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
1. Topographic maps at a minimum scale of 1:2400 (1 inch=200 feet). Slope
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 45
ranges shall be clearly delineated in increments of 15-25%, 25-40%, and 40% or greater.
2. Site history, including description of prior grading and clearing, soil instability, or slope failure.
If a valid geotechnical report has been prepared within the previous two (2) years for a specific site and the proposed land-use development and site conditions have not changed, the report may be utilized without the requirement for a new geotechnical report.
D. Geotechnical Report Assessment
If it is satisfactorily demonstrated within the geotechnical report that hillsides of fifteen percent (15%) slope or greater, landslide and erosion hazard areas, and or seismic hazard areas do not exist on the site, the requirements of this section shall be waived. If it is determined within the geotechnical report that a potential threat to public health, safety, and welfare exists from development of the site, then the applicant shall prepare a geologic hazard plan.
E. Geologic Hazard Plan
The geologic hazard plan shall include discussion of the potential impacts from the proposed development and specific measures or alternatives designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the applicant's proposal on and off-site.
20.08.160 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas
A. General
Fish and wildlife habitat conservation means land management for maintaining species in a wild state in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution ensuring isolated sub-populations are not created. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be managed for the following categories:
1. Category 1: PHS Endangered, PHS Threatened, PHS Sensitive
2. Category 2: Candidate
3. Category 3: PHS Monitor
4. Category 4: PHS Game/Nongame
5. Category 5: All other wildlife
Fish and wildlife habitat areas are identified as follows:
1. Areas with which federal or state endangered, threatened, and sensitive species of fish, wildlife, and plants have a primary association and which,
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 46
if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.
2. Habitats and species of local importance, including areas with which state listed monitor or candidate species or federally listed candidate species have a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.
3. Naturally occurring ponds under twenty (20) acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat.
4. Lakes, ponds, and streams planted with game fish by a governmental agency.
5. State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas.
Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas do not include such artificial features or improvements as irrigation delivery systems, irrigation infrastructure, irrigation canal, or drainage ditches that lie within the boundaries of and are maintained by a port district or an irrigation district or company.
B. Development Standards
Regulated Activities located within Fish and Wildlife Habitat conservation areas include but are not limited to the following:
1. Removal excavation or grading of soil;
2. Dredging of soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter, or material of any kind;
3. Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material, liquid or solid;
4. Draining, flooding, or disturbing of the water level or water table;
5. Placement of structures;
6. Construction, reconstruction, demolition or expansion of any structure;
7. Activities that result in the destruction or alteration of major vegetation, including clearing, harvesting, intentional burning, livestock foraging, or planting of vegetation
8. Activities that result in a significant change of water temperature, significant change of physical or chemical characteristics of ground or surface water resources, including quantity, or the introduction of pollutants;
9. Site threshold for disturbed soil.
For all regulated activity proposed on a site which contains or is within three hundred feet of fish and wildlife habitat, a habitat assessment shall be required and shall be prepared by a professional biologist. The habitat assessment shall be
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 47
required and shall be prepared by a professional wildlife biologist. The habitat assessment shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. An analysis and discussion of species or habitats known or suspected to be located on the development site and or within the habitat ecosystem.
2. A site plan which clearly delineates the critical fish and wildlife habitats found.
C. Habitat Assessment Review
A habitat assessment review shall be forwarded for review and comment to agencies with expertise or jurisdiction on the proposal, including, but not limited to:
1. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
2. Washington Department of Natural Resources
3. U.S. Fish and Wildlife service
Comments received from review agencies within forty-five days of the submittal of the assessment shall be considered by the Building Official prior to issuance of building permits or by the Community Development Director for inclusion in the staff report for other development permits. If it is determined, based upon the comments received, that critical fish and wildlife habitat does not occur on or within three hundred feet of the site, the development may proceed without any additional requirements under this section. If it is determined that a critical fish and wildlife habitat occurs on or within three hundred feet of the site, a habitat management plan shall be prepared.
D. Habitat Management Plan
Habitat management plans required under this section shall be prepared by a professional wildlife biologist. The habitat management plan shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Analysis and discussion on the project's effects on critical fish and wildlife habitat.
2. An assessment and discussion on special management recommendations which have been developed for species or habitat located on the site by any federal or state agency.
3. Proposed mitigation measures which could minimize or avoid negative impacts.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 48
4. Assessment and evaluation of the effectiveness of mitigation measures proposed. Upon review of the habitat management plan by appropriate federal and state agencies, comments received from the agencies within forty five days of the submittal of the proposed plan shall be considered by the city and, if mitigation is recommended, may be incorporated into conditions of project approval. If it is determined, based on the comments received, that a project or proposal will result in the net loss of critical fish and wildlife species, the project or proposal may be denied.
E. Habitat Management Plan Review
The City shall discuss the potential impacts from the proposed development and specific measures or alternatives designed to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the applicant's proposal on and off-site. The SEPA responsible official during environmental review shall review the habitat management plan and make a determination if the development proposal warrants approval, or denial.
F. Buffer Requirements
The City, upon the review of the habitat management plan, shall require buffer areas based upon the habitat management plan. The buffer areas determined by the habitat management plan will be included in the approval document to mitigate impacts to critical fish and wildlife habitat areas.
20.08.170 Existing Structures and Developments
Lawfully existing structures and previously approved developments prior to the adoption of this section shall be allowed to continue as exemptions from this ordinance. It is the intention of this chapter to allow these non-conforming uses to continue and to allow previously approved developments to commence without any additional review procedures. In addition to the requirements of this section, the requirements of Chapter 19.48, Non-conforming Uses shall apply.
20.08.175 Reasonable Use Exception
A. If the application of this chapter would deny all reasonable economically viable use of the subject property, the property owner may apply for an exception pursuant to this section.
B. An application for a reasonable use exception shall include a critical areas report, including mitigation plan, if necessary; and any other related project documents, such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies, and environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW)(SEPA documents).
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 49
C. The hearing examiner shall review the application and conduct a public hearing pursuant to the hearing provisions of the development code. The hearing examiner shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the proposal’s ability to comply with all of the reasonable use permit criteria in subsection (D) of this section.
D. Reasonable Use Permit Criteria. All of the following criteria must be met:
1. The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable economically viable use of the property;
2. No other economically reasonable use of the property has less impact on the critical area or its buffer;
3. The impact to the critical area or its buffer is the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property;
4. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site;
5. The proposal protects and mitigates impacts to the critical area functions and values consistent with the best available science;
6. The inability to derive reasonable use is not the result of the applicants actions or that of a previous owner.
E. Burden of Proof. The applicant has the burden of proving that the application meets the stated reasonable use permit criteria.
20.08.180 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
This ordinance does not imply that land outside resource lands and critical areas or activities that are permitted within such areas will be free from exposure or damage resulting from catastrophic natural disasters which can, and will, occur on rare occasions. This ordinance shall not impose or create any liability on the part of the City of Ephrata, elected or appointed officials, and or employees thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
20.08.190 Severability:
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, or the statutes adopted herein by reference, should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE 20 - 50
20.08.200 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or state or federal laws and regulations. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, deed restriction, state or federal law or regulation conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions as determined by the City shall prevail.
20.08.210 Penalties for Non-Compliance
Persons violating any provision of this chapter are deemed to have committed a civil infraction. The penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter is a mandatory court appearance and a monthly penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation. (Ord. No. 92-25, 1992)(Ord 04-08, 2004)(Ord 07-12, 2007)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
1
Title 21
STREET AND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
Chapters:
21.02 Street and Utility Construction Permits
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
2
Chapter 21
Street and Utility Construction Permits
Sections:
21.02.010 Permit Required
21.02.012 Community Street and Utility Standards Adopted
21.02.015 Permit Requirement for Curb and Sidewalk Repairs
21.02.020 Permit - Terms and Conditions
21.02.030 Road Closures
21.02.040 Inspection Fees
21.02.060 Insurance May Be Required
21.02.070 Bond
21.02.075 Contractor Registration and City Business License Area Required
21.02.080 Traffic Control Required of Permittee
21.02.100 Delinquent Fees - Refusal of Permit
21.02.110 Deviations
21.02.120 Violation - Penalty
21.02.010 Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct, construct, or disturb existing or proposed municipal improvements without first having obtained a Street and Utility Construction Permit. However, some exceptions to a required permit are provided for in 21.02.015 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
21.02.012 Community Street and Utility Standards Adopted: The most recently adopted Street and Utility Standards adopted by resolution of the city council are hereby adopted as the standard for construction and repair of city street, water, sewer and stormwater utilities.
21.02.015 Permit Requirements for Curb and Sidewalk Repairs: All curb and sidewalk repairs require a Street and Utility Construction Permit in accordance with Chapter 21.02 of the Ephrata Municipal Code. However, a permit is not required if sidewalk panels are either lifted or lowered to eliminate a hazard, provided that adjacent improvements are not disturbed in the process.
21.02.020 Permit - Terms and Conditions: The Public Works Director is authorized to review Street and Utility Construction Permit Applications and to approve Street and Utility Construction Permits.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
3
A. The applicant for a Street and Utility Construction Permit shall provide the Public Works Director with information about the proposal to construct, obstruct, or disturb municipal improvements. The information shall provide a description of the proposed work or acts to be done under such permits and shall show the location and plan of the work along with all traffic control and other pertinent information that the Public Works Director requests about the project. The Public Works Director may require civil engineering plans to be provided by a professional engineer.
B. The Public Works Director may issue a Street and Utility Construction Permit upon approval of the application and upon verification of the following three (3) items when required.
1. Washington State Contractor registration.
2. Street and Utility Construction Bond.
3. City of Ephrata Business License.
For exceptions to these three items, refer to sections 21.02.070 and 21.02.075 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
C. The permit and application shall include the length of time allowed for the completion of the work and a description of the work that is being approved by the permit. The permit and application shall include information about the contractor registration, Street and Utility Construction bond, and city business license. The applicant shall sign the permit after it has been approved by the Public Works Director. By signing the permit, the applicant guarantees to the following.
1. All existing and proposed municipal improvements that are affected by the permittee’s work shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the Community Street and Utility Standards or per the approved construction plans.
2. All work will be completed and accepted within the time allowed by the permit.
3. All disturbances will be reconstructed in accordance with the conditions stated on the permit.
4. All expenses required to fulfill the conditions of the permit shall be the liability of the permittee.
5. All work shall be subject to the direction of the Public Works Director until the permit requirements have been completely fulfilled.
6. The Public Works Director will be allowed to inspect all phases of the work.
D. At the expiration of the time fixed by a Street and Utility Construction permit, or upon the completion of the work allowed to be done under such permit, the Public Works Director shall have the right to have all additional work performed as necessary to restore the construction area
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
4
to a condition compliant with the permit conditions. The permittee shall be liable for all expenses required for completion of additional work. Moreover, the city shall have a cause of action for all of the city’s expenses and costs paid out upon the additional work. The city’s costs may be collected in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Nothing in this chapter precludes the permittee from being liable for all defects in material or workmanship that are discovered beyond the two (2) year maintenance period.
F. If municipal improvements are installed where none were existing, the work shall not be considered complete until the Public Works Director or City Council accepts the improvements.
21.02.030 Road Closures: The Public Works Director may allow roads to be closed during construction; however, the permittee shall provide road access to emergency traffic such as police, fire, and emergency units at all times. Additionally, access to commercial property shall not be blocked for more than four (4) consecutive hours, and access to residential property shall not be blocked for more than eight (8) consecutive hours. The permittee shall notify the Multi-Agency Communications Center (MACC, 509-762-1160) prior to closing any street and immediately upon reopening a closed street.
The permittee shall also coordinate all construction activities with the school district, post office, disposal firms, and other services that operate in the project area. The permittee shall be liable for all damages that result from failure to provide reasonable notice, access, or coordination. All road closures shall be in accordance with Section 21.02.080 of the Ephrata Municipal Code.
21.02.040 Inspection Fees: Permit fees are required after the permit has been approved. The permit fees are two and one half percent (2.5%) of the cost of all construction that will be inspected by the Public Works Director, but no less than twenty-five dollars ($25).
21.02.060 Insurance May Be Required: The Public Works Director may require a comprehensive liability insurance policy for bodily injury, death, and property damage prior to issuance of a permit, if the Public Works Director determines that the work allowed by the permit could cause adverse damage to improvements beyond the scope of the permit or that bodily injury or death is of elevated concern for the project permitted. All required policies shall be per limits specified by the Public Works Director. When insurance is required, the permittee shall deliver a certificate of insurance to the City for approval prior to issuance of the permit. The policy shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all claims for injury, death, or property damage in connection with the work for which the permit is issued. The policy shall contain verbiage such that the policy cannot be canceled or reduced until after a minimum of ten (10) days written notice of said cancellation or reduction has been provided to the city. All required insurance policies shall include the following
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
5
endorsement: “The City of Ephrata is an Additional Insured as pertains to the project.” The endorsement will include Form B, Additional insured - owners, lessees, or contractors - or equivalent.
21.02.070 Bond: All permits require a Street and Utility Construction Bond in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost to replace existing improvements that may be disturbed as allowed by the Street and Utility Construction Permit, but no bond shall be approved for less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000). These improvements are limited to only those that are located in the right-of-way of the city street or easement and that have been dedicated to the city of Ephrata. However, a bond is not required for permits that are issued to a legal property owner for sidewalk repairs or replacements that abut the legal property owner’s property. The bond shall be on forms provided by the city and shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to issuance of the permit.
A. The bond shall contain the following declarations:
1. The bond guarantees that all persons who have provided or will provide labor and materials for the project will be paid by the permittee.
2. The bond guarantees all municipal improvements shall be constructed or reconstructed to original or better condition in accordance with the permit requirements.
3. The bond guarantees all work shall be completed within the time specified by the permit.
4. The bond guarantees all defects in workmanship or material that are discovered during construction and until that time the city accepts the improvements to their infrastructure network to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
B. The aforesaid bond initially shall be for a period of one (1) year and shall automatically renew each year unless notice of non-renewal is provided to the city. The obligation of such bond shall survive its cancellation or expiration for a period of one (1) year after acceptance by the city of all work for which such bond is given.
C. Whenever the Public Works Director determines that the amount of a bond is insufficient for additional permits, the Public Works Director may require a new or additional bond from the permittee. All new or additional bonds shall be in accordance with the aforementioned requirements.
D. A 2-year maintenance bond is required in the amount of 50 percent of the construction costs. The maintenance bond shall be provided upon completion of the project and prior to Public Works Director or City Council acceptance of the project.
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
6
21.02.075 Contractor Registration and City Business License are Required: The permittee shall provide current verification that they possess a Washington State Contractor Registration and City of Ephrata business license before applying for a permit. However, when a permit is issued to a legal property owner for sidewalk repairs or replacements on property that abuts property that is owned by the permittee, a Washington State Contractor’s Registration and a City of Ephrata business license are not required.
21.02.080 Traffic Control Required of Permittee: By signing the permit, the permittee guarantees that all required traffic control shall be set up as required by the Public Works Director, and the permittee guarantees that all traffic control shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All traffic control proposals shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review prior to their use in the field. The Public Works Director may require traffic control plans to be stamped by a professional engineer prior to approval of traffic control plans. The city assumes no liability for traffic control that has been set by the permittee; moreover, by signing the permit, the permittee assumes full liability for all traffic control.
21.02.100 Delinquent Fees - Refusal of Permit: No permit shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation who is either delinquent in the payment of any fees or charges that are owed to the city under this chapter, including but not limited to permit fees, business licensing fees, or penalties for violations of this chapter, or who refuses or neglects to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The Public Works Director may revoke any permit for reasons of non-compliance with this chapter, and the permittee shall have no recourse for said action of the Public Works Director revoking a permit.
21.02.110 Deviations: The City Council may grant a deviation to the standards set forth in this chapter upon the findings that the granting of a deviation is in the best interest and welfare of the community.
21.02.120 Violation - Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for all liability resulting from their actions or the omission of their actions, and they shall make full restitution to the city of all direct and indirect costs, expenses, and damages. It is further provided that the same person, firm, or corporation who engage in said conduct shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction subject to penalties as provided in EMC Chapter 1.22.
(Ord. 16-17, 2016)
EPHRATA MUNICIPAL CODE
7